Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. David Denno. Dr. David today is Dr. David Denno. Dr. David today is Dr. David Denno. Dr. David Denno is a professor of psychology at Denno is a professor of psychology at Denno is a professor of psychology at Northeastern University and an expert on Northeastern University and an expert on Northeastern University and an expert on the science of morality, religion, and the science of morality, religion, and the science of morality, religion, and the health benefits of belief in God and the health benefits of belief in God and the health benefits of belief in God and religion. Many people, perhaps most religion. Many people, perhaps most religion. Many people, perhaps most people actually, view science and people actually, view science and people actually, view science and religion as mutually exclusive. Today, religion as mutually exclusive. Today, religion as mutually exclusive. Today, Dr. Denno explains why that view is Dr. Denno explains why that view is Dr. Denno explains why that view is actually incorrect. And he also shares actually incorrect. And he also shares actually incorrect. And he also shares the data showing that religion and the data showing that religion and the data showing that religion and prayer have tremendous mental and prayer have tremendous mental and prayer have tremendous mental and physical benefits. We discuss the brain physical benefits. We discuss the brain physical benefits. We discuss the brain mechanisms that often lead people to mechanisms that often lead people to mechanisms that often lead people to embrace faith in God and religion. And embrace faith in God and religion. And embrace faith in God and religion. And we attempt to tackle some of the big we attempt to tackle some of the big we attempt to tackle some of the big questions that often come up around questions that often come up around questions that often come up around science and religion. For instance, can science and religion. For instance, can science and religion. For instance, can the existence of God actually be proven? the existence of God actually be proven? the existence of God actually be proven? Can it be disproven? If not, how should Can it be disproven? If not, how should Can it be disproven? If not, how should we think about miracles, the origin of we think about miracles, the origin of we think about miracles, the origin of life and the afterlife? So, small life and the afterlife? So, small life and the afterlife? So, small questions like that. We also discuss questions like that. We also discuss questions like that. We also discuss where the line between rituals and where the line between rituals and where the line between rituals and suspicions resides and what suspicions resides and what suspicions resides and what distinguishes religions from cults. He distinguishes religions from cults. He distinguishes religions from cults. He also shares that despite the fact that also shares that despite the fact that also shares that despite the fact that more than a hundred new religions more than a hundred new religions more than a hundred new religions surface every year. That was surprising surface every year. That was surprising surface every year. That was surprising to me. Very few are able to last. That to me. Very few are able to last. That to me. Very few are able to last. That was not surprising. He also shares was not surprising. He also shares was not surprising. He also shares amazing data on when and how people lie amazing data on when and how people lie amazing data on when and how people lie for personal gain and the simple for personal gain and the simple for personal gain and the simple practices that convert liars into truth practices that convert liars into truth practices that convert liars into truth tellers and that make people more tellers and that make people more tellers and that make people more empathic overall. To be clear, Dr. Denno empathic overall. To be clear, Dr. Denno empathic overall. To be clear, Dr. Denno is not promoting religion. He's a is not promoting religion. He's a is not promoting religion. He's a scientist and his approach is to study scientist and his approach is to study scientist and his approach is to study in an unbiased way how belief in God and in an unbiased way how belief in God and in an unbiased way how belief in God and religious practices can benefit religious practices can benefit religious practices can benefit individuals and groups. Thanks to him, individuals and groups. Thanks to him, individuals and groups. Thanks to him, it's a remarkable conversation that I it's a remarkable conversation that I it's a remarkable conversation that I also believe is important, especially in also believe is important, especially in also believe is important, especially in this time of rapidly evolving AI this time of rapidly evolving AI this time of rapidly evolving AI technology and social media. I learned a technology and social media. I learned a technology and social media. I learned a ton speaking with him about science, ton speaking with him about science, ton speaking with him about science, God, and religion, and I'm certain that God, and religion, and I'm certain that God, and religion, and I'm certain that you will, too. Before we begin, I'd like you will, too. Before we begin, I'd like you will, too. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the science and science related tools to the science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. David Denno. Dr. David Deno, Dr. David Denno. Dr. David Deno, Dr. David Denno. Dr. David Deno, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thanks for having me, Andrew. For so &gt;&gt; Thanks for having me, Andrew. For so &gt;&gt; Thanks for having me, Andrew. For so many people, the idea of science and many people, the idea of science and many people, the idea of science and religion or science and God are opposite religion or science and God are opposite religion or science and God are opposite one another and maybe even um mutually one another and maybe even um mutually one another and maybe even um mutually antagonistic to one another depending on antagonistic to one another depending on antagonistic to one another depending on who you're talking to and how it's who you're talking to and how it's who you're talking to and how it's framed. uh that makes sense I think to a framed. uh that makes sense I think to a framed. uh that makes sense I think to a lot of people religious or not just lot of people religious or not just lot of people religious or not just because on the face of it science is because on the face of it science is because on the face of it science is supposed to be about disproving supposed to be about disproving supposed to be about disproving hypothesis and religion in most people's hypothesis and religion in most people's hypothesis and religion in most people's minds is based on belief and faith in minds is based on belief and faith in minds is based on belief and faith in things that are difficult to disprove um things that are difficult to disprove um things that are difficult to disprove um not impossible perhaps but difficult to not impossible perhaps but difficult to not impossible perhaps but difficult to disprove and people go back and forth disprove and people go back and forth disprove and people go back and forth trying to prove the existence of God trying to prove the existence of God trying to prove the existence of God trying to disprove the existence of God trying to disprove the existence of God trying to disprove the existence of God this is going on for um many this is going on for um many this is going on for um many thousands of thousands of thousands of to start I just want to know what is to start I just want to know what is to start I just want to know what is your view on the compatibility of your view on the compatibility of your view on the compatibility of science and let's just say belief in God science and let's just say belief in God science and let's just say belief in God because religion and belief in God are because religion and belief in God are because religion and belief in God are somewhat separable and we'll get into somewhat separable and we'll get into somewhat separable and we'll get into that. &gt;&gt; Uh but to keep things simple &gt;&gt; Uh but to keep things simple &gt;&gt; Uh but to keep things simple &gt;&gt; what do we know for sure about the &gt;&gt; what do we know for sure about the &gt;&gt; what do we know for sure about the compatibility or lack of compatibility or lack of compatibility or lack of compatibility between what we call science and a between what we call science and a between what we call science and a belief in God? To me, the question of belief in God? To me, the question of belief in God? To me, the question of belief in God, and you're right, it gets belief in God, and you're right, it gets belief in God, and you're right, it gets in the way of this because people will in the way of this because people will in the way of this because people will say, "Well, if I believe in God, then I say, "Well, if I believe in God, then I say, "Well, if I believe in God, then I can't embrace science." And I think can't embrace science." And I think can't embrace science." And I think that's wrong. But let me start at the that's wrong. But let me start at the that's wrong. But let me start at the beginning and say why I think the beginning and say why I think the beginning and say why I think the question of does God exist isn't a question of does God exist isn't a question of does God exist isn't a useful question. It doesn't mean it's useful question. It doesn't mean it's useful question. It doesn't mean it's not an important question. As you said, not an important question. As you said, not an important question. As you said, people have been debating this for people have been debating this for people have been debating this for millennia, but it's not useful because millennia, but it's not useful because millennia, but it's not useful because as scientists, we can't prove it. Any as scientists, we can't prove it. Any as scientists, we can't prove it. Any scientist who tells you they know for scientist who tells you they know for scientist who tells you they know for sure God doesn't exist, you shouldn't sure God doesn't exist, you shouldn't sure God doesn't exist, you shouldn't listen to. Um the reason I say that is listen to. Um the reason I say that is listen to. Um the reason I say that is oftentimes we you and I as scientists oftentimes we you and I as scientists oftentimes we you and I as scientists live by the data. We run experiments. live by the data. We run experiments. live by the data. We run experiments. And what's behind any experiment is we And what's behind any experiment is we And what's behind any experiment is we try to manipulate a variable and we see try to manipulate a variable and we see try to manipulate a variable and we see if it produces a change. When you're if it produces a change. When you're if it produces a change. When you're talking about God, talking about God, talking about God, you can't do an experiment. And so, you can't do an experiment. And so, you can't do an experiment. And so, you know, I'll say the know, I'll say the know, I'll say the absence of evidence is not evidence of absence of evidence is not evidence of absence of evidence is not evidence of absence. People hear that a lot and it absence. People hear that a lot and it absence. People hear that a lot and it sounds like a copout, but in this case sounds like a copout, but in this case sounds like a copout, but in this case it's not really. So if I'm testing a new it's not really. So if I'm testing a new it's not really. So if I'm testing a new drug, I can have people take the drug drug, I can have people take the drug drug, I can have people take the drug and see if it combats a pathogen. And if and see if it combats a pathogen. And if and see if it combats a pathogen. And if it doesn't combat a pathogen, I can say, it doesn't combat a pathogen, I can say, it doesn't combat a pathogen, I can say, "All right, well, it doesn't seem to be "All right, well, it doesn't seem to be "All right, well, it doesn't seem to be working in this experiment." Any one working in this experiment." Any one working in this experiment." Any one experiment can fail for lots of reasons. experiment can fail for lots of reasons. experiment can fail for lots of reasons. Maybe people didn't take the medication Maybe people didn't take the medication Maybe people didn't take the medication in the right way. Maybe it only works in the right way. Maybe it only works in the right way. Maybe it only works for a certain type of people. And so you for a certain type of people. And so you for a certain type of people. And so you can try it again and again in different can try it again and again in different can try it again and again in different cases. And you can kind of build up a cases. And you can kind of build up a cases. And you can kind of build up a sense of is there evidence here that sense of is there evidence here that sense of is there evidence here that this drug works or doesn't over time and this drug works or doesn't over time and this drug works or doesn't over time and if it doesn't in any case you might say if it doesn't in any case you might say if it doesn't in any case you might say h maybe there's nothing there. With God h maybe there's nothing there. With God h maybe there's nothing there. With God you can't even run the experiment. So you can't even run the experiment. So you can't even run the experiment. So I'm a psychologist and so most of what I I'm a psychologist and so most of what I I'm a psychologist and so most of what I do is I bring people into my lab. I do is I bring people into my lab. I do is I bring people into my lab. I study how emotions change their study how emotions change their study how emotions change their behavior. And so I'll bring people in behavior. And so I'll bring people in behavior. And so I'll bring people in and I'll create two groups. Um I'll and I'll create two groups. Um I'll and I'll create two groups. Um I'll balance gender and ideology and balance gender and ideology and balance gender and ideology and intelligence and all of those things. intelligence and all of those things. intelligence and all of those things. and to one of them will change their and to one of them will change their and to one of them will change their emotional state and I'll see if it'll do emotional state and I'll see if it'll do emotional state and I'll see if it'll do something with God. You can't run an something with God. You can't run an something with God. You can't run an experiment. You can't manipulate God if experiment. You can't manipulate God if experiment. You can't manipulate God if God exists. Right? People say, "Oh, God exists. Right? People say, "Oh, God exists. Right? People say, "Oh, Dave, I prayed for X, Y, and Z and it Dave, I prayed for X, Y, and Z and it Dave, I prayed for X, Y, and Z and it didn't come true. So therefore, God must didn't come true. So therefore, God must didn't come true. So therefore, God must not exist." And I'm like, "Well, do you not exist." And I'm like, "Well, do you not exist." And I'm like, "Well, do you know the mind of God? Maybe God only know the mind of God? Maybe God only know the mind of God? Maybe God only helps people God likes. Maybe God only helps people God likes. Maybe God only helps people God likes. Maybe God only helps people on every third Tuesday, helps people on every third Tuesday, helps people on every third Tuesday, right? I don't know. And if I can't right? I don't know. And if I can't right? I don't know. And if I can't manipulate something about the mind of manipulate something about the mind of manipulate something about the mind of God, then I can't infer causality if God God, then I can't infer causality if God God, then I can't infer causality if God exists or doesn't exist. And so I think exists or doesn't exist. And so I think exists or doesn't exist. And so I think this question of does God exist is one this question of does God exist is one this question of does God exist is one science can't answer. I mean, I'm happy science can't answer. I mean, I'm happy science can't answer. I mean, I'm happy to say as a scientist, I see no to say as a scientist, I see no to say as a scientist, I see no empirical evidence that God exists. But empirical evidence that God exists. But empirical evidence that God exists. But without being able to run an experiment without being able to run an experiment without being able to run an experiment to prove it, it's beyond the realm of to prove it, it's beyond the realm of to prove it, it's beyond the realm of science. And all it does is polarize us, science. And all it does is polarize us, science. And all it does is polarize us, right? It polarizes people into the right? It polarizes people into the right? It polarizes people into the camps that you're saying. But I think camps that you're saying. But I think camps that you're saying. But I think most people, the ones on X are most people, the ones on X are most people, the ones on X are fundamentalists who are shouting science fundamentalists who are shouting science fundamentalists who are shouting science is bad or hardcore new atheists who are is bad or hardcore new atheists who are is bad or hardcore new atheists who are saying religion is bad. I think most saying religion is bad. I think most saying religion is bad. I think most people live in the middle somewhere and people live in the middle somewhere and people live in the middle somewhere and most people accept the view that there most people accept the view that there most people accept the view that there could be something there and they're not could be something there and they're not could be something there and they're not intention. And I think for a lot of intention. And I think for a lot of intention. And I think for a lot of history that was the I mean the Catholic history that was the I mean the Catholic history that was the I mean the Catholic Church funds research. They have a Church funds research. They have a Church funds research. They have a wonderful observatory uh to look at wonderful observatory uh to look at wonderful observatory uh to look at astronomical behavior. The Dollaly Lama astronomical behavior. The Dollaly Lama astronomical behavior. The Dollaly Lama funds neuroscience, right? To understand funds neuroscience, right? To understand funds neuroscience, right? To understand how the mind works. And so we had how the mind works. And so we had how the mind works. And so we had Francis Collins on the show, one of the, Francis Collins on the show, one of the, Francis Collins on the show, one of the, you know, great geneticists of her time. you know, great geneticists of her time. you know, great geneticists of her time. And for him there's no tension. He says And for him there's no tension. He says And for him there's no tension. He says God, he's a believer. God created the God, he's a believer. God created the God, he's a believer. God created the human mind so that we could learn about human mind so that we could learn about human mind so that we could learn about the wonders of God's creation and how the wonders of God's creation and how the wonders of God's creation and how the world works. They don't need to be the world works. They don't need to be the world works. They don't need to be intention. And so for me, I like to put intention. And so for me, I like to put intention. And so for me, I like to put that question to the side. What I'm that question to the side. What I'm that question to the side. What I'm interested in is the data that we'll interested in is the data that we'll interested in is the data that we'll talk about that shows engaging with talk about that shows engaging with talk about that shows engaging with religion makes life better for people. religion makes life better for people. religion makes life better for people. And why is that? I definitely want to go And why is that? I definitely want to go And why is that? I definitely want to go into all the practices that people can into all the practices that people can into all the practices that people can embrace should they choose that can embrace should they choose that can embrace should they choose that can indeed according to the research make indeed according to the research make indeed according to the research make life better not just for them but for life better not just for them but for life better not just for them but for many people many people many people &gt;&gt; to ask a second version of the first &gt;&gt; to ask a second version of the first &gt;&gt; to ask a second version of the first question again. I'm wondering how you question again. I'm wondering how you question again. I'm wondering how you reconcile the argument that I've often reconcile the argument that I've often reconcile the argument that I've often heard where someone will say, "Okay, heard where someone will say, "Okay, heard where someone will say, "Okay, well, it's creation." And someone else well, it's creation." And someone else well, it's creation." And someone else will say, "No, it's evolution." And will say, "No, it's evolution." And will say, "No, it's evolution." And someone will say, "Well, who created someone will say, "Well, who created someone will say, "Well, who created evolution? It must have been God that evolution? It must have been God that evolution? It must have been God that created evolution." And or we could be created evolution." And or we could be created evolution." And or we could be talking about the origins of the talking about the origins of the talking about the origins of the universe. Um my dad's a theoretical universe. Um my dad's a theoretical universe. Um my dad's a theoretical physicist and uh we've talked about this physicist and uh we've talked about this physicist and uh we've talked about this before and um you say well okay so you before and um you say well okay so you before and um you say well okay so you have the big bang theory and then uh but have the big bang theory and then uh but have the big bang theory and then uh but you know we had to start from someplace you know we had to start from someplace you know we had to start from someplace and then okay well then you had um you and then okay well then you had um you and then okay well then you had um you know this uh soup of things that when know this uh soup of things that when know this uh soup of things that when combined started to create some sort of combined started to create some sort of combined started to create some sort of order that built on a structure which order that built on a structure which order that built on a structure which built okay well then what started that built okay well then what started that built okay well then what started that and basically it seems to me whoever and basically it seems to me whoever and basically it seems to me whoever is willing to stay in the argument is willing to stay in the argument is willing to stay in the argument longest and peel back the layers longest and peel back the layers longest and peel back the layers further and further. further and further. further and further. &gt;&gt; They don't win, but they're sort of last &gt;&gt; They don't win, but they're sort of last &gt;&gt; They don't win, but they're sort of last person standing in the argument. person standing in the argument. person standing in the argument. &gt;&gt; And you know, I'm sure this has been &gt;&gt; And you know, I'm sure this has been &gt;&gt; And you know, I'm sure this has been debated formally. Um, and I'm sure it's debated formally. Um, and I'm sure it's debated formally. Um, and I'm sure it's been debated formally for centuries, if been debated formally for centuries, if been debated formally for centuries, if not thousands and thousands of years. not thousands and thousands of years. not thousands and thousands of years. And here we are, 2025, and people still And here we are, 2025, and people still And here we are, 2025, and people still debate this debate this debate this &gt;&gt; and we're seeing a resurgence in &gt;&gt; and we're seeing a resurgence in &gt;&gt; and we're seeing a resurgence in religious belief. You also see that on religious belief. You also see that on religious belief. You also see that on X, you see it on social media, you see X, you see it on social media, you see X, you see it on social media, you see it lots of places. And I think there's it lots of places. And I think there's it lots of places. And I think there's also great interest in science and also great interest in science and also great interest in science and belief in science. So the question I belief in science. So the question I belief in science. So the question I have is, you know, if it's merely a have is, you know, if it's merely a have is, you know, if it's merely a matter of who's willing to peel back the matter of who's willing to peel back the matter of who's willing to peel back the layers furthest, um I don't think we're layers furthest, um I don't think we're layers furthest, um I don't think we're ever going to get to an answer. But is ever going to get to an answer. But is ever going to get to an answer. But is there some sort of uh rational argument there some sort of uh rational argument there some sort of uh rational argument or irrational argument that one can or irrational argument that one can or irrational argument that one can either choose to adopt or not choose to either choose to adopt or not choose to either choose to adopt or not choose to adopt that it could at least can give an adopt that it could at least can give an adopt that it could at least can give an individual a sense that they've arrived individual a sense that they've arrived individual a sense that they've arrived at an answer for them, right? because it at an answer for them, right? because it at an answer for them, right? because it seems to me that it's either you take seems to me that it's either you take seems to me that it's either you take the stance that well if it can't be the stance that well if it can't be the stance that well if it can't be disproven then there's a possibility and disproven then there's a possibility and disproven then there's a possibility and if there's a possibility there's a if there's a possibility there's a if there's a possibility there's a possibility or you take the stance possibility or you take the stance possibility or you take the stance unless you can prove it to me forget it. unless you can prove it to me forget it. unless you can prove it to me forget it. Um I'm not going to believe that and Um I'm not going to believe that and Um I'm not going to believe that and it just becomes an endless cycle of it just becomes an endless cycle of it just becomes an endless cycle of humans arguing with humans which is humans arguing with humans which is humans arguing with humans which is maybe what God wants. maybe what God wants. maybe what God wants. &gt;&gt; Well, you know you're hitting on &gt;&gt; Well, you know you're hitting on &gt;&gt; Well, you know you're hitting on the point there. This is why I say it's the point there. This is why I say it's the point there. This is why I say it's not a useful scientific question because not a useful scientific question because not a useful scientific question because when you can when you can when you can raise a finding, say evolution, which we raise a finding, say evolution, which we raise a finding, say evolution, which we know is true, um, and then say, "Oh, know is true, um, and then say, "Oh, know is true, um, and then say, "Oh, well, maybe that's the way God works." well, maybe that's the way God works." well, maybe that's the way God works." If you if you keep creating a carve out If you if you keep creating a carve out If you if you keep creating a carve out to explain something, to explain something, to explain something, it becomes very difficult to make a it becomes very difficult to make a it becomes very difficult to make a strong case, right? I mean, scientists strong case, right? I mean, scientists strong case, right? I mean, scientists live by falsifiability. Can we falsify live by falsifiability. Can we falsify live by falsifiability. Can we falsify something? But if you say, "Oh yeah, something? But if you say, "Oh yeah, something? But if you say, "Oh yeah, okay, that falsified, but there's a okay, that falsified, but there's a okay, that falsified, but there's a reason why that falsified because God reason why that falsified because God reason why that falsified because God did it a different way." It becomes did it a different way." It becomes did it a different way." It becomes just, as you say, an endless debate. So just, as you say, an endless debate. So just, as you say, an endless debate. So when I was an undergraduate in college, when I was an undergraduate in college, when I was an undergraduate in college, I was always interested in the questions I was always interested in the questions I was always interested in the questions of, you know, what does it mean to be a of, you know, what does it mean to be a of, you know, what does it mean to be a good person? How do you flourish? How do good person? How do you flourish? How do good person? How do you flourish? How do you find happiness? And I was trying to you find happiness? And I was trying to you find happiness? And I was trying to decide between being a history of decide between being a history of decide between being a history of religions major and a psychologist. I religions major and a psychologist. I religions major and a psychologist. I ultimately decided to be a psychologist ultimately decided to be a psychologist ultimately decided to be a psychologist because I could get data and not just because I could get data and not just because I could get data and not just argue about the things that you're argue about the things that you're argue about the things that you're saying. But what I've realized over time saying. But what I've realized over time saying. But what I've realized over time is that the things that we're finding is that the things that we're finding is that the things that we're finding that make life better for people, that make life better for people, that make life better for people, these traditions, they couldn't run these traditions, they couldn't run these traditions, they couldn't run randomized control trials, but they had randomized control trials, but they had randomized control trials, but they had intuited long ago. And so for me, what I intuited long ago. And so for me, what I intuited long ago. And so for me, what I like to tell people is, yeah, religion like to tell people is, yeah, religion like to tell people is, yeah, religion is about belief, but it's also about is about belief, but it's also about is about belief, but it's also about what you do, you know. And so, yes, what you do, you know. And so, yes, what you do, you know. And so, yes, there are lots of people who really there are lots of people who really there are lots of people who really don't believe in God. There are lots of don't believe in God. There are lots of don't believe in God. There are lots of Jews who are atheists yet are deeply Jews who are atheists yet are deeply Jews who are atheists yet are deeply engaged in their practices and it tends engaged in their practices and it tends engaged in their practices and it tends to make life better. So let me let me to make life better. So let me let me to make life better. So let me let me tell you why I think it's rational. You tell you why I think it's rational. You tell you why I think it's rational. You can make a rational case to believe can make a rational case to believe can make a rational case to believe this. So the thing you're hitting at this. So the thing you're hitting at this. So the thing you're hitting at comes from something called Pascal's comes from something called Pascal's comes from something called Pascal's wager. Pascal being one of the greatest wager. Pascal being one of the greatest wager. Pascal being one of the greatest mathematicians and philosophers. And mathematicians and philosophers. And mathematicians and philosophers. And he argued that he argued that he argued that if God exists and you choose to believe if God exists and you choose to believe if God exists and you choose to believe in God, you can have everlasting life. in God, you can have everlasting life. in God, you can have everlasting life. Right? This is Pascal was Christian. So Right? This is Pascal was Christian. So Right? This is Pascal was Christian. So this was the Christian God that we were this was the Christian God that we were this was the Christian God that we were talking about. And he said by nature of talking about. And he said by nature of talking about. And he said by nature of being born, you're forced into this bet. being born, you're forced into this bet. being born, you're forced into this bet. You have to play the game. Should you be You have to play the game. Should you be You have to play the game. Should you be religious or not? Well, if there's a religious or not? Well, if there's a religious or not? Well, if there's a chance that you could have everlasting chance that you could have everlasting chance that you could have everlasting life in a pleasurable way, even the life in a pleasurable way, even the life in a pleasurable way, even the smallest chance of that outweighs any smallest chance of that outweighs any smallest chance of that outweighs any joy you'd have on earth. So, if you joy you'd have on earth. So, if you joy you'd have on earth. So, if you chose not to believe in God, yeah, you chose not to believe in God, yeah, you chose not to believe in God, yeah, you might have a more libertine lifestyle might have a more libertine lifestyle might have a more libertine lifestyle here, but the joy you would gain from here, but the joy you would gain from here, but the joy you would gain from that pales in comparison. And so, it that pales in comparison. And so, it that pales in comparison. And so, it makes sense from a decision theory, makes sense from a decision theory, makes sense from a decision theory, right? The expected value of happiness right? The expected value of happiness right? The expected value of happiness is larger, if happiness is infinite. And is larger, if happiness is infinite. And is larger, if happiness is infinite. And so, Pascal said you should believe in so, Pascal said you should believe in so, Pascal said you should believe in God. But people say, well, what if I God. But people say, well, what if I God. But people say, well, what if I believe the probability that there's believe the probability that there's believe the probability that there's everlasting life is zero? Or what if everlasting life is zero? Or what if everlasting life is zero? Or what if there's I choose the wrong religion? there's I choose the wrong religion? there's I choose the wrong religion? There are lots of religions out there of There are lots of religions out there of There are lots of religions out there of the wrong god. And what Pascal realized the wrong god. And what Pascal realized the wrong god. And what Pascal realized at the time was that you could solve at the time was that you could solve at the time was that you could solve this problem if religion also brought this problem if religion also brought this problem if religion also brought benefits in the here and now too. And benefits in the here and now too. And benefits in the here and now too. And what we're seeing is it does exactly what we're seeing is it does exactly what we're seeing is it does exactly that. So let me give you an example. that. So let me give you an example. that. So let me give you an example. Epidemiological data show that people Epidemiological data show that people Epidemiological data show that people who engage with religion, not just say I who engage with religion, not just say I who engage with religion, not just say I believe in God, but actually engage with believe in God, but actually engage with believe in God, but actually engage with faith over a 15 to 20 year period, it faith over a 15 to 20 year period, it faith over a 15 to 20 year period, it cuts all told all cause mortality by cuts all told all cause mortality by cuts all told all cause mortality by 30%. Cuts death due to cancer and 30%. Cuts death due to cancer and 30%. Cuts death due to cancer and cardiovascular vascular disease by 25%. cardiovascular vascular disease by 25%. cardiovascular vascular disease by 25%. Reduces anxiety and depression. Reduces anxiety and depression. Reduces anxiety and depression. Increases people's sense of meaning and Increases people's sense of meaning and Increases people's sense of meaning and feeling that their life is flourishing. feeling that their life is flourishing. feeling that their life is flourishing. This is what brought me to my kind of This is what brought me to my kind of This is what brought me to my kind of mission today of trying to find and mission today of trying to find and mission today of trying to find and curate conversations between science and curate conversations between science and curate conversations between science and religion. You can't argue with those and religion. You can't argue with those and religion. You can't argue with those data. Now, for a long time, people would data. Now, for a long time, people would data. Now, for a long time, people would say those studies were done say those studies were done say those studies were done cross-sectionally, right? And so, you cross-sectionally, right? And so, you cross-sectionally, right? And so, you would say uh you look at people who are would say uh you look at people who are would say uh you look at people who are going to services and people who are not going to services and people who are not going to services and people who are not and you'd find people are healthier when and you'd find people are healthier when and you'd find people are healthier when they go to services. So, you could say, they go to services. So, you could say, they go to services. So, you could say, "Oh, religion makes people healthier." "Oh, religion makes people healthier." "Oh, religion makes people healthier." But there was an important alternative, But there was an important alternative, But there was an important alternative, right? maybe the people who were really right? maybe the people who were really right? maybe the people who were really sick or really depressed can't get out sick or really depressed can't get out sick or really depressed can't get out of bed to go to services, right? So, of bed to go to services, right? So, of bed to go to services, right? So, that was always an issue. Now, there's that was always an issue. Now, there's that was always an issue. Now, there's wonderful work by an epidemiologist uh wonderful work by an epidemiologist uh wonderful work by an epidemiologist uh Tyler Vanderel from Harvard School of Tyler Vanderel from Harvard School of Tyler Vanderel from Harvard School of Public Health. He follows thousands and Public Health. He follows thousands and Public Health. He follows thousands and thousands of people longitudinally thousands of people longitudinally thousands of people longitudinally because you can't run a randomized because you can't run a randomized because you can't run a randomized control trial. I can't say, "Andrew, control trial. I can't say, "Andrew, control trial. I can't say, "Andrew, tomorrow if you believe in God, I want tomorrow if you believe in God, I want tomorrow if you believe in God, I want you to stop." Or, you know, Dave, you to stop." Or, you know, Dave, you to stop." Or, you know, Dave, tomorrow you don't believe in God, start tomorrow you don't believe in God, start tomorrow you don't believe in God, start going to church. Ethically you can't do going to church. Ethically you can't do going to church. Ethically you can't do that but what you can do is follow that but what you can do is follow that but what you can do is follow people through time as they become more people through time as they become more people through time as they become more religious or stop becoming religious and religious or stop becoming religious and religious or stop becoming religious and leave the faith etc and that's what he leave the faith etc and that's what he leave the faith etc and that's what he finds and it's not just community you finds and it's not just community you finds and it's not just community you know another kind of criticism always know another kind of criticism always know another kind of criticism always been well Dave you know these health been well Dave you know these health been well Dave you know these health benefits it's just community if they benefits it's just community if they benefits it's just community if they joined a bowling club right to use joined a bowling club right to use joined a bowling club right to use Robert Putnham's analogy of bowling Robert Putnham's analogy of bowling Robert Putnham's analogy of bowling alone they would get the same health alone they would get the same health alone they would get the same health benefits what you see in the data is benefits what you see in the data is benefits what you see in the data is that the effect size which is basically that the effect size which is basically that the effect size which is basically the degree how much bang for the buck the degree how much bang for the buck the degree how much bang for the buck you get. Yeah. Being in community, you get. Yeah. Being in community, you get. Yeah. Being in community, joining clubs, having tighter social joining clubs, having tighter social joining clubs, having tighter social networks makes you healthier and networks makes you healthier and networks makes you healthier and happier. But the effect size is larger happier. But the effect size is larger happier. But the effect size is larger for religious community, right? They're for religious community, right? They're for religious community, right? They're doing something in those communities. doing something in those communities. doing something in those communities. And I think it's the practices they do And I think it's the practices they do And I think it's the practices they do that matter. And even among young adults that matter. And even among young adults that matter. And even among young adults where we're seeing increasing levels of where we're seeing increasing levels of where we're seeing increasing levels of anxiety and depression, even private anxiety and depression, even private anxiety and depression, even private practices, things like prayer and practices, things like prayer and practices, things like prayer and meditation are showing up as ways to meditation are showing up as ways to meditation are showing up as ways to buffer those and protect against them. buffer those and protect against them. buffer those and protect against them. &gt;&gt; Do you observe those effects across &gt;&gt; Do you observe those effects across &gt;&gt; Do you observe those effects across religions? Are they the same for religions? Are they the same for religions? Are they the same for Christianity, Judaism, for Muslims and Christianity, Judaism, for Muslims and Christianity, Judaism, for Muslims and uh and also we could talk about the uh and also we could talk about the uh and also we could talk about the subdivisions within each of those? subdivisions within each of those? subdivisions within each of those? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a good question. So these &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a good question. So these &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a good question. So these aren't my data. These these are data aren't my data. These these are data aren't my data. These these are data from Tyler Vanderbilt and other folks. from Tyler Vanderbilt and other folks. from Tyler Vanderbilt and other folks. um they haven't examined every religion, um they haven't examined every religion, um they haven't examined every religion, but when they do look across some but when they do look across some but when they do look across some faiths, it's a pretty stable faiths, it's a pretty stable faiths, it's a pretty stable finding. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Our acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Our acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Our Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever compounds such as PASES or forever compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of chemicals are still found in 80% of chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well as utensils, non-stick pans, as well as utensils, non-stick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen appliances, and countless other kitchen appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've discussed before in products. As I've discussed before in products. As I've discussed before in this podcast, these PASES or forever this podcast, these PASES or forever this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked chemicals like Teflon have been linked chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone to major health issues such as hormone to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's really important to problems. So, it's really important to problems. So, it's really important to try and avoid them. This is why I'm a try and avoid them. This is why I'm a try and avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of our place. Ourplace products huge fan of our place. Ourplace products huge fan of our place. Ourplace products are made with the highest quality are made with the highest quality are made with the highest quality materials and are all completely PAS and materials and are all completely PAS and materials and are all completely PAS and toxin-free. I especially love their toxin-free. I especially love their toxin-free. I especially love their titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful titanium. This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my Titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my Titanium Always Pan Pro eggs in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it and it puts a really and steaks in it and it puts a really and steaks in it and it puts a really nice sear on the meat. But again, nice sear on the meat. But again, nice sear on the meat. But again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean and it's even dishwasher easy to clean and it's even dishwasher easy to clean and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it and I basically use it safe. I love it and I basically use it safe. I love it and I basically use it constantly. Our Place now has a full constantly. Our Place now has a full constantly. Our Place now has a full line of titanium Pro cookware that uses line of titanium Pro cookware that uses line of titanium Pro cookware that uses its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout. and use the code Huberman at checkout. and use the code Huberman at checkout. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can shipping, and free returns, you can shipping, and free returns, you can experience this terrific cookware with experience this terrific cookware with experience this terrific cookware with zero risk. Today's episode is also zero risk. Today's episode is also zero risk. Today's episode is also brought to us by Element. Element is an brought to us by Element. Element is an brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct magnesium, and potassium in the correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body is critical for optimal brain and body is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and dehydration can diminish cognitive and dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklemnt.com/huberman, spelled drinklemnt.com/huberman, spelled drinklemnt.com/huberman, to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. I was to claim a free sample pack. I was to claim a free sample pack. I was planning to ask you this later, but um planning to ask you this later, but um planning to ask you this later, but um I'm going to ask you now. It seems I'm going to ask you now. It seems I'm going to ask you now. It seems appropriate to ask you now what your appropriate to ask you now what your appropriate to ask you now what your thoughts are on uh this Russell's teapot thoughts are on uh this Russell's teapot thoughts are on uh this Russell's teapot business uh which was taught to me by my business uh which was taught to me by my business uh which was taught to me by my postoc adviser who was a staunch postoc adviser who was a staunch postoc adviser who was a staunch atheist. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; And um he I'll never forget this &gt;&gt; And um he I'll never forget this &gt;&gt; And um he I'll never forget this conversation. He said uh you know he conversation. He said uh you know he conversation. He said uh you know he said he was an atheist. Uh, I had said he was an atheist. Uh, I had said he was an atheist. Uh, I had questions about that. Um, I believe in questions about that. Um, I believe in questions about that. Um, I believe in God. I should be uh, you know, just God. I should be uh, you know, just God. I should be uh, you know, just clear about that now. Um, back then I clear about that now. Um, back then I clear about that now. Um, back then I was probably a bit more uh, in the was probably a bit more uh, in the was probably a bit more uh, in the question of that. Um, but deep down I question of that. Um, but deep down I question of that. Um, but deep down I would have written in my journal, I would have written in my journal, I would have written in my journal, I believe in God. I have since I was a believe in God. I have since I was a believe in God. I have since I was a kid. I and I do now. Um, he said, well, kid. I and I do now. Um, he said, well, kid. I and I do now. Um, he said, well, there's this um, he described it as a there's this um, he described it as a there's this um, he described it as a celestial teapot. He gave me this celestial teapot. He gave me this celestial teapot. He gave me this example, the celestial teapot, which was example, the celestial teapot, which was example, the celestial teapot, which was for him a rational argument as to um why for him a rational argument as to um why for him a rational argument as to um why he was an atheist. Um I looked it up. he was an atheist. Um I looked it up. he was an atheist. Um I looked it up. It's not called the celestial teapot. It's not called the celestial teapot. It's not called the celestial teapot. It's called Russell's teapot. So he got It's called Russell's teapot. So he got It's called Russell's teapot. So he got it wrong. Russell was right. So here it wrong. Russell was right. So here it wrong. Russell was right. So here it is. And and I'm paraphrasing here from is. And and I'm paraphrasing here from is. And and I'm paraphrasing here from something I've pulled from the internet, something I've pulled from the internet, something I've pulled from the internet, but I verified this is uh accurate to but I verified this is uh accurate to but I verified this is uh accurate to Russell's teapot. Russell's teapot is an Russell's teapot. Russell's teapot is an Russell's teapot. Russell's teapot is an analogy formulated by the philosopher uh analogy formulated by the philosopher uh analogy formulated by the philosopher uh Bertrand Russell to illustrate the Bertrand Russell to illustrate the Bertrand Russell to illustrate the philosophic burden of proof lies on the philosophic burden of proof lies on the philosophic burden of proof lies on the person making empirically unfalsifiable person making empirically unfalsifiable person making empirically unfalsifiable claims as opposed to shifting the burden claims as opposed to shifting the burden claims as opposed to shifting the burden of disproof to others. So Russell of disproof to others. So Russell of disproof to others. So Russell specifically applied his analogy in the specifically applied his analogy in the specifically applied his analogy in the context rel of religion. He wrote that context rel of religion. He wrote that context rel of religion. He wrote that uh if he were to assert without offering uh if he were to assert without offering uh if he were to assert without offering proof that a teapot too small to be seen proof that a teapot too small to be seen proof that a teapot too small to be seen by telescopes orbits the sun somewhere by telescopes orbits the sun somewhere by telescopes orbits the sun somewhere in space between the earth and Mars, he in space between the earth and Mars, he in space between the earth and Mars, he could not expect anyone to believe him could not expect anyone to believe him could not expect anyone to believe him solely because his assertion could not solely because his assertion could not solely because his assertion could not be proven wrong. So this brings us back be proven wrong. So this brings us back be proven wrong. So this brings us back to uh the first uh part of our to uh the first uh part of our to uh the first uh part of our conversation. You know what do you think conversation. You know what do you think conversation. You know what do you think about this? People are walking around about this? People are walking around about this? People are walking around with Russell's teapot in their mind with Russell's teapot in their mind with Russell's teapot in their mind saying, you know, the burden of proof is saying, you know, the burden of proof is saying, you know, the burden of proof is on the person making the assertion, not on the person making the assertion, not on the person making the assertion, not on um other people to uh to carry a on um other people to uh to carry a on um other people to uh to carry a belief because it can't be falsified. belief because it can't be falsified. belief because it can't be falsified. &gt;&gt; It depends on your philosophy of &gt;&gt; It depends on your philosophy of &gt;&gt; It depends on your philosophy of science. Um for me, I tend to think science. Um for me, I tend to think science. Um for me, I tend to think about this. So, I'm a psychologist. So, about this. So, I'm a psychologist. So, about this. So, I'm a psychologist. So, you know, William James, the father of you know, William James, the father of you know, William James, the father of psychology, had a real interest in psychology, had a real interest in psychology, had a real interest in religion. And he phrased this slightly religion. And he phrased this slightly religion. And he phrased this slightly differently. He had this notion of differently. He had this notion of differently. He had this notion of something he called an overbelief. And something he called an overbelief. And something he called an overbelief. And an overbelief is a belief for which the an overbelief is a belief for which the an overbelief is a belief for which the evidence is lacking. evidence is lacking. evidence is lacking. Not it's not disisconfirmed, right? But Not it's not disisconfirmed, right? But Not it's not disisconfirmed, right? But it's lacking, but which nonetheless it's lacking, but which nonetheless it's lacking, but which nonetheless feels right and leads to positive feels right and leads to positive feels right and leads to positive outcomes. And for him if those two criteria were And for him if those two criteria were And for him if those two criteria were true then it is rational to embrace were true then it is rational to embrace were true then it is rational to embrace that belief. And that's how he basically that belief. And that's how he basically that belief. And that's how he basically uh came to embrace religion. And so I uh came to embrace religion. And so I uh came to embrace religion. And so I think again you know where we are is think again you know where we are is think again you know where we are is either of those philosophies can be either of those philosophies can be either of those philosophies can be valid. You have to make a choice. It's valid. You have to make a choice. It's valid. You have to make a choice. It's one is not more valid than the other. one is not more valid than the other. one is not more valid than the other. It's based on your philosophy of It's based on your philosophy of It's based on your philosophy of science. &gt;&gt; And for me the question is always going &gt;&gt; And for me the question is always going &gt;&gt; And for me the question is always going to be one of faith. Right? You know, to be one of faith. Right? You know, to be one of faith. Right? You know, there are a lot of people who are trying there are a lot of people who are trying there are a lot of people who are trying to make a case uh I'm thinking of to make a case uh I'm thinking of to make a case uh I'm thinking of Ross Dat's book, Believe. They're trying Ross Dat's book, Believe. They're trying Ross Dat's book, Believe. They're trying to make a case for that it's rational to make a case for that it's rational to make a case for that it's rational to believe in religion because oh, it's believe in religion because oh, it's believe in religion because oh, it's called the finetuning argument. Look called the finetuning argument. Look called the finetuning argument. Look at all the parameters in the world for at all the parameters in the world for at all the parameters in the world for gravity and other um physical for gravity and other um physical for gravity and other um physical coefficients. If they weren't tuned just coefficients. If they weren't tuned just coefficients. If they weren't tuned just exactly right, life could never have exactly right, life could never have exactly right, life could never have evolved here. And the probability evolved here. And the probability evolved here. And the probability against them being tuned just exactly against them being tuned just exactly against them being tuned just exactly right is low. And then people say, well, right is low. And then people say, well, right is low. And then people say, well, sure, but there can be hundreds of sure, but there can be hundreds of sure, but there can be hundreds of millions of other universes, right, that millions of other universes, right, that millions of other universes, right, that we know in the multiverse, and so it's we know in the multiverse, and so it's we know in the multiverse, and so it's not that weird that we have here. And so not that weird that we have here. And so not that weird that we have here. And so I just I think it's never going to be I just I think it's never going to be I just I think it's never going to be the case that you're going to have the case that you're going to have the case that you're going to have proof. You know, these arguments, these proof. You know, these arguments, these proof. You know, these arguments, these philosophies can bring you up to a philosophies can bring you up to a philosophies can bring you up to a certain point, but to take that final certain point, but to take that final certain point, but to take that final step of belief or disbelief, step of belief or disbelief, step of belief or disbelief, it's faith one way or the other. And it's faith one way or the other. And it's faith one way or the other. And again, it's why I think scientists again, it's why I think scientists again, it's why I think scientists need to stay in their lane. You know, need to stay in their lane. You know, need to stay in their lane. You know, even Richard Dawkins, right, the most even Richard Dawkins, right, the most even Richard Dawkins, right, the most famous atheist around, will say he famous atheist around, will say he famous atheist around, will say he cannot be absolutely sure that God cannot be absolutely sure that God cannot be absolutely sure that God doesn't exist. Yet, he acts like he doesn't exist. Yet, he acts like he doesn't exist. Yet, he acts like he doesn't. He urges you to not believe. doesn't. He urges you to not believe. doesn't. He urges you to not believe. And so, for me, I think let's not do And so, for me, I think let's not do And so, for me, I think let's not do that. You know, I when we talk about that. You know, I when we talk about that. You know, I when we talk about these practices, how they lead to health these practices, how they lead to health these practices, how they lead to health and well-being, I can't tell you if they and well-being, I can't tell you if they and well-being, I can't tell you if they are divinely inspired from a creator who are divinely inspired from a creator who are divinely inspired from a creator who cares about its creations and kind of cares about its creations and kind of cares about its creations and kind of gave them a road map or a user's guide gave them a road map or a user's guide gave them a road map or a user's guide to make life better or if they're to make life better or if they're to make life better or if they're cultural adaptations of people figuring cultural adaptations of people figuring cultural adaptations of people figuring stuff out over millennia. stuff out over millennia. stuff out over millennia. But we don't need to answer that to have But we don't need to answer that to have But we don't need to answer that to have respect for them and to study how they respect for them and to study how they respect for them and to study how they work and to see what we can learn from work and to see what we can learn from work and to see what we can learn from them. And if we're not willing to do them. And if we're not willing to do them. And if we're not willing to do that, we're slowing down the science of that, we're slowing down the science of that, we're slowing down the science of human flourishing in my view. human flourishing in my view. human flourishing in my view. &gt;&gt; In a similar vein, I think um in the &gt;&gt; In a similar vein, I think um in the &gt;&gt; In a similar vein, I think um in the position that I found myself in the last position that I found myself in the last position that I found myself in the last few years of doing public health few years of doing public health few years of doing public health education, public science education, you education, public science education, you education, public science education, you know, I I've embraced for a long time know, I I've embraced for a long time know, I I've embraced for a long time the idea that there are behavioral tools the idea that there are behavioral tools the idea that there are behavioral tools that really help. Things like that really help. Things like that really help. Things like meditation, breath work, um certainly meditation, breath work, um certainly meditation, breath work, um certainly exercise, u maybe even deliberate cold exercise, u maybe even deliberate cold exercise, u maybe even deliberate cold exposure, heat exposure, sauna, etc. I exposure, heat exposure, sauna, etc. I exposure, heat exposure, sauna, etc. I also embrace prescription drug and their also embrace prescription drug and their also embrace prescription drug and their utility in some instances, right? Um and utility in some instances, right? Um and utility in some instances, right? Um and I embrace certain over-the-counter I embrace certain over-the-counter I embrace certain over-the-counter compounds. We call them supplements, but compounds. We call them supplements, but compounds. We call them supplements, but they're um compounds that nowadays more they're um compounds that nowadays more they're um compounds that nowadays more and more people would say, "Yeah, maybe and more people would say, "Yeah, maybe and more people would say, "Yeah, maybe taking some vitamin D. People are maybe taking some vitamin D. People are maybe taking some vitamin D. People are maybe taking omega-3s." Maybe they're not. taking omega-3s." Maybe they're not. taking omega-3s." Maybe they're not. Maybe they think anything that a doctor Maybe they think anything that a doctor Maybe they think anything that a doctor doesn't prescribe is or that your mother doesn't prescribe is or that your mother doesn't prescribe is or that your mother didn't prescribe is not worthwhile. didn't prescribe is not worthwhile. didn't prescribe is not worthwhile. But I take the view that all of these But I take the view that all of these But I take the view that all of these are uh are useful for promoting health. are uh are useful for promoting health. are uh are useful for promoting health. I sort of um take the same view when it I sort of um take the same view when it I sort of um take the same view when it comes to the notion that uh religious comes to the notion that uh religious comes to the notion that uh religious belief or strong or even strong belief or strong or even strong belief or strong or even strong belief in God, praying etc could be useful. To in God, praying etc could be useful. To in God, praying etc could be useful. To me these aren't mutually exclusive. Um me these aren't mutually exclusive. Um me these aren't mutually exclusive. Um and I think for some reason and it may and I think for some reason and it may and I think for some reason and it may be generational uh I do think that be generational uh I do think that be generational uh I do think that there's a certain generation there's a certain generation there's a certain generation um above uh mine that for them if a pill um above uh mine that for them if a pill um above uh mine that for them if a pill was not prescribed by a doctor it must was not prescribed by a doctor it must was not prescribed by a doctor it must be snake oil. And that's crazy if you be snake oil. And that's crazy if you be snake oil. And that's crazy if you think about the fact that, you know, in think about the fact that, you know, in think about the fact that, you know, in the 1970s and ' 80s there was this big the 1970s and ' 80s there was this big the 1970s and ' 80s there was this big movement to try and get meditation into movement to try and get meditation into movement to try and get meditation into universities and those people were kind universities and those people were kind universities and those people were kind of shunn psychedelics. of shunn psychedelics. of shunn psychedelics. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; People were fired. Now, I can um &gt;&gt; People were fired. Now, I can um &gt;&gt; People were fired. Now, I can um tell you that tens, if not hundreds of tell you that tens, if not hundreds of tell you that tens, if not hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars are being millions of taxpayer dollars are being millions of taxpayer dollars are being used to study psychedelics in used to study psychedelics in used to study psychedelics in laboratories at major universities like laboratories at major universities like laboratories at major universities like yours and mine and a bunch of others in yours and mine and a bunch of others in yours and mine and a bunch of others in the US and around the world. So, what the US and around the world. So, what the US and around the world. So, what was once considered sorcery um and was once considered sorcery um and was once considered sorcery um and pseudocience often becomes the topic of pseudocience often becomes the topic of pseudocience often becomes the topic of discrete study. Of course, with discrete study. Of course, with discrete study. Of course, with controlled conditions, you get better controlled conditions, you get better controlled conditions, you get better understanding of what those things can understanding of what those things can understanding of what those things can and can't do. But I think we're arriving and can't do. But I think we're arriving and can't do. But I think we're arriving at the time where religion and science at the time where religion and science at the time where religion and science are going to start to be um looked at uh are going to start to be um looked at uh are going to start to be um looked at uh with scientific rigor and I think that's with scientific rigor and I think that's with scientific rigor and I think that's going to bring about more acceptance of going to bring about more acceptance of going to bring about more acceptance of God and religion in terms of how the God and religion in terms of how the God and religion in terms of how the mind works and well-being. mind works and well-being. mind works and well-being. &gt;&gt; I agree with you. But let's talk &gt;&gt; I agree with you. But let's talk &gt;&gt; I agree with you. But let's talk about that older generation because about that older generation because about that older generation because you're right. I have many in my family you're right. I have many in my family you're right. I have many in my family too who you know if the doctor doesn't too who you know if the doctor doesn't too who you know if the doctor doesn't prescribe it don't take it. prescribe it don't take it. prescribe it don't take it. But even during that time period when But even during that time period when But even during that time period when those folks were younger, the those folks were younger, the those folks were younger, the pharmaceutical companies, and I make pharmaceutical companies, and I make pharmaceutical companies, and I make this argument in my book, the this argument in my book, the this argument in my book, the pharmaceutical companies had technology pharmaceutical companies had technology pharmaceutical companies had technology to make all kinds of drugs, but they to make all kinds of drugs, but they to make all kinds of drugs, but they didn't know where to look. And so what didn't know where to look. And so what didn't know where to look. And so what did they do? They sent people to did they do? They sent people to did they do? They sent people to traditional cultures around the world to traditional cultures around the world to traditional cultures around the world to find substances that say the traditional find substances that say the traditional find substances that say the traditional culture say can help people. They called culture say can help people. They called culture say can help people. They called it biorrosspecting at the time. Um, and it biorrosspecting at the time. Um, and it biorrosspecting at the time. Um, and you know, sure, a lot of those didn't do you know, sure, a lot of those didn't do you know, sure, a lot of those didn't do anything, but some did. And from those, anything, but some did. And from those, anything, but some did. And from those, we've got we've found wonderful we've got we've found wonderful we've got we've found wonderful chemotherapy drugs, drugs that reduce chemotherapy drugs, drugs that reduce chemotherapy drugs, drugs that reduce pain, etc. And we wouldn't have done pain, etc. And we wouldn't have done pain, etc. And we wouldn't have done that if we didn't that if we didn't that if we didn't let go of our arrogance that some of let go of our arrogance that some of let go of our arrogance that some of this traditional wisdom might not be this traditional wisdom might not be this traditional wisdom might not be valid. And so what I argue for is a valid. And so what I argue for is a valid. And so what I argue for is a terrible word, but instead of terrible word, but instead of terrible word, but instead of boprospecting, I call it boprospecting, I call it boprospecting, I call it religiospecting. Right? We should go religiospecting. Right? We should go religiospecting. Right? We should go back to these traditions, find these back to these traditions, find these back to these traditions, find these practices, do exactly what you're practices, do exactly what you're practices, do exactly what you're saying, study them in terms of the saying, study them in terms of the saying, study them in terms of the scientific method, which I fully support scientific method, which I fully support scientific method, which I fully support and believe in as a scientist, and see and believe in as a scientist, and see and believe in as a scientist, and see what they do. And what we're finding what they do. And what we're finding what they do. And what we're finding they can do a lot. they can do a lot. they can do a lot. Tell us about some of those findings Tell us about some of those findings Tell us about some of those findings because they're really striking um in because they're really striking um in because they're really striking um in terms of what specific practices and terms of what specific practices and terms of what specific practices and belief systems um can do in terms of belief systems um can do in terms of belief systems um can do in terms of improving our physical and mental improving our physical and mental improving our physical and mental health. And I'm curious as we have that health. And I'm curious as we have that health. And I'm curious as we have that conversation if you could emphasize conversation if you could emphasize conversation if you could emphasize where sometimes it's a positive effect, where sometimes it's a positive effect, where sometimes it's a positive effect, a new positive thing created a new positive thing created a new positive thing created &gt;&gt; as opposed to where you personally might &gt;&gt; as opposed to where you personally might &gt;&gt; as opposed to where you personally might uh view the data is more pointing to uh view the data is more pointing to uh view the data is more pointing to uh when one does practices it doesn't allow when one does practices it doesn't allow when one does practices it doesn't allow the brain to go into its default pathway the brain to go into its default pathway the brain to go into its default pathway of worry etc. Right? Because I think of worry etc. Right? Because I think of worry etc. Right? Because I think most people can accept that stress is most people can accept that stress is most people can accept that stress is bad for the brain and body. Excessive bad for the brain and body. Excessive bad for the brain and body. Excessive stress is bad for the brain and body. stress is bad for the brain and body. stress is bad for the brain and body. And so anytime we replace a thought or a And so anytime we replace a thought or a And so anytime we replace a thought or a behavior with something, you potentially behavior with something, you potentially behavior with something, you potentially are removing the possibility that are removing the possibility that are removing the possibility that default state was stress, right? So that default state was stress, right? So that default state was stress, right? So I'm asking you to do this now I'm asking you to do this now I'm asking you to do this now because I think that positive effects in because I think that positive effects in because I think that positive effects in science um sometimes seem obvious like science um sometimes seem obvious like science um sometimes seem obvious like oh you know maybe pray for a certain oh you know maybe pray for a certain oh you know maybe pray for a certain number of minutes or meditate you get an number of minutes or meditate you get an number of minutes or meditate you get an effect. But there's also a question of effect. But there's also a question of effect. But there's also a question of what the opportunity cost was what the opportunity cost was what the opportunity cost was what weren't you doing in that uh five what weren't you doing in that uh five what weren't you doing in that uh five minutes that might have that might have minutes that might have that might have minutes that might have that might have been detrimental. And there's a reason been detrimental. And there's a reason been detrimental. And there's a reason I'm setting it up this way um that we'll I'm setting it up this way um that we'll I'm setting it up this way um that we'll get to a little bit later. get to a little bit later. get to a little bit later. &gt;&gt; Okay, let me let me give you two &gt;&gt; Okay, let me let me give you two &gt;&gt; Okay, let me let me give you two examples and I'll start with one examples and I'll start with one examples and I'll start with one that actually really started me down that actually really started me down that actually really started me down this road. Um I had a student uh named this road. Um I had a student uh named this road. Um I had a student uh named Paul Condan who's now professor uh in Paul Condan who's now professor uh in Paul Condan who's now professor uh in Oregon and he was very interested in Oregon and he was very interested in Oregon and he was very interested in meditation. And if you read the New York meditation. And if you read the New York meditation. And if you read the New York Times or the Atlantic, it'll tell you, Times or the Atlantic, it'll tell you, Times or the Atlantic, it'll tell you, oh, meditation will lower your blood oh, meditation will lower your blood oh, meditation will lower your blood pressure. It'll increase your blood pressure. It'll increase your blood pressure. It'll increase your standardized test scores. It will standardized test scores. It will standardized test scores. It will increase your executive control. Does increase your executive control. Does increase your executive control. Does all those things and that's great. But all those things and that's great. But all those things and that's great. But if you talk to the monks, they'll say if you talk to the monks, they'll say if you talk to the monks, they'll say that's not why it was created, right? that's not why it was created, right? that's not why it was created, right? It's probably apocryphal, but you It's probably apocryphal, but you It's probably apocryphal, but you know, the saying goes that the know, the saying goes that the know, the saying goes that the Buddha said, "I I teach one thing and Buddha said, "I I teach one thing and Buddha said, "I I teach one thing and one thing only," which is the end of one thing only," which is the end of one thing only," which is the end of suffering. And meditation was a tool suffering. And meditation was a tool suffering. And meditation was a tool that the Buddha believed would help that the Buddha believed would help that the Buddha believed would help people do this. And so when we looked people do this. And so when we looked people do this. And so when we looked around, I'm a social psychologist, so I around, I'm a social psychologist, so I around, I'm a social psychologist, so I study behavior, there was no evidence of study behavior, there was no evidence of study behavior, there was no evidence of this. And so we decided we're going to this. And so we decided we're going to this. And so we decided we're going to put this to the test. And so we put this to the test. And so we put this to the test. And so we recruited people who had never meditated recruited people who had never meditated recruited people who had never meditated before and they were either put on a on before and they were either put on a on before and they were either put on a on a wait list or they came for eight weeks a wait list or they came for eight weeks a wait list or they came for eight weeks to uh a sacred space on campus where to uh a sacred space on campus where to uh a sacred space on campus where they were led in meditation at the at they were led in meditation at the at they were led in meditation at the at the feet of a Buddhist llama. And she the feet of a Buddhist llama. And she the feet of a Buddhist llama. And she created, you know, practices for them in created, you know, practices for them in created, you know, practices for them in MP3 so they can go home and practice. MP3 so they can go home and practice. MP3 so they can go home and practice. After 8 weeks, we invited each of them After 8 weeks, we invited each of them After 8 weeks, we invited each of them individually back to the lab. And we individually back to the lab. And we individually back to the lab. And we told them, we're going to measure your told them, we're going to measure your told them, we're going to measure your memory. We're going to measure your memory. We're going to measure your memory. We're going to measure your executive control. basically your executive control. basically your executive control. basically your ability to override your own ability to override your own ability to override your own impulses. That wasn't the experiment. impulses. That wasn't the experiment. impulses. That wasn't the experiment. The experiment actually happened in the The experiment actually happened in the The experiment actually happened in the waiting room to the lab. So when you waiting room to the lab. So when you waiting room to the lab. So when you come into the lab, there's a room with come into the lab, there's a room with come into the lab, there's a room with three chairs and um people were sitting three chairs and um people were sitting three chairs and um people were sitting in two of them and these were actors in two of them and these were actors in two of them and these were actors that we hired. You know, this people that we hired. You know, this people that we hired. You know, this people coming into the study thought they were coming into the study thought they were coming into the study thought they were just other people waiting in the room. just other people waiting in the room. just other people waiting in the room. And so there was one chair left and so And so there was one chair left and so And so there was one chair left and so the person would take the last chair. the person would take the last chair. the person would take the last chair. About 2 or 3 minutes later, a person About 2 or 3 minutes later, a person About 2 or 3 minutes later, a person who'd come down the hallway, also an who'd come down the hallway, also an who'd come down the hallway, also an actor who worked for us, who was on actor who worked for us, who was on actor who worked for us, who was on crutches, wearing one of those, you crutches, wearing one of those, you crutches, wearing one of those, you know, boots you put on your foot when know, boots you put on your foot when know, boots you put on your foot when it's when it's broken, wasn't really it's when it's broken, wasn't really it's when it's broken, wasn't really broken, looking like she was in a broken, looking like she was in a broken, looking like she was in a good amount of pain. She came into the good amount of pain. She came into the good amount of pain. She came into the room, all the three chairs were taken at room, all the three chairs were taken at room, all the three chairs were taken at that point. Um, she would kind of lean that point. Um, she would kind of lean that point. Um, she would kind of lean back against the wall, let out a little back against the wall, let out a little back against the wall, let out a little whimper of pain. And what we wanted to whimper of pain. And what we wanted to whimper of pain. And what we wanted to look at is would somebody help her? Now, look at is would somebody help her? Now, look at is would somebody help her? Now, the two actors in the chairs, we told do the two actors in the chairs, we told do the two actors in the chairs, we told do what you do when you're on the subway, what you do when you're on the subway, what you do when you're on the subway, right? You don't want to give up your right? You don't want to give up your right? You don't want to give up your seat. Don't look at the person. Thumb seat. Don't look at the person. Thumb seat. Don't look at the person. Thumb your phone. Ignore them. Right? So, your phone. Ignore them. Right? So, your phone. Ignore them. Right? So, we're creating a situation where people we're creating a situation where people we're creating a situation where people aren't helping. And our question was, aren't helping. And our question was, aren't helping. And our question was, would the person who was in the study in would the person who was in the study in would the person who was in the study in the third chair actually help this the third chair actually help this the third chair actually help this person? In the control condition, people person? In the control condition, people person? In the control condition, people who weren't meditating, about 15% of who weren't meditating, about 15% of who weren't meditating, about 15% of them got up and said, "Oh, do you want them got up and said, "Oh, do you want them got up and said, "Oh, do you want my chair? Can I help you? Can I hold my chair? Can I help you? Can I hold my chair? Can I help you? Can I hold something for you?" In the meditation something for you?" In the meditation something for you?" In the meditation condition, it was close to 50% of people condition, it was close to 50% of people condition, it was close to 50% of people who did this, right? We tripled the rate who did this, right? We tripled the rate who did this, right? We tripled the rate at which somebody felt compassion for at which somebody felt compassion for at which somebody felt compassion for somebody else in pain and was willing to somebody else in pain and was willing to somebody else in pain and was willing to help them. That's a pretty big effect in help them. That's a pretty big effect in help them. That's a pretty big effect in terms of behavioral science. Now, that terms of behavioral science. Now, that terms of behavioral science. Now, that was a small study. So, so we've was a small study. So, so we've was a small study. So, so we've replicated it. We've also done it in a replicated it. We've also done it in a replicated it. We've also done it in a in a situation where someone is in a situation where someone is in a situation where someone is provoking you. So in this situation, provoking you. So in this situation, provoking you. So in this situation, people who had been meditating or not people who had been meditating or not people who had been meditating or not came to the lab and there's a paradigm came to the lab and there's a paradigm came to the lab and there's a paradigm that's designed to evoke anger. And the that's designed to evoke anger. And the that's designed to evoke anger. And the way it works is you create a um you'd way it works is you create a um you'd way it works is you create a um you'd spend five minutes to write a story spend five minutes to write a story spend five minutes to write a story about your life's goals. You have to about your life's goals. You have to about your life's goals. You have to then present this to the other subject then present this to the other subject then present this to the other subject who they didn't know was an actor for who they didn't know was an actor for who they didn't know was an actor for us. He listens to this and he says, us. He listens to this and he says, us. He listens to this and he says, "Really? That's your plan? That doesn't "Really? That's your plan? That doesn't "Really? That's your plan? That doesn't make any sense." Right? And this was a make any sense." Right? And this was a make any sense." Right? And this was a um paradigm developed by an anger a um paradigm developed by an anger a um paradigm developed by an anger researcher named Ton named Tom Densen. researcher named Ton named Tom Densen. researcher named Ton named Tom Densen. And we know it creates you know the HPA And we know it creates you know the HPA And we know it creates you know the HPA axis anger response. And so it's really axis anger response. And so it's really axis anger response. And so it's really well validated well validated well validated and people either meditated or in this and people either meditated or in this and people either meditated or in this case the control was an active control. case the control was an active control. case the control was an active control. They had done lumosity brain training They had done lumosity brain training They had done lumosity brain training for a while. Um and what we found is for a while. Um and what we found is for a while. Um and what we found is that those who had they were then given that those who had they were then given that those who had they were then given the chance to cause punishment to this the chance to cause punishment to this the chance to cause punishment to this person. And I don't I won't go into it person. And I don't I won't go into it person. And I don't I won't go into it all, but they thought there was a way all, but they thought there was a way all, but they thought there was a way for them to cause this person pain. for them to cause this person pain. for them to cause this person pain. The people who didn't meditate were The people who didn't meditate were The people who didn't meditate were willing to cause this guy a good amount willing to cause this guy a good amount willing to cause this guy a good amount of pain. Now, it didn't actually happen, of pain. Now, it didn't actually happen, of pain. Now, it didn't actually happen, of course, but they thought it would. of course, but they thought it would. of course, but they thought it would. Um, those who had meditated Um, those who had meditated Um, those who had meditated refused to cause him any pain. refused to cause him any pain. refused to cause him any pain. They still said what he did was wrong, They still said what he did was wrong, They still said what he did was wrong, and they'd want to talk to him and tell and they'd want to talk to him and tell and they'd want to talk to him and tell him what he did was wrong. But they him what he did was wrong. But they him what he did was wrong. But they thought that creating more pain and thought that creating more pain and thought that creating more pain and suffering was not the way to go about suffering was not the way to go about suffering was not the way to go about it. And so for us, you know, right here it. And so for us, you know, right here it. And so for us, you know, right here was evidence that these practices make was evidence that these practices make was evidence that these practices make you kinder, make you more compassionate. you kinder, make you more compassionate. you kinder, make you more compassionate. The other way, what does it save you The other way, what does it save you The other way, what does it save you from in terms of stress? This isn't my from in terms of stress? This isn't my from in terms of stress? This isn't my work, but there's a lot of work on work, but there's a lot of work on work, but there's a lot of work on prayer. And so when people pray, prayer. And so when people pray, prayer. And so when people pray, especially if you're reciting formal especially if you're reciting formal especially if you're reciting formal prayers, not so much if you're just prayers, not so much if you're just prayers, not so much if you're just having a conversation with God, but if having a conversation with God, but if having a conversation with God, but if you're saying the rosary or you're saying the rosary or you're saying the rosary or you're reciting, you know, Hindu sutras or any reciting, you know, Hindu sutras or any reciting, you know, Hindu sutras or any formulaic prayer, what it typically does formulaic prayer, what it typically does formulaic prayer, what it typically does is it reduces your respiration rate. is it reduces your respiration rate. is it reduces your respiration rate. Not only does it reduce your respiration Not only does it reduce your respiration Not only does it reduce your respiration rate, but it also tends to increase the rate, but it also tends to increase the rate, but it also tends to increase the duration of the exhalations. And this is duration of the exhalations. And this is duration of the exhalations. And this is for meditation as well. What does that for meditation as well. What does that for meditation as well. What does that do? I mean, you talk about breath work a do? I mean, you talk about breath work a do? I mean, you talk about breath work a lot on your show, right? What it does is lot on your show, right? What it does is lot on your show, right? What it does is it um it um it um increases veagal tone, reduces heart increases veagal tone, reduces heart increases veagal tone, reduces heart rate. It puts the body in a state where rate. It puts the body in a state where rate. It puts the body in a state where it is not expecting um threat or it is not expecting um threat or it is not expecting um threat or challenge in the environment where it challenge in the environment where it challenge in the environment where it wants to engage and be more open to wants to engage and be more open to wants to engage and be more open to socialization. It reduces cortisol socialization. It reduces cortisol socialization. It reduces cortisol responses. And so what it's basically responses. And so what it's basically responses. And so what it's basically doing there is yes, you're saying the doing there is yes, you're saying the doing there is yes, you're saying the words, but it's reducing the stress in words, but it's reducing the stress in words, but it's reducing the stress in your body. And even if you're praying your body. And even if you're praying your body. And even if you're praying about things that are bothering you, about things that are bothering you, about things that are bothering you, things that you're sad or anxious about, things that you're sad or anxious about, things that you're sad or anxious about, by saying those prayers over and over by saying those prayers over and over by saying those prayers over and over again, stuff travels up the vagus, again, stuff travels up the vagus, again, stuff travels up the vagus, right? And so by increasing exhalations, right? And so by increasing exhalations, right? And so by increasing exhalations, by slowing the respiration rate, it's by slowing the respiration rate, it's by slowing the respiration rate, it's telling your mind you're safe, things telling your mind you're safe, things telling your mind you're safe, things are okay, and thereby it's reducing the are okay, and thereby it's reducing the are okay, and thereby it's reducing the stress. And so when you look at that stress. And so when you look at that stress. And so when you look at that data from Tyler Vanderules that I data from Tyler Vanderules that I data from Tyler Vanderules that I mentioned on young adults who pray, why mentioned on young adults who pray, why mentioned on young adults who pray, why does it reduce stress? It's basically a does it reduce stress? It's basically a does it reduce stress? It's basically a way of increasing veagal tone in that in way of increasing veagal tone in that in way of increasing veagal tone in that in that moment and it helps you sit with that moment and it helps you sit with that moment and it helps you sit with the ideas of the things that are the ideas of the things that are the ideas of the things that are bothering you while physiologically your bothering you while physiologically your bothering you while physiologically your body's telling you you're safe. body's telling you you're safe. body's telling you you're safe. &gt;&gt; Thank you for reminding everyone that &gt;&gt; Thank you for reminding everyone that &gt;&gt; Thank you for reminding everyone that signals travel up the vagus in addition signals travel up the vagus in addition signals travel up the vagus in addition to the vag nerve controlling slowing of to the vag nerve controlling slowing of to the vag nerve controlling slowing of the heart rate when you exhale because I the heart rate when you exhale because I the heart rate when you exhale because I think we hear a lot about the vagus think we hear a lot about the vagus think we hear a lot about the vagus pathway and um most people get it wrong. pathway and um most people get it wrong. pathway and um most people get it wrong. You got it exactly right. Um there's a You got it exactly right. Um there's a You got it exactly right. Um there's a lot of information flowing out from the lot of information flowing out from the lot of information flowing out from the body and that actually helps answer the body and that actually helps answer the body and that actually helps answer the question that was um in the back of my question that was um in the back of my question that was um in the back of my mind heading into this conversation mind heading into this conversation mind heading into this conversation which was um well I I'll tell by way of which was um well I I'll tell by way of which was um well I I'll tell by way of anecdote how I arrived there my high anecdote how I arrived there my high anecdote how I arrived there my high school girlfriend was Greek Orthodox a school girlfriend was Greek Orthodox a school girlfriend was Greek Orthodox a lot of Greeks in our family and it lot of Greeks in our family and it lot of Greeks in our family and it wasn't like wasn't like wasn't like &gt;&gt; that movie my big fat Greek wedding but &gt;&gt; that movie my big fat Greek wedding but &gt;&gt; that movie my big fat Greek wedding but it wasn't dissimilar either to go over it wasn't dissimilar either to go over it wasn't dissimilar either to go over there you know and Greek Easter and like there you know and Greek Easter and like there you know and Greek Easter and like people were breaking plates and people were breaking plates and people were breaking plates and &gt;&gt; all the festivities. But one thing I &gt;&gt; all the festivities. But one thing I &gt;&gt; all the festivities. But one thing I learned spending time with people in the learned spending time with people in the learned spending time with people in the Greek Orthodox community is um there was Greek Orthodox community is um there was Greek Orthodox community is um there was a lot of prayer. a lot of prayer. a lot of prayer. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um in their family. Uh there were also a &gt;&gt; Um in their family. Uh there were also a &gt;&gt; Um in their family. Uh there were also a lot of use of worry beads. lot of use of worry beads. lot of use of worry beads. &gt;&gt; Um you know these like beads that people &gt;&gt; Um you know these like beads that people &gt;&gt; Um you know these like beads that people would um would use not unlike spinners, would um would use not unlike spinners, would um would use not unlike spinners, right? Um right? Um right? Um &gt;&gt; but uh often while reciting prayer, &gt;&gt; but uh often while reciting prayer, &gt;&gt; but uh often while reciting prayer, &gt;&gt; this was more in the older generation in &gt;&gt; this was more in the older generation in &gt;&gt; this was more in the older generation in her family and friends. Um, and there in her family and friends. Um, and there in her family and friends. Um, and there was also a lot of superstition that was also a lot of superstition that was also a lot of superstition that comes up in that movie. But there was a comes up in that movie. But there was a comes up in that movie. But there was a lot of superstition. So I asked her, I lot of superstition. So I asked her, I lot of superstition. So I asked her, I was why all the superstition. Uh, was why all the superstition. Uh, was why all the superstition. Uh, why the worry beads? And she said, oh why the worry beads? And she said, oh why the worry beads? And she said, oh because um that replaces what the mind because um that replaces what the mind because um that replaces what the mind would be doing would be doing would be doing &gt;&gt; if you weren't manipulating these beads &gt;&gt; if you weren't manipulating these beads &gt;&gt; if you weren't manipulating these beads and um carrying out, you know, kind and um carrying out, you know, kind and um carrying out, you know, kind of superstitious activities. He's like of superstitious activities. He's like of superstitious activities. He's like the superstitious activities as long as the superstitious activities as long as the superstitious activities as long as they don't take over your life um they don't take over your life um they don't take over your life um replace things that are much worse, replace things that are much worse, replace things that are much worse, darker thoughts, darker thoughts, darker thoughts, &gt;&gt; more terrifying ideas about terrifying &gt;&gt; more terrifying ideas about terrifying &gt;&gt; more terrifying ideas about terrifying things that you don't want to things that you don't want to things that you don't want to happen. So, it's about it's about happen. So, it's about it's about happen. So, it's about it's about replacing all of that with uh with replacing all of that with uh with replacing all of that with uh with repeating themes, literally loops of repeating themes, literally loops of repeating themes, literally loops of thought &gt;&gt; that um of course they could break out &gt;&gt; that um of course they could break out &gt;&gt; that um of course they could break out of and interact. I'm not suggesting all of and interact. I'm not suggesting all of and interact. I'm not suggesting all Greeks are like this, by the way. I love Greeks are like this, by the way. I love Greeks are like this, by the way. I love Greek culture. I love the food. I love I Greek culture. I love the food. I love I Greek culture. I love the food. I love I think they're wonderful people. Um, but think they're wonderful people. Um, but think they're wonderful people. Um, but it's very interesting that at least it's very interesting that at least it's very interesting that at least within that culture, they've adopted s within that culture, they've adopted s within that culture, they've adopted s quote unquote superstitions are somewhat quote unquote superstitions are somewhat quote unquote superstitions are somewhat accepted. &gt;&gt; Again, they're somewhat generational. &gt;&gt; Again, they're somewhat generational. &gt;&gt; Again, they're somewhat generational. Um, worry beads and prayer and ritual, Um, worry beads and prayer and ritual, Um, worry beads and prayer and ritual, you know, and all these things sort of you know, and all these things sort of you know, and all these things sort of blend together seamlessly. Like you blend together seamlessly. Like you blend together seamlessly. Like you wouldn't say, oh, you know, they're over wouldn't say, oh, you know, they're over wouldn't say, oh, you know, they're over there using worry beads, then they're there using worry beads, then they're there using worry beads, then they're doing superstitious activities or um or doing superstitious activities or um or doing superstitious activities or um or reciting things in a superstitious way. reciting things in a superstitious way. reciting things in a superstitious way. But, you know, it's all kind of blended But, you know, it's all kind of blended But, you know, it's all kind of blended into the culture in a way that they seem into the culture in a way that they seem into the culture in a way that they seem like very happy people, I must say. Very like very happy people, I must say. Very like very happy people, I must say. Very joy joyful a lot of the time. A lot of joy joyful a lot of the time. A lot of joy joyful a lot of the time. A lot of the time. the time. the time. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I the way I like to think &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I the way I like to think &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I the way I like to think about these rituals as you're mentioning about these rituals as you're mentioning about these rituals as you're mentioning is they're really sophisticated mindbody is they're really sophisticated mindbody is they're really sophisticated mindbody practices. Like, you know, we we're a practices. Like, you know, we we're a practices. Like, you know, we we're a culture that wants the life hack. Give culture that wants the life hack. Give culture that wants the life hack. Give me the life hack so that I can study me the life hack so that I can study me the life hack so that I can study more. Give me the life hack so that I more. Give me the life hack so that I more. Give me the life hack so that I can save money or lose weight. can save money or lose weight. can save money or lose weight. Rituals are like sophisticated Rituals are like sophisticated Rituals are like sophisticated packages of life hacks where a life hack packages of life hacks where a life hack packages of life hacks where a life hack is like playing a single note on a is like playing a single note on a is like playing a single note on a piano. A ritual is like a symphony. So piano. A ritual is like a symphony. So piano. A ritual is like a symphony. So let me give you an example that kind of let me give you an example that kind of let me give you an example that kind of picks up on what you're saying. So one picks up on what you're saying. So one picks up on what you're saying. So one of the thing that cuts across of the thing that cuts across of the thing that cuts across everybody's lives unfortunately is that everybody's lives unfortunately is that everybody's lives unfortunately is that we have to we will grieve at some point. we have to we will grieve at some point. we have to we will grieve at some point. We will lose somebody and we will have We will lose somebody and we will have We will lose somebody and we will have the pain. Um and so I was interested in the pain. Um and so I was interested in the pain. Um and so I was interested in looking at mourning rituals, right? looking at mourning rituals, right? looking at mourning rituals, right? And what is one thing that almost all And what is one thing that almost all And what is one thing that almost all religions do when somebody passes? you religions do when somebody passes? you religions do when somebody passes? you eulogize this person and it seems you eulogize this person and it seems you eulogize this person and it seems normal, but when you think about it, it's kind but when you think about it, it's kind but when you think about it, it's kind of strange because if I just lost a job of strange because if I just lost a job of strange because if I just lost a job that I loved or if my wife just decided that I loved or if my wife just decided that I loved or if my wife just decided she was going to leave me, I wouldn't she was going to leave me, I wouldn't she was going to leave me, I wouldn't want to think about daily how wonderful want to think about daily how wonderful want to think about daily how wonderful this person was or this job was because this person was or this job was because this person was or this job was because it would increase the pain. But with it would increase the pain. But with it would increase the pain. But with someone passing, it does the opposite. someone passing, it does the opposite. someone passing, it does the opposite. So George Banano who's one of the So George Banano who's one of the So George Banano who's one of the nation's leading um bereavement nation's leading um bereavement nation's leading um bereavement researchers at Colombia he says one of researchers at Colombia he says one of researchers at Colombia he says one of the biggest predictors of who can move the biggest predictors of who can move the biggest predictors of who can move through grief successfully and by that I through grief successfully and by that I through grief successfully and by that I mean it doesn't get too intense or it mean it doesn't get too intense or it mean it doesn't get too intense or it doesn't go on too long that it becomes doesn't go on too long that it becomes doesn't go on too long that it becomes paralyzing is who can consolidate paralyzing is who can consolidate paralyzing is who can consolidate positive memories of the deceased positive memories of the deceased positive memories of the deceased person. The better you are able at doing person. The better you are able at doing person. The better you are able at doing that the more you'll move through grief that the more you'll move through grief that the more you'll move through grief successfully. And then you're talking successfully. And then you're talking successfully. And then you're talking about superstitions. You know, if you about superstitions. You know, if you about superstitions. You know, if you look at the Jewish morning ritual of look at the Jewish morning ritual of look at the Jewish morning ritual of Shiva, I won't say this is a of Shiva, I won't say this is a of Shiva, I won't say this is a superstition, but there are elements to superstition, but there are elements to superstition, but there are elements to it that some people think are strange. it that some people think are strange. it that some people think are strange. Like when someone passes, you cover your Like when someone passes, you cover your Like when someone passes, you cover your mirror. Why would you cover your mirror? mirror. Why would you cover your mirror? mirror. Why would you cover your mirror? Well, there's lots of research in Well, there's lots of research in Well, there's lots of research in psychology that shows when you look into psychology that shows when you look into psychology that shows when you look into a mirror, whatever emotion you are a mirror, whatever emotion you are a mirror, whatever emotion you are feeling becomes intensified. So if feeling becomes intensified. So if feeling becomes intensified. So if you're happy and you look into a mirror, you're happy and you look into a mirror, you're happy and you look into a mirror, you'll feel more happy. If you're sad, you'll feel more happy. If you're sad, you'll feel more happy. If you're sad, you'll feel more sad. you'll feel more sad. you'll feel more sad. &gt;&gt; Those are solid data. Those are solid &gt;&gt; Those are solid data. Those are solid &gt;&gt; Those are solid data. Those are solid data from the like the 1970s or ' 80s. data from the like the 1970s or ' 80s. data from the like the 1970s or ' 80s. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so, um, they would give people &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so, um, they would give people &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so, um, they would give people emotional inductions. They'd have group emotional inductions. They'd have group emotional inductions. They'd have group who would look into the mirrors and who would look into the mirrors and who would look into the mirrors and groups who didn't. They would then groups who didn't. They would then groups who didn't. They would then measure their emotions after. Always measure their emotions after. Always measure their emotions after. Always goes up. goes up. goes up. &gt;&gt; Selfies. Just kidding. &gt;&gt; Selfies. Just kidding. &gt;&gt; Selfies. Just kidding. &gt;&gt; And so, by simply covering mirrors at a &gt;&gt; And so, by simply covering mirrors at a &gt;&gt; And so, by simply covering mirrors at a time when you were feeling intense time when you were feeling intense time when you were feeling intense sadness and grief, it reduces that. sadness and grief, it reduces that. sadness and grief, it reduces that. &gt;&gt; They also in during shiva, you're &gt;&gt; They also in during shiva, you're &gt;&gt; They also in during shiva, you're supposed to reduce self-focus. So, supposed to reduce self-focus. So, supposed to reduce self-focus. So, you're not supposed to shave. You're not you're not supposed to shave. You're not you're not supposed to shave. You're not supposed to wear your best clothes. supposed to wear your best clothes. supposed to wear your best clothes. There's work coming out showing that There's work coming out showing that There's work coming out showing that reductions in self-focus and focusing on reductions in self-focus and focusing on reductions in self-focus and focusing on you and your needs actually reduces you and your needs actually reduces you and your needs actually reduces grief. It's also the case that every day grief. It's also the case that every day grief. It's also the case that every day during the seven days of Shiva, your during the seven days of Shiva, your during the seven days of Shiva, your community has to come with come to your community has to come with come to your community has to come with come to your house and uh prayers are said in what's house and uh prayers are said in what's house and uh prayers are said in what's called a minion which is a minimum of 10 called a minion which is a minimum of 10 called a minion which is a minimum of 10 people. So people will come and they people. So people will come and they people. So people will come and they will say prayers together and while will say prayers together and while will say prayers together and while they're saying prayers they're kind of they're saying prayers they're kind of they're saying prayers they're kind of you know swaying in unison and saying you know swaying in unison and saying you know swaying in unison and saying the same words in unison that's the same words in unison that's the same words in unison that's something in psychology we call motor something in psychology we call motor something in psychology we call motor synchrony right what is motors synchrony right what is motors synchrony right what is motors synchrony it's simply moving your body in it's simply moving your body in it's simply moving your body in synchrony with someone else so in my lab synchrony with someone else so in my lab synchrony with someone else so in my lab we've shown that if we bring people in we've shown that if we bring people in we've shown that if we bring people in and we have them engage in motor synchry and we have them engage in motor synchry and we have them engage in motor synchry so you know let's say you and you and I so you know let's say you and you and I so you know let's say you and you and I don't know each other we sit down um you don't know each other we sit down um you don't know each other we sit down um you put on earphones I put on earphones or put on earphones I put on earphones or put on earphones I put on earphones or headphones and in front of us is a headphones and in front of us is a headphones and in front of us is a little sensor It's really not a sensor, little sensor It's really not a sensor, little sensor It's really not a sensor, but it looks like a little pad. And we but it looks like a little pad. And we but it looks like a little pad. And we play you tones, and you're supposed to play you tones, and you're supposed to play you tones, and you're supposed to tap that sensor every time you hear the tap that sensor every time you hear the tap that sensor every time you hear the tone. And in some conditions, we have tone. And in some conditions, we have tone. And in some conditions, we have these people who have never met hear. these people who have never met hear. these people who have never met hear. So, they're tapping in unison. In other So, they're tapping in unison. In other So, they're tapping in unison. In other cases, they're completely random, and so cases, they're completely random, and so cases, they're completely random, and so they're not synchronized at all. they're not synchronized at all. they're not synchronized at all. through a whole set of shenanigans that through a whole set of shenanigans that through a whole set of shenanigans that I won't go into. What then happens is I won't go into. What then happens is I won't go into. What then happens is one of the persons is put in a one of the persons is put in a one of the persons is put in a situation where they need help to situation where they need help to situation where they need help to complete a task or they're going to be complete a task or they're going to be complete a task or they're going to be stuck there for a long time and not get stuck there for a long time and not get stuck there for a long time and not get credit for this study. credit for this study. credit for this study. If we had tapped in unison, If we had tapped in unison, If we had tapped in unison, people report feeling more connection to people report feeling more connection to people report feeling more connection to this person. They report feeling more this person. They report feeling more this person. They report feeling more compassion for their plight. and by 30% compassion for their plight. and by 30% compassion for their plight. and by 30% more they're willing to go help that more they're willing to go help that more they're willing to go help that person spend their time taking on some person spend their time taking on some person spend their time taking on some of that person's burden. Now, if you ask of that person's burden. Now, if you ask of that person's burden. Now, if you ask them why do they do this, they'll say, them why do they do this, they'll say, them why do they do this, they'll say, you know, I feel like I must know this you know, I feel like I must know this you know, I feel like I must know this person, like maybe he was in my class person, like maybe he was in my class person, like maybe he was in my class last semester or maybe it was a party I last semester or maybe it was a party I last semester or maybe it was a party I was at. But that action of synchrony, was at. But that action of synchrony, was at. But that action of synchrony, right, is a cue to the mind that these right, is a cue to the mind that these right, is a cue to the mind that these two are joined. We kind of see this if two are joined. We kind of see this if two are joined. We kind of see this if you see flocks of birds or you see you see flocks of birds or you see you see flocks of birds or you see schools of fish, you kind of see a schools of fish, you kind of see a schools of fish, you kind of see a greater hole even out of individuals greater hole even out of individuals greater hole even out of individuals because they're moving together. And so because they're moving together. And so because they're moving together. And so it's an ancient marker to the mind that it's an ancient marker to the mind that it's an ancient marker to the mind that we are joined. People don't have insight we are joined. People don't have insight we are joined. People don't have insight to that, but yet they feel that to that, but yet they feel that to that, but yet they feel that connection and they can't explain it. So connection and they can't explain it. So connection and they can't explain it. So they create a story for it. they create a story for it. they create a story for it. What happens at Shiva when you say these What happens at Shiva when you say these What happens at Shiva when you say these prayers? You're surrounded by at least prayers? You're surrounded by at least prayers? You're surrounded by at least 10 people who are doing them in 10 people who are doing them in 10 people who are doing them in synchrony with you. What is that going synchrony with you. What is that going synchrony with you. What is that going to do? It's going to increase the to do? It's going to increase the to do? It's going to increase the empathy and the compassion you feel. It empathy and the compassion you feel. It empathy and the compassion you feel. It also happens just in religious community also happens just in religious community also happens just in religious community in general. Like I talked earlier about in general. Like I talked earlier about in general. Like I talked earlier about why are the effects of religious why are the effects of religious why are the effects of religious community better. What are you normally community better. What are you normally community better. What are you normally doing? You're singing together. You're doing? You're singing together. You're doing? You're singing together. You're praying together. You're sitting and praying together. You're sitting and praying together. You're sitting and kneeling together. That's a subtle kneeling together. That's a subtle kneeling together. That's a subtle signal to the mind that you are more signal to the mind that you are more signal to the mind that you are more connected and it will increase your connected and it will increase your connected and it will increase your empathy for each other. Having been a empathy for each other. Having been a empathy for each other. Having been a summer camp counselor in college, uh it summer camp counselor in college, uh it summer camp counselor in college, uh it was incredible to see the transition was incredible to see the transition was incredible to see the transition between the first day kind of shyness between the first day kind of shyness between the first day kind of shyness and awkwardness of the kids and then you and awkwardness of the kids and then you and awkwardness of the kids and then you get them singing together or hanging get them singing together or hanging get them singing together or hanging out around a campfire one night by the out around a campfire one night by the out around a campfire one night by the next day. It's almost like they'd known next day. It's almost like they'd known next day. It's almost like they'd known each other for a year. each other for a year. each other for a year. &gt;&gt; Um the you know, there were other &gt;&gt; Um the you know, there were other &gt;&gt; Um the you know, there were other factors at play there. Uh but it's factors at play there. Uh but it's factors at play there. Uh but it's remarkable and um I believe that remarkable and um I believe that remarkable and um I believe that nervous systems link up relatively nervous systems link up relatively nervous systems link up relatively easily if they're given the right easily if they're given the right easily if they're given the right they're going to train with each other they're going to train with each other they're going to train with each other the right opportunity. Uh it's just the right opportunity. Uh it's just the right opportunity. Uh it's just inherent to our species and to you know inherent to our species and to you know inherent to our species and to you know schools of fish have lateral lines. They schools of fish have lateral lines. They schools of fish have lateral lines. They measure each other's uh electrical measure each other's uh electrical measure each other's uh electrical signals without trying. I think signals without trying. I think signals without trying. I think humans uh humans uh humans uh &gt;&gt; we I think we overemphasize that the &gt;&gt; we I think we overemphasize that the &gt;&gt; we I think we overemphasize that the extent to which this happens through extent to which this happens through extent to which this happens through speech. I think happens a lot more speech. I think happens a lot more speech. I think happens a lot more through bodily things. And um through bodily things. And um through bodily things. And um &gt;&gt; we had an expert in uh the evolution of &gt;&gt; we had an expert in uh the evolution of &gt;&gt; we had an expert in uh the evolution of human speech on here a few years ago, human speech on here a few years ago, human speech on here a few years ago, Eric Jarvis, who's a excuse me, not Eric Jarvis, who's a excuse me, not Eric Jarvis, who's a excuse me, not Colombia, the Rockefeller. I almost Colombia, the Rockefeller. I almost Colombia, the Rockefeller. I almost insulted him in New York. He would never insulted him in New York. He would never insulted him in New York. He would never say that. Um and Eric um is a very say that. Um and Eric um is a very say that. Um and Eric um is a very accomplished dancer in addition to the accomplished dancer in addition to the accomplished dancer in addition to the incredible science he does. And he the incredible science he does. And he the incredible science he does. And he told me that people now believe based on told me that people now believe based on told me that people now believe based on genetics, anatomy, and more that song genetics, anatomy, and more that song genetics, anatomy, and more that song evolved prior to spoken language, evolved prior to spoken language, evolved prior to spoken language, &gt;&gt; which makes sense. And so song and dance &gt;&gt; which makes sense. And so song and dance &gt;&gt; which makes sense. And so song and dance were the more um evolutionarily ancient were the more um evolutionarily ancient were the more um evolutionarily ancient forms of language forms of language forms of language &gt;&gt; and speech came out of that. So it makes &gt;&gt; and speech came out of that. So it makes &gt;&gt; and speech came out of that. So it makes sense that we would that we would bond sense that we would that we would bond sense that we would that we would bond that way. Um you mentioned um people that way. Um you mentioned um people that way. Um you mentioned um people sitting Shiva in Judaism. What other sitting Shiva in Judaism. What other sitting Shiva in Judaism. What other sorts of um activities that in other sorts of um activities that in other sorts of um activities that in other religions that you see around grieving religions that you see around grieving religions that you see around grieving seem to serve this kind of purpose? I've seem to serve this kind of purpose? I've seem to serve this kind of purpose? I've been to an Irish wake that was been to an Irish wake that was been to an Irish wake that was definitely a different experience. definitely a different experience. definitely a different experience. People laughing and telling jokes and People laughing and telling jokes and People laughing and telling jokes and stories. There was some crying too. stories. There was some crying too. stories. There was some crying too. &gt;&gt; Um certainly grieving was happening but &gt;&gt; Um certainly grieving was happening but &gt;&gt; Um certainly grieving was happening but in a very different way. Um in a very different way. Um in a very different way. Um &gt;&gt; I believe you grew up Catholic. Is that &gt;&gt; I believe you grew up Catholic. Is that &gt;&gt; I believe you grew up Catholic. Is that right? Okay. So what about some of the right? Okay. So what about some of the right? Okay. So what about some of the other forms of grieving in other forms of grieving in other forms of grieving in other religions? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you know, it's funny. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you know, it's funny. Um, &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you know, it's funny. Um, friends of mine who are Jewish will friends of mine who are Jewish will friends of mine who are Jewish will always say, "Yeah, we do death well." always say, "Yeah, we do death well." always say, "Yeah, we do death well." And I think it's true as I look at it, And I think it's true as I look at it, And I think it's true as I look at it, the practice of Shiva to me has the practice of Shiva to me has the practice of Shiva to me has all the right pieces. And and for me, so all the right pieces. And and for me, so all the right pieces. And and for me, so like eulogizing happens in all faiths like eulogizing happens in all faiths like eulogizing happens in all faiths and what I like to say is there are and what I like to say is there are and what I like to say is there are convergences in these, right? If you're convergences in these, right? If you're convergences in these, right? If you're if you're a cultural anthropologist, if you're a cultural anthropologist, if you're a cultural anthropologist, you're seeing convergent evolution in you're seeing convergent evolution in you're seeing convergent evolution in terms of the cultural things that we can terms of the cultural things that we can terms of the cultural things that we can do to put our bodies in the right in the do to put our bodies in the right in the do to put our bodies in the right in the right way. Uh or if you're a person of right way. Uh or if you're a person of right way. Uh or if you're a person of faith, you can say, well, you know, God faith, you can say, well, you know, God faith, you can say, well, you know, God cares about God's creations, and so cares about God's creations, and so cares about God's creations, and so we're all embodied in the same way, and we're all embodied in the same way, and we're all embodied in the same way, and so the same practices are going to so the same practices are going to so the same practices are going to matter. But some groups may have figured matter. But some groups may have figured matter. But some groups may have figured things out more than another. I think I things out more than another. I think I things out more than another. I think I mean, eulogizing is the big one. At mean, eulogizing is the big one. At mean, eulogizing is the big one. At Irish Wakes, at some Irish wakes, they Irish Wakes, at some Irish wakes, they Irish Wakes, at some Irish wakes, they do cover mirrors. They have a completely do cover mirrors. They have a completely do cover mirrors. They have a completely different theological story for why they different theological story for why they different theological story for why they do it. do it. do it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why do what do they say? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why do what do they say? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Why do what do they say? &gt;&gt; I think it's something about &gt;&gt; I think it's something about &gt;&gt; I think it's something about keeping evil spirits away. I don't keeping evil spirits away. I don't keeping evil spirits away. I don't know. But and in Hindu ceremonies, they know. But and in Hindu ceremonies, they know. But and in Hindu ceremonies, they do it as well and certain Hindu do it as well and certain Hindu do it as well and certain Hindu ceremonies. Um and so I think it is it ceremonies. Um and so I think it is it ceremonies. Um and so I think it is it is uh always about coming together in is uh always about coming together in is uh always about coming together in Chinese uh grieving rituals. There is Chinese uh grieving rituals. There is Chinese uh grieving rituals. There is this focus on ancestor worship. And so this focus on ancestor worship. And so this focus on ancestor worship. And so when someone dies, yes, they go to a when someone dies, yes, they go to a when someone dies, yes, they go to a different domain like heaven, but there different domain like heaven, but there different domain like heaven, but there what they do is they keep the what they do is they keep the what they do is they keep the relationship going. So there's something relationship going. So there's something relationship going. So there's something called uh they call it I don't know what called uh they call it I don't know what called uh they call it I don't know what the word in Chinese, but it's called the word in Chinese, but it's called the word in Chinese, but it's called ghost money. And so what you can do uh ghost money. And so what you can do uh ghost money. And so what you can do uh if you want to honor an ancestor and be if you want to honor an ancestor and be if you want to honor an ancestor and be in connection with them is you can go to in connection with them is you can go to in connection with them is you can go to the store and it's this paper money that the store and it's this paper money that the store and it's this paper money that looks like real money, but it's not real looks like real money, but it's not real looks like real money, but it's not real money. It's a paper currency and you and money. It's a paper currency and you and money. It's a paper currency and you and you burn that and as the smoke rises it you burn that and as the smoke rises it you burn that and as the smoke rises it goes to them where they are and they can goes to them where they are and they can goes to them where they are and they can use it to buy stuff. You can buy cell use it to buy stuff. You can buy cell use it to buy stuff. You can buy cell phones that are kind of origami shaped phones that are kind of origami shaped phones that are kind of origami shaped as paper. Burn that and it goes to them. as paper. Burn that and it goes to them. as paper. Burn that and it goes to them. And that might sound strange, but what And that might sound strange, but what And that might sound strange, but what it really does, it's a way of keeping it really does, it's a way of keeping it really does, it's a way of keeping that relationship there, of not totally that relationship there, of not totally that relationship there, of not totally losing that person, of having that losing that person, of having that losing that person, of having that positive memory and still feeling like positive memory and still feeling like positive memory and still feeling like you have them in your life. Because one you have them in your life. Because one you have them in your life. Because one of the biggest difficulties of humans, of the biggest difficulties of humans, of the biggest difficulties of humans, you know, we're social creatures. When you know, we're social creatures. When you know, we're social creatures. When we experience loneliness, when we lose we experience loneliness, when we lose we experience loneliness, when we lose someone, it is painful psychologically. someone, it is painful psychologically. someone, it is painful psychologically. It's also bad for us physiologically if It's also bad for us physiologically if It's also bad for us physiologically if it goes on. Well, anything that we can it goes on. Well, anything that we can it goes on. Well, anything that we can do to feel like that relationship is do to feel like that relationship is do to feel like that relationship is still maintained as opposed to just loss still maintained as opposed to just loss still maintained as opposed to just loss helps us avoid the stress and loneliness helps us avoid the stress and loneliness helps us avoid the stress and loneliness that comes with it. And so, that's that comes with it. And so, that's that comes with it. And so, that's another kind of grieving ritual I've another kind of grieving ritual I've another kind of grieving ritual I've seen. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. also includes prebiotics and adaptogens. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for more than 13 years now. I AG1 for more than 13 years now. I AG1 for more than 13 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been drinking it every day since. For been drinking it every day since. For been drinking it every day since. For the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same the past 13 years, AG1 has been the same original flavor. They've updated the original flavor. They've updated the original flavor. They've updated the formulation, but the flavor has always formulation, but the flavor has always formulation, but the flavor has always remained the same. And now, for the remained the same. And now, for the remained the same. And now, for the first time, AG1 is available in three first time, AG1 is available in three first time, AG1 is available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and new flavors: berry, citrus, and new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. All the flavors include the tropical. All the flavors include the tropical. All the flavors include the highest quality ingredients in exactly highest quality ingredients in exactly highest quality ingredients in exactly the right doses to together provide the right doses to together provide the right doses to together provide support for your gut microbiome, support for your gut microbiome, support for your gut microbiome, support for your immune health, and support for your immune health, and support for your immune health, and support for better energy, and more. So, now you can better energy, and more. So, now you can better energy, and more. So, now you can find the flavor of AG1 that you like the find the flavor of AG1 that you like the find the flavor of AG1 that you like the most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 most. Well, I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially when I mix original flavor, especially when I mix original flavor, especially when I mix it with water and a little bit of lemon it with water and a little bit of lemon it with water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice. That's how I've been or lime juice. That's how I've been or lime juice. That's how I've been doing it for basically 13 years now. I doing it for basically 13 years now. I doing it for basically 13 years now. I really enjoy the new berry flavor in really enjoy the new berry flavor in really enjoy the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great and I don't particular. It tastes great and I don't particular. It tastes great and I don't have to add any lemon or lime juice. I have to add any lemon or lime juice. I have to add any lemon or lime juice. I just mix it up with water. If you'd like just mix it up with water. If you'd like just mix it up with water. If you'd like to try AG1 and these new flavors, you to try AG1 and these new flavors, you to try AG1 and these new flavors, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that is giving away an AG1 welcome kit that includes five free travel packs and a includes five free travel packs and a includes five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to drinkag1.com/huberman to drinkag1.com/huberman to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim the special welcome kit of five to claim the special welcome kit of five to claim the special welcome kit of five free travel packs and a free bottle of free travel packs and a free bottle of free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. 8LE makes brought to us by Eight Sleep. 8LE makes brought to us by Eight Sleep. 8LE makes smart mattress covers with cooling, smart mattress covers with cooling, smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. heating, and sleep tracking capacity. heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure a great One of the best ways to ensure a great One of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to make sure that the night's sleep is to make sure that the night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order is correct. And that's because in order is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your to fall and stay deeply asleep, your to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by body temperature actually has to drop by body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. Eight according to your unique needs. Eight according to your unique needs. Eight has just launched their latest model, has just launched their latest model, has just launched their latest model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has several new the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has several new the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has several new important features. One of these new important features. One of these new important features. One of these new features is called Autopilot. Autopilot features is called Autopilot. Autopilot features is called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI engine that learns your sleep is an AI engine that learns your sleep is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns to adjust the temperature of patterns to adjust the temperature of patterns to adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment across your sleeping environment across your sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It also elevates different sleep stages. It also elevates different sleep stages. It also elevates your head if you're snoring, and it your head if you're snoring, and it your head if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your makes other shifts to optimize your makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an integrated speaker that syncs to the integrated speaker that syncs to the integrated speaker that syncs to the EightLe app and can play audio to EightLe app and can play audio to EightLe app and can play audio to support relaxation and recovery. The support relaxation and recovery. The support relaxation and recovery. The audio catalog includes several NSDR, audio catalog includes several NSDR, audio catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest scripts that I non-sleep deep rest scripts that I non-sleep deep rest scripts that I worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If you're not familiar, NSDR involves you're not familiar, NSDR involves you're not familiar, NSDR involves listening to an audio script that walks listening to an audio script that walks listening to an audio script that walks you through a deep body relaxation you through a deep body relaxation you through a deep body relaxation combined with some very simple breathing combined with some very simple breathing combined with some very simple breathing exercises. It's an extremely powerful exercises. It's an extremely powerful exercises. It's an extremely powerful tool that anyone can benefit from the tool that anyone can benefit from the tool that anyone can benefit from the first time and every time. If you'd like first time and every time. If you'd like first time and every time. If you'd like to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. &gt;&gt; We're talking about God and religion. &gt;&gt; We're talking about God and religion. &gt;&gt; We're talking about God and religion. Um, how separable are those in terms of Um, how separable are those in terms of Um, how separable are those in terms of &gt;&gt; the uh benefits of belief? &gt;&gt; the uh benefits of belief? &gt;&gt; the uh benefits of belief? &gt;&gt; So, for instance, uh has the experiment &gt;&gt; So, for instance, uh has the experiment &gt;&gt; So, for instance, uh has the experiment ever been done to find a group of people ever been done to find a group of people ever been done to find a group of people who pray regularly to God but not in the who pray regularly to God but not in the who pray regularly to God but not in the context of any one specific religious context of any one specific religious context of any one specific religious practice? Maybe they identify as practice? Maybe they identify as practice? Maybe they identify as Christian or Jewish or whatever. Um but Christian or Jewish or whatever. Um but Christian or Jewish or whatever. Um but they pray regularly. They'll tell you, they pray regularly. They'll tell you, they pray regularly. They'll tell you, "Yeah, I pray every night or I pray "Yeah, I pray every night or I pray "Yeah, I pray every night or I pray every morning versus people who um every morning versus people who um every morning versus people who um really adopt prayer as you mentioned really adopt prayer as you mentioned really adopt prayer as you mentioned before, not as just a conversation with before, not as just a conversation with before, not as just a conversation with God and listening." I always think of God and listening." I always think of God and listening." I always think of prayer can be two things. It can be a prayer can be two things. It can be a prayer can be two things. It can be a conversation with God. It can also just conversation with God. It can also just conversation with God. It can also just be listening, which some people might be listening, which some people might be listening, which some people might say, "Well, that's just meditation." But say, "Well, that's just meditation." But say, "Well, that's just meditation." But I don't know, maybe you ping God with a I don't know, maybe you ping God with a I don't know, maybe you ping God with a question and you see what comes back. question and you see what comes back. question and you see what comes back. forms of prayer that are just deep forms of prayer that are just deep forms of prayer that are just deep listening and sitting in silence. Yeah. listening and sitting in silence. Yeah. listening and sitting in silence. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Versus uh reading the Bible &gt;&gt; Versus uh reading the Bible &gt;&gt; Versus uh reading the Bible &gt;&gt; um versus uh reading Torah or scripture &gt;&gt; um versus uh reading Torah or scripture &gt;&gt; um versus uh reading Torah or scripture of any kind. Um what what's known about of any kind. Um what what's known about of any kind. Um what what's known about that? &gt;&gt; There have been studies as I've said &gt;&gt; There have been studies as I've said &gt;&gt; There have been studies as I've said that look at prayer um in general that look at prayer um in general that look at prayer um in general for formalized prayer. I mean there is a for formalized prayer. I mean there is a for formalized prayer. I mean there is a sense that so two questions. Let me deal sense that so two questions. Let me deal sense that so two questions. Let me deal with the first one first which is there with the first one first which is there with the first one first which is there a difference between God and a difference between God and a difference between God and religion? So because the US is a religion? So because the US is a religion? So because the US is a Christian country, I think most of us Christian country, I think most of us Christian country, I think most of us when we think of religion tend to think when we think of religion tend to think when we think of religion tend to think of it in terms of Christianity where of it in terms of Christianity where of it in terms of Christianity where belief where the creed is really where belief where the creed is really where belief where the creed is really important. In most of the world, important. In most of the world, important. In most of the world, religion is more about what you do than religion is more about what you do than religion is more about what you do than what you believe, right? It's what are what you believe, right? It's what are what you believe, right? It's what are the rituals? How do they infuse your the rituals? How do they infuse your the rituals? How do they infuse your daily life? Um and that's why, you know, daily life? Um and that's why, you know, daily life? Um and that's why, you know, as I said, there are many Jews who as I said, there are many Jews who as I said, there are many Jews who are atheists. There are many Hindus I are atheists. There are many Hindus I are atheists. There are many Hindus I know who are atheists, yet they engage know who are atheists, yet they engage know who are atheists, yet they engage in the practices and they get the in the practices and they get the in the practices and they get the benefits from them. So I think those two benefits from them. So I think those two benefits from them. So I think those two are separable. There are also people are separable. There are also people are separable. There are also people who believe in God yet don't go to any who believe in God yet don't go to any who believe in God yet don't go to any services and don't practice at all. Say, services and don't practice at all. Say, services and don't practice at all. Say, "Oh yeah, I believe in God, but I don't "Oh yeah, I believe in God, but I don't "Oh yeah, I believe in God, but I don't engage in this." And when you look at engage in this." And when you look at engage in this." And when you look at the health benefits for those people, the health benefits for those people, the health benefits for those people, they're not there. You have to be they're not there. You have to be they're not there. You have to be actively engaged in the practices. So I actively engaged in the practices. So I actively engaged in the practices. So I think those two can be separated. um in think those two can be separated. um in think those two can be separated. um in terms of um terms of um terms of um prayer. So remember I was telling you about the So remember I was telling you about the So remember I was telling you about the motors synchrony stuff there is and how motors synchrony stuff there is and how motors synchrony stuff there is and how it makes you feel more compassion toward it makes you feel more compassion toward it makes you feel more compassion toward other people. There is work that shows other people. There is work that shows other people. There is work that shows that when you do motors synchrony on its that when you do motors synchrony on its that when you do motors synchrony on its own versus motor synchrony in prayer. own versus motor synchrony in prayer. own versus motor synchrony in prayer. And so these are studies where people And so these are studies where people And so these are studies where people were just listening to music and dancing were just listening to music and dancing were just listening to music and dancing together. They're moving together versus together. They're moving together versus together. They're moving together versus where they were uh chanting together um where they were uh chanting together um where they were uh chanting together um chants that are meaningful to them and chants that are meaningful to them and chants that are meaningful to them and their faith and that set forth their faith and that set forth their faith and that set forth principles of the faith. What you find principles of the faith. What you find principles of the faith. What you find is an increase a greater magnitude of is an increase a greater magnitude of is an increase a greater magnitude of the effect of the uh motor synchrony the effect of the uh motor synchrony the effect of the uh motor synchrony when those meaningful parts of prayer are included. meaningful parts of prayer are included. meaningful parts of prayer are included. Why is that? As I said before, it's a Why is that? As I said before, it's a Why is that? As I said before, it's a mindbody practice. So the moving in mindbody practice. So the moving in mindbody practice. So the moving in time, the motor synchrony is putting time, the motor synchrony is putting time, the motor synchrony is putting your body in a state where it's more your body in a state where it's more your body in a state where it's more receptive to messages about community or coming to messages about community or coming to messages about community or coming together as opposed to feeling tense together as opposed to feeling tense together as opposed to feeling tense where your body is saying no where your body is saying no where your body is saying no there's a threat here but your mind is there's a threat here but your mind is there's a threat here but your mind is saying no Dave be good and reach out to saying no Dave be good and reach out to saying no Dave be good and reach out to these people and so in that sense these people and so in that sense these people and so in that sense combining the creedle elements the combining the creedle elements the combining the creedle elements the belief elements with the practice leads belief elements with the practice leads belief elements with the practice leads to a greater effect than the practice on to a greater effect than the practice on to a greater effect than the practice on its own. You see the same thing with its own. You see the same thing with its own. You see the same thing with meditation, right? Meditation, we're all meditation, right? Meditation, we're all meditation, right? Meditation, we're all sitting at home with our apps, right, by sitting at home with our apps, right, by sitting at home with our apps, right, by ourselves. That's not the way meditation ourselves. That's not the way meditation ourselves. That's not the way meditation is supposed to be done. Traditionally, is supposed to be done. Traditionally, is supposed to be done. Traditionally, it was done in a sa in a community. And it was done in a sa in a community. And it was done in a sa in a community. And as you said before, why is that as you said before, why is that as you said before, why is that important? Because as we're breathing important? Because as we're breathing important? Because as we're breathing together, our respirations are in together, our respirations are in together, our respirations are in training upon one another. And it's training upon one another. And it's training upon one another. And it's creating that sense of synchrony to creating that sense of synchrony to creating that sense of synchrony to build community. So I think adding the build community. So I think adding the build community. So I think adding the message elements of what religions value message elements of what religions value message elements of what religions value to the mind body practice puts you in a to the mind body practice puts you in a to the mind body practice puts you in a situation where you get a synergism and situation where you get a synergism and situation where you get a synergism and this is what worries me when we try to this is what worries me when we try to this is what worries me when we try to extract certain elements. So extract certain elements. So extract certain elements. So psychedelics is one great example. Um, psychedelics is one great example. Um, psychedelics is one great example. Um, psychedelics traditionally, whether it psychedelics traditionally, whether it psychedelics traditionally, whether it was Iawaska or psilocybin, were taken in was Iawaska or psilocybin, were taken in was Iawaska or psilocybin, were taken in the context of a ceremony where you had the context of a ceremony where you had the context of a ceremony where you had a shaman who through chanting or drum a shaman who through chanting or drum a shaman who through chanting or drum beats or whatever it might be created a beats or whatever it might be created a beats or whatever it might be created a situation where the body was very situation where the body was very situation where the body was very relaxed and felt safe. And then at that relaxed and felt safe. And then at that relaxed and felt safe. And then at that point, you would take the psychedelic. point, you would take the psychedelic. point, you would take the psychedelic. And we had Michael Pollen on my show and And we had Michael Pollen on my show and And we had Michael Pollen on my show and when he said he told me he said Dave when he said he told me he said Dave when he said he told me he said Dave the one thing that's really important the one thing that's really important the one thing that's really important when you take psilocybin is you have to when you take psilocybin is you have to when you take psilocybin is you have to feel supremely safe because when that feel supremely safe because when that feel supremely safe because when that moment of self-dissolution comes or ego moment of self-dissolution comes or ego moment of self-dissolution comes or ego death comes it can be beautiful or it death comes it can be beautiful or it death comes it can be beautiful or it can be terrifying and if you don't feel can be terrifying and if you don't feel can be terrifying and if you don't feel safe it can go the wrong way. You know safe it can go the wrong way. You know safe it can go the wrong way. You know the data show about 25% of trips are bad the data show about 25% of trips are bad the data show about 25% of trips are bad about 8% are so bad that they about 8% are so bad that they about 8% are so bad that they necessitate some type of mental health necessitate some type of mental health necessitate some type of mental health intervention. And so you have the shaman intervention. And so you have the shaman intervention. And so you have the shaman with you. You have the experience of ego with you. You have the experience of ego with you. You have the experience of ego death. You see whatever you're going to death. You see whatever you're going to death. You see whatever you're going to see and that person helps you see and that person helps you see and that person helps you reintegrate that and make sense of it. reintegrate that and make sense of it. reintegrate that and make sense of it. So you know at Hopkins where they're So you know at Hopkins where they're So you know at Hopkins where they're doing great work. They don't have a doing great work. They don't have a doing great work. They don't have a religious shaman but they have a guide, religious shaman but they have a guide, religious shaman but they have a guide, right? The guide is with you. You form a right? The guide is with you. You form a right? The guide is with you. You form a relationship with this person during relationship with this person during relationship with this person during your trip. The person is there with you. your trip. The person is there with you. your trip. The person is there with you. They'll put their hand on your hand. They'll put their hand on your hand. They'll put their hand on your hand. They they're there to help make sense They they're there to help make sense They they're there to help make sense and keep you feeling safe. They're doing and keep you feeling safe. They're doing and keep you feeling safe. They're doing the same role as a shaman. But if you're the same role as a shaman. But if you're the same role as a shaman. But if you're in Brooklyn, you know, droppings in Brooklyn, you know, droppings in Brooklyn, you know, droppings psilocybin with your local Brooklyn psilocybin with your local Brooklyn psilocybin with your local Brooklyn hipsters without the container around to hipsters without the container around to hipsters without the container around to keep you safe, there's a good chance you keep you safe, there's a good chance you keep you safe, there's a good chance you may have a bad outcome. And so for me, may have a bad outcome. And so for me, may have a bad outcome. And so for me, you know, long answer to your you know, long answer to your you know, long answer to your question about prayer, I think question about prayer, I think question about prayer, I think we have these containers of the rituals we have these containers of the rituals we have these containers of the rituals and the ideals of the religions that and the ideals of the religions that and the ideals of the religions that work together synergistically. And when work together synergistically. And when work together synergistically. And when you extract those, the question is, will you extract those, the question is, will you extract those, the question is, will they work as well? they work as well? they work as well? or if not, is there actually even in or if not, is there actually even in or if not, is there actually even in some cases a danger? some cases a danger? some cases a danger? &gt;&gt; A couple of things. First of all, um, &gt;&gt; A couple of things. First of all, um, &gt;&gt; A couple of things. First of all, um, yes, psilocybin can be terrifying. I can yes, psilocybin can be terrifying. I can yes, psilocybin can be terrifying. I can attest to that. Uh, as can LSD. attest to that. Uh, as can LSD. attest to that. Uh, as can LSD. &gt;&gt; Did you have a bad trip or &gt;&gt; Did you have a bad trip or &gt;&gt; Did you have a bad trip or &gt;&gt; Well, I don't recommend this, but &gt;&gt; Well, I don't recommend this, but &gt;&gt; Well, I don't recommend this, but when I was young, uh, far too young, I when I was young, uh, far too young, I when I was young, uh, far too young, I experimented with psilocybin and LSD. experimented with psilocybin and LSD. experimented with psilocybin and LSD. Had some good experiences and then a Had some good experiences and then a Had some good experiences and then a couple of really bad experiences that couple of really bad experiences that couple of really bad experiences that led me to just basically write them off led me to just basically write them off led me to just basically write them off for a long period of time. then later um for a long period of time. then later um for a long period of time. then later um revisited that in the proper context revisited that in the proper context revisited that in the proper context with therapeutic support there. with therapeutic support there. with therapeutic support there. Completely different experience, but Completely different experience, but Completely different experience, but still &gt;&gt; psilocybin terrifying every single time, &gt;&gt; psilocybin terrifying every single time, &gt;&gt; psilocybin terrifying every single time, but the integration piece is really but the integration piece is really but the integration piece is really critical critical. Uh we could critical critical. Uh we could critical critical. Uh we could have a long conversation about have a long conversation about have a long conversation about psychedelics, but um I'll just mention psychedelics, but um I'll just mention psychedelics, but um I'll just mention now because I'll come back to this in a now because I'll come back to this in a now because I'll come back to this in a little bit. Uh a friend of mine who's um little bit. Uh a friend of mine who's um little bit. Uh a friend of mine who's um &gt;&gt; quite religious. He's Christian, quite &gt;&gt; quite religious. He's Christian, quite &gt;&gt; quite religious. He's Christian, quite religious, and very versed in the Bible, religious, and very versed in the Bible, religious, and very versed in the Bible, &gt;&gt; studies the Bible, um is very skeptical &gt;&gt; studies the Bible, um is very skeptical &gt;&gt; studies the Bible, um is very skeptical of psychedelics or even um concerned of psychedelics or even um concerned of psychedelics or even um concerned about people's use of psychedelics. about people's use of psychedelics. about people's use of psychedelics. &gt;&gt; Uh not because they're quoteunquote &gt;&gt; Uh not because they're quoteunquote &gt;&gt; Uh not because they're quoteunquote anti-Christian, but because there's this anti-Christian, but because there's this anti-Christian, but because there's this idea uh that during psychedelic journeys idea uh that during psychedelic journeys idea uh that during psychedelic journeys that evil forces actually can see into that evil forces actually can see into that evil forces actually can see into your unconscious mind. Now that might your unconscious mind. Now that might your unconscious mind. Now that might seem like a wild and crazy idea. We seem like a wild and crazy idea. We seem like a wild and crazy idea. We could also talk about psychedelics as could also talk about psychedelics as could also talk about psychedelics as like which serotonin receptors they like which serotonin receptors they like which serotonin receptors they happen to be um activating. So we could happen to be um activating. So we could happen to be um activating. So we could like we could move around the like we could move around the like we could move around the topic from different perspectives. But topic from different perspectives. But topic from different perspectives. But it is interesting in the sense that when it is interesting in the sense that when it is interesting in the sense that when people talk about psychedelic journeys people talk about psychedelic journeys people talk about psychedelic journeys you just did I am it always seems to be you just did I am it always seems to be you just did I am it always seems to be this divergent road. you can either have this divergent road. you can either have this divergent road. you can either have a very meaningful and positive a very meaningful and positive a very meaningful and positive experience or it can include elements experience or it can include elements experience or it can include elements that are terrifying that if not that are terrifying that if not that are terrifying that if not integrated properly can be uh integrated properly can be uh integrated properly can be uh potentially destructive. potentially destructive. potentially destructive. &gt;&gt; So the idea that maybe certain um &gt;&gt; So the idea that maybe certain um &gt;&gt; So the idea that maybe certain um components of religion uh would see it components of religion uh would see it components of religion uh would see it as hazardous as hazardous as hazardous &gt;&gt; assign that to evil spirits, devil, etc. &gt;&gt; assign that to evil spirits, devil, etc. &gt;&gt; assign that to evil spirits, devil, etc. is isn't outside what we've observed is isn't outside what we've observed is isn't outside what we've observed scientifically or clinically either. scientifically or clinically either. scientifically or clinically either. &gt;&gt; No, that's true. And I and I think you &gt;&gt; No, that's true. And I and I think you &gt;&gt; No, that's true. And I and I think you may know this better than me being a may know this better than me being a may know this better than me being a neuroscientist. I think some of the most neuroscientist. I think some of the most neuroscientist. I think some of the most recent work on psychedelics suggests to recent work on psychedelics suggests to recent work on psychedelics suggests to use a poor metaphor, what it's basically use a poor metaphor, what it's basically use a poor metaphor, what it's basically doing is loosening the mind, right? doing is loosening the mind, right? doing is loosening the mind, right? It it reopens up periods of It it reopens up periods of It it reopens up periods of critical learning. And so things that critical learning. And so things that critical learning. And so things that have become kind of rigid and reified in have become kind of rigid and reified in have become kind of rigid and reified in your brain, suddenly there's flexibility your brain, suddenly there's flexibility your brain, suddenly there's flexibility again. Um and so the messages that again. Um and so the messages that again. Um and so the messages that you're getting at that time can have you're getting at that time can have you're getting at that time can have much more influence and situational much more influence and situational much more influence and situational influences um than they would at any influences um than they would at any influences um than they would at any other time. And if you don't have that other time. And if you don't have that other time. And if you don't have that safe container for the religion, yeah, safe container for the religion, yeah, safe container for the religion, yeah, it can take you in really problematic it can take you in really problematic it can take you in really problematic ways. But what I find interesting about ways. But what I find interesting about ways. But what I find interesting about it, you know, is people often talk it, you know, is people often talk it, you know, is people often talk about that moment of when it's good about that moment of when it's good about that moment of when it's good of ego death as kind of being this of ego death as kind of being this of ego death as kind of being this transcendent experience where you feel transcendent experience where you feel transcendent experience where you feel this sense of connection to everything this sense of connection to everything this sense of connection to everything and great love. and great love. and great love. And if you look at mystical traditions And if you look at mystical traditions And if you look at mystical traditions where they're all designed to kind of where they're all designed to kind of where they're all designed to kind of get you to this point, there are what get you to this point, there are what get you to this point, there are what are traditionally called right-handed are traditionally called right-handed are traditionally called right-handed roots and left-handed roots. roots and left-handed roots. roots and left-handed roots. Right-handed roots are the ones that are Right-handed roots are the ones that are Right-handed roots are the ones that are kind of deeply embedded in religions kind of deeply embedded in religions kind of deeply embedded in religions that we normally don't see as much that we normally don't see as much that we normally don't see as much because therefore people who are kind of because therefore people who are kind of because therefore people who are kind of living a contemplative lifestyle. So living a contemplative lifestyle. So living a contemplative lifestyle. So Christian traditions have them. Buddhist Christian traditions have them. Buddhist Christian traditions have them. Buddhist tradition we're more familiar with, etc. tradition we're more familiar with, etc. tradition we're more familiar with, etc. And so you can by virtue of engaging in And so you can by virtue of engaging in And so you can by virtue of engaging in long practices of meditation, building long practices of meditation, building long practices of meditation, building your skill over many years, get your skill over many years, get your skill over many years, get your mind to that point where you can have mind to that point where you can have mind to that point where you can have the sense of ego death. Left-handed the sense of ego death. Left-handed the sense of ego death. Left-handed traditions, they're the quick and easy traditions, they're the quick and easy traditions, they're the quick and easy way, right? So rather than learn the way, right? So rather than learn the way, right? So rather than learn the practice, you can take the drug uh and practice, you can take the drug uh and practice, you can take the drug uh and get there as well. And so it's and get there as well. And so it's and get there as well. And so it's what's interesting to me is that they're what's interesting to me is that they're what's interesting to me is that they're both roots and religions themselves even both roots and religions themselves even both roots and religions themselves even outside of the chemicals have a way for outside of the chemicals have a way for outside of the chemicals have a way for those who want to follow it to gain this those who want to follow it to gain this those who want to follow it to gain this transcendent experience. But they're transcendent experience. But they're transcendent experience. But they're always a little more worried about the always a little more worried about the always a little more worried about the left-hand roots for the reasons you're left-hand roots for the reasons you're left-hand roots for the reasons you're saying because they don't have the saying because they don't have the saying because they don't have the practice and the guidance long term and practice and the guidance long term and practice and the guidance long term and they can go badly for people and lead they can go badly for people and lead they can go badly for people and lead you to problematics that I can see you to problematics that I can see you to problematics that I can see people interpreting as demonic people interpreting as demonic people interpreting as demonic influences. Mhm. Yeah. I think it's also influences. Mhm. Yeah. I think it's also influences. Mhm. Yeah. I think it's also worth knowing that sometimes people can worth knowing that sometimes people can worth knowing that sometimes people can have a very good experience on have a very good experience on have a very good experience on psychedelics &gt;&gt; but without adequate integration or if &gt;&gt; but without adequate integration or if &gt;&gt; but without adequate integration or if the frequency is too high. Um sometimes the frequency is too high. Um sometimes the frequency is too high. Um sometimes issues can surfaced uh weeks or months issues can surfaced uh weeks or months issues can surfaced uh weeks or months later. It's not always just that they later. It's not always just that they later. It's not always just that they have a bad experience. And I'm generally have a bad experience. And I'm generally have a bad experience. And I'm generally optimistic about psychedelics as a optimistic about psychedelics as a optimistic about psychedelics as a clinical tool. clinical tool. clinical tool. &gt;&gt; I'm hoping they will get FDA approval &gt;&gt; I'm hoping they will get FDA approval &gt;&gt; I'm hoping they will get FDA approval soon. I'm hoping there the FDA approval soon. I'm hoping there the FDA approval soon. I'm hoping there the FDA approval will require proper therapeutic support will require proper therapeutic support will require proper therapeutic support in order for them to be used clinically. in order for them to be used clinically. in order for them to be used clinically. But um But um But um nonetheless uh psychedelics are nonetheless uh psychedelics are nonetheless uh psychedelics are adjacent to religion and belief in God. adjacent to religion and belief in God. adjacent to religion and belief in God. I think because as you pointed out they I think because as you pointed out they I think because as you pointed out they tend to recede the waterline on the tend to recede the waterline on the tend to recede the waterline on the conscious mind and bring us into these conscious mind and bring us into these conscious mind and bring us into these unconscious states that I think a lot of unconscious states that I think a lot of unconscious states that I think a lot of people do achieve through prayer and people do achieve through prayer and people do achieve through prayer and through meditation. But as you pointed through meditation. But as you pointed through meditation. But as you pointed out, it takes much longer. out, it takes much longer. out, it takes much longer. &gt;&gt; The reason I brought up this notion of &gt;&gt; The reason I brought up this notion of &gt;&gt; The reason I brought up this notion of evil spirits is that many religions have evil spirits is that many religions have evil spirits is that many religions have a component of good and evil. And we a component of good and evil. And we a component of good and evil. And we tend to assume that those forces are tend to assume that those forces are tend to assume that those forces are presented as things outside of us. You presented as things outside of us. You presented as things outside of us. You know, you have a god and a devil, right? know, you have a god and a devil, right? know, you have a god and a devil, right? And they're battling one And they're battling one And they're battling one another. I have to assume I have to assume I have to assume that some of that is born out of the that some of that is born out of the that some of that is born out of the idea that we also understand that the idea that we also understand that the idea that we also understand that the human brain has circuits that uh hold human brain has circuits that uh hold human brain has circuits that uh hold the potential for good and the potential the potential for good and the potential the potential for good and the potential for evil and those exist in all of us. for evil and those exist in all of us. for evil and those exist in all of us. Mhm. &gt;&gt; In some people there's enough top- down &gt;&gt; In some people there's enough top- down &gt;&gt; In some people there's enough top- down inhibition or enough uh that comes from inhibition or enough uh that comes from inhibition or enough uh that comes from good, you know, good parenting and good good, you know, good parenting and good good, you know, good parenting and good childhood experiences and so on. Um or childhood experiences and so on. Um or childhood experiences and so on. Um or just default wiring that makes uh people just default wiring that makes uh people just default wiring that makes uh people behaving terribly very unlikely. But behaving terribly very unlikely. But behaving terribly very unlikely. But lots of experiments done in the wake of lots of experiments done in the wake of lots of experiments done in the wake of World War II in your field, your field World War II in your field, your field World War II in your field, your field of psychology were focused on um of psychology were focused on um of psychology were focused on um demonstrating really that under the demonstrating really that under the demonstrating really that under the right conditions, most anybody can right conditions, most anybody can right conditions, most anybody can engage in evil behavior or at least engage in evil behavior or at least engage in evil behavior or at least sadistic behavior. Uh we don't talk sadistic behavior. Uh we don't talk sadistic behavior. Uh we don't talk about those experiments so much lately about those experiments so much lately about those experiments so much lately because um they're not politically because um they're not politically because um they're not politically correct. But the was it the Mgrim correct. But the was it the Mgrim correct. But the was it the Mgrim experiments? These ones that which were experiments? These ones that which were experiments? These ones that which were the experiments I think were done at the experiments I think were done at the experiments I think were done at Yale where people experiment where they Yale where people experiment where they Yale where people experiment where they were the Mgrim experiments where people were the Mgrim experiments where people were the Mgrim experiments where people literally believed um that they were literally believed um that they were literally believed um that they were causing intense pain in others and they causing intense pain in others and they causing intense pain in others and they would get people to ratchet up to um the would get people to ratchet up to um the would get people to ratchet up to um the point where they were inducing um point where they were inducing um point where they were inducing um extreme pain on others. um to the point extreme pain on others. um to the point extreme pain on others. um to the point where people later were shocked, no pun where people later were shocked, no pun where people later were shocked, no pun intended, uh that they themselves had intended, uh that they themselves had intended, uh that they themselves had been had done that they had been had done that they had been had done that they had been um the person controlling the been um the person controlling the been um the person controlling the amount and intensity of that much pain amount and intensity of that much pain amount and intensity of that much pain over someone else for no other reason over someone else for no other reason over someone else for no other reason except that they were told to. except that they were told to. except that they were told to. &gt;&gt; Um now I realize those experiments are a &gt;&gt; Um now I realize those experiments are a &gt;&gt; Um now I realize those experiments are a little bit controversial. Um, but I little bit controversial. Um, but I little bit controversial. Um, but I think there have been enough think there have been enough think there have been enough demonstrations that humans hold the demonstrations that humans hold the demonstrations that humans hold the potential to do bad things to other potential to do bad things to other potential to do bad things to other humans under the right conditions that humans under the right conditions that humans under the right conditions that we can accept that the human brain at we can accept that the human brain at we can accept that the human brain at least has the wiring to go there. least has the wiring to go there. least has the wiring to go there. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; What are the data on this notion of &gt;&gt; What are the data on this notion of &gt;&gt; What are the data on this notion of good and evil? Why do religions present good and evil? Why do religions present good and evil? Why do religions present good and evil outside of us? Is there good and evil outside of us? Is there good and evil outside of us? Is there any evidence that a bias toward any evidence that a bias toward any evidence that a bias toward accepting that there is good and evil in accepting that there is good and evil in accepting that there is good and evil in us is helpful? Um because I can think us is helpful? Um because I can think us is helpful? Um because I can think of, you know, when I think about of, you know, when I think about of, you know, when I think about Buddhism, for instance, I think about Buddhism, for instance, I think about Buddhism, for instance, I think about loving kindness meditation. I think loving kindness meditation. I think loving kindness meditation. I think about um mindfulness. I think about um mindfulness. I think about um mindfulness. I think about eliminating suffering. When I think eliminating suffering. When I think eliminating suffering. When I think about the New Testament, I think about a about the New Testament, I think about a about the New Testament, I think about a loving God. I we hear Jesus as a as loving God. I we hear Jesus as a as loving God. I we hear Jesus as a as being of love and forgiveness and being of love and forgiveness and being of love and forgiveness and redemption. And then of course we and redemption. And then of course we and redemption. And then of course we have the Old Testament which is a lot have the Old Testament which is a lot have the Old Testament which is a lot less forgiving. less forgiving. less forgiving. &gt;&gt; A lot less forgiving. &gt;&gt; A lot less forgiving. &gt;&gt; A lot less forgiving. &gt;&gt; So what are your reflections on good and &gt;&gt; So what are your reflections on good and &gt;&gt; So what are your reflections on good and evil in religion and how they can serve evil in religion and how they can serve evil in religion and how they can serve us um in terms of our beliefs or I don't us um in terms of our beliefs or I don't us um in terms of our beliefs or I don't know the data um for people that want to know the data um for people that want to know the data um for people that want to reject that. Is there an advantage to reject that. Is there an advantage to reject that. Is there an advantage to rejecting that? rejecting that? rejecting that? &gt;&gt; There's a lot there. So first the &gt;&gt; There's a lot there. So first the &gt;&gt; There's a lot there. So first the question of why do I think religions question of why do I think religions question of why do I think religions think about it as outside of us? So one think about it as outside of us? So one think about it as outside of us? So one of the things I teach is moral of the things I teach is moral of the things I teach is moral psychology. Why do people do good or psychology. Why do people do good or psychology. Why do people do good or bad? And what the data has shown us over bad? And what the data has shown us over bad? And what the data has shown us over the past few decades is that people's the past few decades is that people's the past few decades is that people's moral behavior is a lot more variable moral behavior is a lot more variable moral behavior is a lot more variable than anyone would ever predict. Um, and than anyone would ever predict. Um, and than anyone would ever predict. Um, and because of that, because like most because of that, because like most because of that, because like most people like to think of ourselves as people like to think of ourselves as people like to think of ourselves as good people, when we do something wrong good people, when we do something wrong good people, when we do something wrong that's objectifiably wrong, we feel like that's objectifiably wrong, we feel like that's objectifiably wrong, we feel like something came over us, right? And so something came over us, right? And so something came over us, right? And so it's easy to say there's an evil force it's easy to say there's an evil force it's easy to say there's an evil force outside that was guiding me. What we're outside that was guiding me. What we're outside that was guiding me. What we're learning now is that a lot of moral learning now is that a lot of moral learning now is that a lot of moral processing within the brain happens kind processing within the brain happens kind processing within the brain happens kind of below your conscious awareness. And of below your conscious awareness. And of below your conscious awareness. And I'll give you an example of that in a I'll give you an example of that in a I'll give you an example of that in a minute. So it feels like it's coming minute. So it feels like it's coming minute. So it feels like it's coming over. So therefore, maybe it's some over. So therefore, maybe it's some over. So therefore, maybe it's some other force. But the point you raise is other force. But the point you raise is other force. But the point you raise is a good one, right? We did not evolve to a good one, right? We did not evolve to a good one, right? We did not evolve to be saints. We did not evolve to be saints. We did not evolve to be saints. We did not evolve to be sinners. We evolved to be adaptive, sinners. We evolved to be adaptive, sinners. We evolved to be adaptive, right? Uh to basically be able to right? Uh to basically be able to right? Uh to basically be able to reproduce and pass on our genetic reproduce and pass on our genetic reproduce and pass on our genetic material because we're a social species. material because we're a social species. material because we're a social species. We need to cooperate with each other and We need to cooperate with each other and We need to cooperate with each other and therefore most of the time when people therefore most of the time when people therefore most of the time when people can see what we're doing, we're going to can see what we're doing, we're going to can see what we're doing, we're going to try and be good because we don't want a try and be good because we don't want a try and be good because we don't want a reputation for being a bad person. No reputation for being a bad person. No reputation for being a bad person. No one's going to cooperate with us. But if one's going to cooperate with us. But if one's going to cooperate with us. But if you're in a situation where you can have you're in a situation where you can have you're in a situation where you can have your cake and eat it, too. That's your cake and eat it, too. That's your cake and eat it, too. That's adaptive. You're going to take it. And adaptive. You're going to take it. And adaptive. You're going to take it. And so as an example, we do studies on so as an example, we do studies on so as an example, we do studies on cheating in my lab and we uh have the cheating in my lab and we uh have the cheating in my lab and we uh have the situation where people come to the lab situation where people come to the lab situation where people come to the lab and we say, "Okay, look, there's two and we say, "Okay, look, there's two and we say, "Okay, look, there's two tasks that need to be done. One is short tasks that need to be done. One is short tasks that need to be done. One is short and fun, takes about 10 minutes, one is and fun, takes about 10 minutes, one is and fun, takes about 10 minutes, one is long and ownorous, takes about 45. long and ownorous, takes about 45. long and ownorous, takes about 45. You uh are in the role of decider. You uh are in the role of decider. You uh are in the role of decider. You can pick which one of these you You can pick which one of these you You can pick which one of these you want to do. Most people think the want to do. Most people think the want to do. Most people think the fairest way to do it is to flip a coin fairest way to do it is to flip a coin fairest way to do it is to flip a coin because whichever one you don't do, the because whichever one you don't do, the because whichever one you don't do, the person behind you is going to get stuck person behind you is going to get stuck person behind you is going to get stuck doing." And everybody says, "Yeah, that doing." And everybody says, "Yeah, that doing." And everybody says, "Yeah, that makes sense." And so we give them a makes sense." And so we give them a makes sense." And so we give them a little um a little device that's a little um a little device that's a little um a little device that's a computerized coin flipper. So they can computerized coin flipper. So they can computerized coin flipper. So they can hit the button and it comes up heads or hit the button and it comes up heads or hit the button and it comes up heads or tails. The reason we do that is so we tails. The reason we do that is so we tails. The reason we do that is so we can control which side comes up. Heads, can control which side comes up. Heads, can control which side comes up. Heads, you get the fun task. Tails, you get the you get the fun task. Tails, you get the you get the fun task. Tails, you get the bad task. 100% of people when you ask bad task. 100% of people when you ask bad task. 100% of people when you ask them and you say um if you lied them and you say um if you lied them and you say um if you lied about this because you're going to be in about this because you're going to be in about this because you're going to be in the room by your by yourself. If you say the room by your by yourself. If you say the room by your by yourself. If you say you got heads when you didn't, is that you got heads when you didn't, is that you got heads when you didn't, is that morally wrong? Only time in my life I morally wrong? Only time in my life I morally wrong? Only time in my life I get unanimous data. 100% of people say, get unanimous data. 100% of people say, get unanimous data. 100% of people say, "Yeah, that's morally wrong." "Yeah, that's morally wrong." "Yeah, that's morally wrong." &gt;&gt; That's encouraging that they say that. &gt;&gt; That's encouraging that they say that. &gt;&gt; That's encouraging that they say that. &gt;&gt; Well, yeah. Wait. And so then we put &gt;&gt; Well, yeah. Wait. And so then we put &gt;&gt; Well, yeah. Wait. And so then we put them in the room and we say, you know, them in the room and we say, you know, them in the room and we say, you know, they uh know they can decide how they uh know they can decide how they uh know they can decide how they want. They know most people say you they want. They know most people say you they want. They know most people say you should use the coin. They say you should use the coin. They say you should use the coin. They say you should use the coin. Guess what should use the coin. Guess what should use the coin. Guess what percentage of them? So we know they percentage of them? So we know they percentage of them? So we know they lie because they come out and they lie because they come out and they lie because they come out and they basically say, "Oh, I got the easy task basically say, "Oh, I got the easy task basically say, "Oh, I got the easy task and we let them go do that." We know the and we let them go do that." We know the and we let them go do that." We know the coin came up tails because we rigged it. coin came up tails because we rigged it. coin came up tails because we rigged it. What percent of people do you think lie What percent of people do you think lie What percent of people do you think lie to us? to us? to us? &gt;&gt; I don't know. &gt;&gt; I don't know. &gt;&gt; I don't know. &gt;&gt; Depending on the study, it's usually &gt;&gt; Depending on the study, it's usually &gt;&gt; Depending on the study, it's usually like 85%. like 85%. like 85%. &gt;&gt; 85%. &gt;&gt; 85%. &gt;&gt; 85%. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now, there are situations where we &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now, there are situations where we &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now, there are situations where we tell them you can't decide. You must do tell them you can't decide. You must do tell them you can't decide. You must do what the coin tells you. And there it what the coin tells you. And there it what the coin tells you. And there it still about a third of people cheat. still about a third of people cheat. still about a third of people cheat. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. Seriously? &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. Seriously? &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. Seriously? &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so, and we've done it with &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so, and we've done it with &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so, and we've done it with money. You can get more money on the money. You can get more money on the money. You can get more money on the coin flip higher or lower. But what's coin flip higher or lower. But what's coin flip higher or lower. But what's interesting is when you ask people later interesting is when you ask people later interesting is when you ask people later why did they cheat? They will create a why did they cheat? They will create a why did they cheat? They will create a story because no one likes to think of story because no one likes to think of story because no one likes to think of themselves as bad. So, they'll say themselves as bad. So, they'll say themselves as bad. So, they'll say things like, "Well, yeah, normally I things like, "Well, yeah, normally I things like, "Well, yeah, normally I wouldn't do that, but you know, I had an wouldn't do that, but you know, I had an wouldn't do that, but you know, I had an appointment later and I just wanted to appointment later and I just wanted to appointment later and I just wanted to make sure I wasn't late and I thought make sure I wasn't late and I thought make sure I wasn't late and I thought that longer task might be a that longer task might be a that longer task might be a problem." Or my favorite one was because problem." Or my favorite one was because problem." Or my favorite one was because the bad task was like logic problems the bad task was like logic problems the bad task was like logic problems they had to solve. One person said, they had to solve. One person said, they had to solve. One person said, "Well, you know, the guy who was sitting "Well, you know, the guy who was sitting "Well, you know, the guy who was sitting next to me in the waiting room and I next to me in the waiting room and I next to me in the waiting room and I know would get the one that I didn't know would get the one that I didn't know would get the one that I didn't choose, he was an engineer, so I thought choose, he was an engineer, so I thought choose, he was an engineer, so I thought he would like the logic problems that he would like the logic problems that he would like the logic problems that took a lot longer to do, right?" And so took a lot longer to do, right?" And so took a lot longer to do, right?" And so people are creating these stories. And people are creating these stories. And people are creating these stories. And so the point of this is that um if it so the point of this is that um if it so the point of this is that um if it was public, no one would ever cheat. was public, no one would ever cheat. was public, no one would ever cheat. Like you know when I go on TV, people Like you know when I go on TV, people Like you know when I go on TV, people will say, "Can we do one of your will say, "Can we do one of your will say, "Can we do one of your cheating experiments?" And I'm like, cheating experiments?" And I'm like, cheating experiments?" And I'm like, "No, no one's going to cheat when "No, no one's going to cheat when "No, no one's going to cheat when they're like, you know, have the TV they're like, you know, have the TV they're like, you know, have the TV cameras on them, right? But when you can cameras on them, right? But when you can cameras on them, right? But when you can get away with it, your brain changes the get away with it, your brain changes the get away with it, your brain changes the computations of what's valuable, you computations of what's valuable, you computations of what's valuable, you will cheat because it's adaptive to not will cheat because it's adaptive to not will cheat because it's adaptive to not exert extra energy. You don't have to if exert extra energy. You don't have to if exert extra energy. You don't have to if there's no reputational cost." And so there's no reputational cost." And so there's no reputational cost." And so people do. Where does religion fit in people do. Where does religion fit in people do. Where does religion fit in this? Well, there's wonderful work. This this? Well, there's wonderful work. This this? Well, there's wonderful work. This is by uh Demetrius Psychotus, who's a is by uh Demetrius Psychotus, who's a is by uh Demetrius Psychotus, who's a professor at Yukon, um where he has professor at Yukon, um where he has professor at Yukon, um where he has people in different cultures do a people in different cultures do a people in different cultures do a similar thing, and he has them play a similar thing, and he has them play a similar thing, and he has them play a game where they can cheat somebody else game where they can cheat somebody else game where they can cheat somebody else out of money. And they either do it in a out of money. And they either do it in a out of money. And they either do it in a restaurant kitchen or in a temple. restaurant kitchen or in a temple. restaurant kitchen or in a temple. The rate of cheating drops dramatically The rate of cheating drops dramatically The rate of cheating drops dramatically if you're doing it in the temple. Why? if you're doing it in the temple. Why? if you're doing it in the temple. Why? because suddenly you're reminded, oh my because suddenly you're reminded, oh my because suddenly you're reminded, oh my goodness, God cares about this and goodness, God cares about this and goodness, God cares about this and there's going to be a price for me to there's going to be a price for me to there's going to be a price for me to pay if I do this. And so that's pay if I do this. And so that's pay if I do this. And so that's top down. But it also works from the top down. But it also works from the top down. But it also works from the bottom up, right? We know that the bottom up, right? We know that the bottom up, right? We know that the brain's computations of what we value is brain's computations of what we value is brain's computations of what we value is often done below our conscious is often done below our conscious is often done below our conscious awareness and is influenced by lots of awareness and is influenced by lots of awareness and is influenced by lots of things including feeling states. So one things including feeling states. So one things including feeling states. So one thing we study in my lab is gratitude. thing we study in my lab is gratitude. thing we study in my lab is gratitude. Bring people into the lab. We have all Bring people into the lab. We have all Bring people into the lab. We have all different ways of making them feel different ways of making them feel different ways of making them feel grateful, but the easiest way is count grateful, but the easiest way is count grateful, but the easiest way is count your blessings. take five minutes and your blessings. take five minutes and your blessings. take five minutes and count your blessings. We then give them count your blessings. We then give them count your blessings. We then give them tasks where they can cheat in this way. tasks where they can cheat in this way. tasks where they can cheat in this way. Those who have counted their blessings, Those who have counted their blessings, Those who have counted their blessings, cheating is almost non-existent. cheating is almost non-existent. cheating is almost non-existent. &gt;&gt; 85% to zero. &gt;&gt; 85% to zero. &gt;&gt; 85% to zero. &gt;&gt; Well, in that study, they were told they &gt;&gt; Well, in that study, they were told they &gt;&gt; Well, in that study, they were told they had to do what the what the coin said. had to do what the what the coin said. had to do what the what the coin said. So, what the coin flipper said, so the So, what the coin flipper said, so the So, what the coin flipper said, so the average cheating rate was like 25 or average cheating rate was like 25 or average cheating rate was like 25 or 30%. It went down to 2%. 30%. It went down to 2%. 30%. It went down to 2%. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Still a market change. &gt;&gt; Still a market change. &gt;&gt; Still a market change. &gt;&gt; Still a market change. Uh and I'm sure &gt;&gt; Still a market change. Uh and I'm sure &gt;&gt; Still a market change. Uh and I'm sure in the other one it would drop, if we in the other one it would drop, if we in the other one it would drop, if we did it the other way, it would drop did it the other way, it would drop did it the other way, it would drop dramatically, too. We find that uh when dramatically, too. We find that uh when dramatically, too. We find that uh when we give people the opportunity to help we give people the opportunity to help we give people the opportunity to help someone else who is asking for help, a someone else who is asking for help, a someone else who is asking for help, a stranger they don't know, if they feel stranger they don't know, if they feel stranger they don't know, if they feel grateful, they're much more likely to do grateful, they're much more likely to do grateful, they're much more likely to do it. And we can do it in such a way that it. And we can do it in such a way that it. And we can do it in such a way that we can titrate the level of gratitude we can titrate the level of gratitude we can titrate the level of gratitude they're feeling to the amount of help they're feeling to the amount of help they're feeling to the amount of help they're giving. And so what's happening they're giving. And so what's happening they're giving. And so what's happening here is here is here is religions cultivate, they curate our religions cultivate, they curate our religions cultivate, they curate our emotional lives. What do people do when emotional lives. What do people do when emotional lives. What do people do when they pray? A lot of prayer, the most they pray? A lot of prayer, the most they pray? A lot of prayer, the most common prayer is a prayer of gratitude. common prayer is a prayer of gratitude. common prayer is a prayer of gratitude. If you are experiencing gratitude more If you are experiencing gratitude more If you are experiencing gratitude more frequently in your day, it puts you in a frequently in your day, it puts you in a frequently in your day, it puts you in a position where you are being nudged from position where you are being nudged from position where you are being nudged from the bottom up to be more willing to be the bottom up to be more willing to be the bottom up to be more willing to be honest, patient, generous, and helpful honest, patient, generous, and helpful honest, patient, generous, and helpful to other people. And so what's going on? to other people. And so what's going on? to other people. And so what's going on? The gratitude that you're feeling is The gratitude that you're feeling is The gratitude that you're feeling is putting your body in a state where you putting your body in a state where you putting your body in a state where you the brain wants to be more pro-social. the brain wants to be more pro-social. the brain wants to be more pro-social. The same time you're praying, you're The same time you're praying, you're The same time you're praying, you're getting the message, hey, you should be getting the message, hey, you should be getting the message, hey, you should be more pro-social. And so again, it's a more pro-social. And so again, it's a more pro-social. And so again, it's a synergistic effect to push us in that synergistic effect to push us in that synergistic effect to push us in that way. &gt;&gt; When it comes to discussions around &gt;&gt; When it comes to discussions around &gt;&gt; When it comes to discussions around religion and religious practices, you religion and religious practices, you religion and religious practices, you can see a lot of uh commonalities among can see a lot of uh commonalities among can see a lot of uh commonalities among religious practices. We need to kind of religious practices. We need to kind of religious practices. We need to kind of take a step back. Um whether or not it's take a step back. Um whether or not it's take a step back. Um whether or not it's around gratitude or it's around uh around gratitude or it's around uh around gratitude or it's around uh grieving uh celebrating birth of grieving uh celebrating birth of grieving uh celebrating birth of children etc. Um children etc. Um children etc. Um &gt;&gt; there's a lot of discussion nowadays how &gt;&gt; there's a lot of discussion nowadays how &gt;&gt; there's a lot of discussion nowadays how at least in the United States but I at least in the United States but I at least in the United States but I think elsewhere in the world as well, think elsewhere in the world as well, think elsewhere in the world as well, people are more isolated. people are more isolated. people are more isolated. &gt;&gt; Yeah. U people are feeling um probably &gt;&gt; Yeah. U people are feeling um probably &gt;&gt; Yeah. U people are feeling um probably more pulled into their phones really. Uh more pulled into their phones really. Uh more pulled into their phones really. Uh there was an interesting uh picture there was an interesting uh picture there was an interesting uh picture published recently or a series of published recently or a series of published recently or a series of pictures I forget exactly where but pictures I forget exactly where but pictures I forget exactly where but we'll provide a link to it where um we'll provide a link to it where um we'll provide a link to it where um someone took pictures of real pictures someone took pictures of real pictures someone took pictures of real pictures of humans in a natural environment of humans in a natural environment of humans in a natural environment cities etc. but deleted the phone the cities etc. but deleted the phone the cities etc. but deleted the phone the phones anytime they were holding their phones anytime they were holding their phones anytime they were holding their phones and everyone's just staring at phones and everyone's just staring at phones and everyone's just staring at their palms at the beach with their kids their palms at the beach with their kids their palms at the beach with their kids their kids like kids on the subway. I their kids like kids on the subway. I their kids like kids on the subway. I don't know if there was a subway one, don't know if there was a subway one, don't know if there was a subway one, but it's just every we're all staring at but it's just every we're all staring at but it's just every we're all staring at our palms all the time. It's a very our palms all the time. It's a very our palms all the time. It's a very bizarre point in human history. bizarre point in human history. bizarre point in human history. &gt;&gt; So, a question I have is when people &gt;&gt; So, a question I have is when people &gt;&gt; So, a question I have is when people pray, uh when people have a belief in pray, uh when people have a belief in pray, uh when people have a belief in God, uh presumably they feel less alone. God, uh presumably they feel less alone. God, uh presumably they feel less alone. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's it certainly makes me feel &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's it certainly makes me feel &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's it certainly makes me feel less alone to pray. In fact, um, at some less alone to pray. In fact, um, at some less alone to pray. In fact, um, at some point I found anyway that if you pray point I found anyway that if you pray point I found anyway that if you pray regularly that you never feel lonely, regularly that you never feel lonely, regularly that you never feel lonely, you never feel alone because you realize you never feel alone because you realize you never feel alone because you realize that people come, people go. Ideally, that people come, people go. Ideally, that people come, people go. Ideally, they you don't lose people close to you they you don't lose people close to you they you don't lose people close to you quickly or too soon. But everyone dies quickly or too soon. But everyone dies quickly or too soon. But everyone dies eventually. &gt;&gt; But your relationship with God, if you &gt;&gt; But your relationship with God, if you &gt;&gt; But your relationship with God, if you have one, is a permanent thing have one, is a permanent thing have one, is a permanent thing &gt;&gt; from it's just and the more you lean &gt;&gt; from it's just and the more you lean &gt;&gt; from it's just and the more you lean into that component and a faith in that, into that component and a faith in that, into that component and a faith in that, the less lonely you feel ever. It's kind the less lonely you feel ever. It's kind the less lonely you feel ever. It's kind of remarkable. And you know, in this age of remarkable. And you know, in this age of remarkable. And you know, in this age of like AI and digital twins and of like AI and digital twins and of like AI and digital twins and smartphones where everyone's got at smartphones where everyone's got at smartphones where everyone's got at least one smartphone, um I think this is least one smartphone, um I think this is least one smartphone, um I think this is not a trivial aspect to all of it. I not a trivial aspect to all of it. I not a trivial aspect to all of it. I mean the notion of not being alone is so mean the notion of not being alone is so mean the notion of not being alone is so fundamental to feeling safe as a human. fundamental to feeling safe as a human. fundamental to feeling safe as a human. &gt;&gt; So um I don't know what the research on &gt;&gt; So um I don't know what the research on &gt;&gt; So um I don't know what the research on loneliness and religion says um but loneliness and religion says um but loneliness and religion says um but often times we hear about these things often times we hear about these things often times we hear about these things in the context of community. What about in the context of community. What about in the context of community. What about just the um the mental health just the um the mental health just the um the mental health benefits of feeling like you're not benefits of feeling like you're not benefits of feeling like you're not alone because you really believe you're alone because you really believe you're alone because you really believe you're not alone? not alone? not alone? &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, so the data show that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, so the data show that &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, so the data show that people who engage with religion report people who engage with religion report people who engage with religion report much less loneliness. And it's much less loneliness. And it's much less loneliness. And it's probably both, right? It is usually probably both, right? It is usually probably both, right? It is usually they're engaged in a religious community they're engaged in a religious community they're engaged in a religious community that causes deeper social bonds. But I that causes deeper social bonds. But I that causes deeper social bonds. But I think you're right. It it does believing think you're right. It it does believing think you're right. It it does believing you have a relationship with God you have a relationship with God you have a relationship with God allows you to feel like someone is allows you to feel like someone is allows you to feel like someone is always there. And you know there there's always there. And you know there there's always there. And you know there there's an important difference, right? Being an important difference, right? Being an important difference, right? Being alone is not the same as being lonely, alone is not the same as being lonely, alone is not the same as being lonely, right? You can be surrounded by a lot of right? You can be surrounded by a lot of right? You can be surrounded by a lot of people but not feel connection to them. people but not feel connection to them. people but not feel connection to them. Um, with God, from what we can tell, Um, with God, from what we can tell, Um, with God, from what we can tell, there is this sense of having there is this sense of having there is this sense of having a relationship with someone who has your a relationship with someone who has your a relationship with someone who has your back, right? A friend that in essence back, right? A friend that in essence back, right? A friend that in essence you can count on. Um, you can count on. Um, you can count on. Um, it's interesting in a lot of evangelical it's interesting in a lot of evangelical it's interesting in a lot of evangelical traditions, there's a lot of emphasis traditions, there's a lot of emphasis traditions, there's a lot of emphasis placed on having conversations with God. placed on having conversations with God. placed on having conversations with God. So, I'm not sure how you were raised, So, I'm not sure how you were raised, So, I'm not sure how you were raised, but for me being Catholic, it was more but for me being Catholic, it was more but for me being Catholic, it was more like you would you would pray and you like you would you would pray and you like you would you would pray and you know God was there. But in a lot of know God was there. But in a lot of know God was there. But in a lot of these evangelical traditions, there are these evangelical traditions, there are these evangelical traditions, there are trainings that people go to be able trainings that people go to be able trainings that people go to be able to listen for God. And I'm not as to listen for God. And I'm not as to listen for God. And I'm not as familiar with the steps of those, but familiar with the steps of those, but familiar with the steps of those, but there really is this sense to kind of there really is this sense to kind of there really is this sense to kind of train yourself to be able to hear God or train yourself to be able to hear God or train yourself to be able to hear God or sense God by you. And it's not for me to sense God by you. And it's not for me to sense God by you. And it's not for me to say whether this is true or not. I don't say whether this is true or not. I don't say whether this is true or not. I don't know. Remember, I'm a scientist. And so know. Remember, I'm a scientist. And so know. Remember, I'm a scientist. And so when I talk about these things, I'm not when I talk about these things, I'm not when I talk about these things, I'm not trying to reduce them anyway. I'm trying to reduce them anyway. I'm trying to reduce them anyway. I'm saying, look, we're embodied creatures. saying, look, we're embodied creatures. saying, look, we're embodied creatures. We have a brain. If I see God or hear We have a brain. If I see God or hear We have a brain. If I see God or hear God, my occipital cortex is going to light my occipital cortex is going to light my occipital cortex is going to light up. Doesn't mean it's reducible to up. Doesn't mean it's reducible to up. Doesn't mean it's reducible to the neurons in there. It just means the neurons in there. It just means the neurons in there. It just means that's what it is. And so it's not for that's what it is. And so it's not for that's what it is. And so it's not for me to say whether they're actually me to say whether they're actually me to say whether they're actually hearing God or not. But this emphasis on hearing God or not. But this emphasis on hearing God or not. But this emphasis on forming a relationship with God that is forming a relationship with God that is forming a relationship with God that is kind of two ways is a big part of the kind of two ways is a big part of the kind of two ways is a big part of the faith. And those people report feeling a faith. And those people report feeling a faith. And those people report feeling a lot less loneliness. And I think it's a lot less loneliness. And I think it's a lot less loneliness. And I think it's a way of solving the problem that we're way of solving the problem that we're way of solving the problem that we're sensing right now in this in this sensing right now in this in this sensing right now in this in this society, which is growing loneliness, a society, which is growing loneliness, a society, which is growing loneliness, a growing sense that no one values you, growing sense that no one values you, growing sense that no one values you, right? No one has your back. I was right? No one has your back. I was right? No one has your back. I was talking to Robert Waldinger who um right talking to Robert Waldinger who um right talking to Robert Waldinger who um right was the head of the Harvard study on was the head of the Harvard study on was the head of the Harvard study on adult development. And I'm sure you've adult development. And I'm sure you've adult development. And I'm sure you've heard him say one of the biggest heard him say one of the biggest heard him say one of the biggest predictors for uh health is good personal for uh health is good personal for uh health is good personal relationships, but it's also having what relationships, but it's also having what relationships, but it's also having what he calls that 3:00 a.m. friend, right? he calls that 3:00 a.m. friend, right? he calls that 3:00 a.m. friend, right? It's that friend that you know you can It's that friend that you know you can It's that friend that you know you can count on that's not going to be like, count on that's not going to be like, count on that's not going to be like, "H, Andrew, yeah, I can't help you move "H, Andrew, yeah, I can't help you move "H, Andrew, yeah, I can't help you move today. Sorry, I got something better to today. Sorry, I got something better to today. Sorry, I got something better to do." Right? and with God. Even though do." Right? and with God. Even though do." Right? and with God. Even though God's not going to basically show up and God's not going to basically show up and God's not going to basically show up and help you move, if you believe and have help you move, if you believe and have help you move, if you believe and have faith in God and you feel you can faith in God and you feel you can faith in God and you feel you can connect and converse with God, God's connect and converse with God, God's connect and converse with God, God's that 3:00 a.m. friend. He's there when that 3:00 a.m. friend. He's there when that 3:00 a.m. friend. He's there when you need it. And so, I can clearly see you need it. And so, I can clearly see you need it. And so, I can clearly see that helping people. But in terms of the that helping people. But in terms of the that helping people. But in terms of the data, we don't know. We know religious data, we don't know. We know religious data, we don't know. We know religious people are less lonely. We don't know people are less lonely. We don't know people are less lonely. We don't know how much of it is the sense of God or how much of it is the sense of God or how much of it is the sense of God or how much of it comes from community is how much of it comes from community is how much of it comes from community is probably a combo. I'd like to take a probably a combo. I'd like to take a probably a combo. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became sponsors, Function. Last year, I became sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for a Function member after searching for a Function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab the most comprehensive approach to lab the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 testing. Function provides over 100 testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, on your heart health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added much more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for from harmful plastics, and tests for from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over a 100 only provides testing of over a 100 only provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. Yeah. to get early access to Function. Yeah. to get early access to Function. Yeah. And people will sometimes talk about And people will sometimes talk about And people will sometimes talk about being able to really feel him. That's being able to really feel him. That's being able to really feel him. That's usually the language that's used. Uh usually the language that's used. Uh usually the language that's used. Uh people close to me are like really goded people close to me are like really goded people close to me are like really goded up. Seems like more and more these days. up. Seems like more and more these days. up. Seems like more and more these days. And and I have some friends who are, you And and I have some friends who are, you And and I have some friends who are, you know, um know, um know, um &gt;&gt; who are clearly atheists and I have &gt;&gt; who are clearly atheists and I have &gt;&gt; who are clearly atheists and I have friends that aren't. But this notion friends that aren't. But this notion friends that aren't. But this notion that you can feel God, that you can feel God, that you can feel God, &gt;&gt; right, as a presence, not just um &gt;&gt; right, as a presence, not just um &gt;&gt; right, as a presence, not just um &gt;&gt; you know, like some being that you're in &gt;&gt; you know, like some being that you're in &gt;&gt; you know, like some being that you're in conversation with, it's an conversation with, it's an conversation with, it's an obviously an internal feeling, but then obviously an internal feeling, but then obviously an internal feeling, but then people often I've experienced this, people often I've experienced this, people often I've experienced this, we'll will experience it kind of around we'll will experience it kind of around we'll will experience it kind of around you as well. And then of course I can you as well. And then of course I can you as well. And then of course I can step back and go, okay, well that's my step back and go, okay, well that's my step back and go, okay, well that's my insular cortex and you know that like of insular cortex and you know that like of insular cortex and you know that like of course, right? But the argument that course, right? But the argument that course, right? But the argument that um anyone who believes in God or um anyone who believes in God or um anyone who believes in God or religion would make was okay, well, how religion would make was okay, well, how religion would make was okay, well, how did that all get placed there? And then did that all get placed there? And then did that all get placed there? And then we get back to the beginning of the we get back to the beginning of the we get back to the beginning of the conversation where we're peeling back conversation where we're peeling back conversation where we're peeling back the layers of the onion and saying, the layers of the onion and saying, the layers of the onion and saying, "Well, who put that there?" And um "Well, who put that there?" And um "Well, who put that there?" And um &gt;&gt; it's actually probably um appropriate to &gt;&gt; it's actually probably um appropriate to &gt;&gt; it's actually probably um appropriate to raise the words intelligent design. Um raise the words intelligent design. Um raise the words intelligent design. Um &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; that was popular a few years ago. It's &gt;&gt; that was popular a few years ago. It's &gt;&gt; that was popular a few years ago. It's kind of disappeared now in the at least kind of disappeared now in the at least kind of disappeared now in the at least in the media. Um I've studied the visual in the media. Um I've studied the visual in the media. Um I've studied the visual system and I worked on a number of other system and I worked on a number of other system and I worked on a number of other things, but in the context of the visual things, but in the context of the visual things, but in the context of the visual system, this is very uh relevant because system, this is very uh relevant because system, this is very uh relevant because um eyes are incredible in their ability um eyes are incredible in their ability um eyes are incredible in their ability to extract light information obviously to extract light information obviously to extract light information obviously and to allow us visual perceptions. Um, and to allow us visual perceptions. Um, and to allow us visual perceptions. Um, and the evolution of the eye is kind of and the evolution of the eye is kind of and the evolution of the eye is kind of the lynchpin argument for those that uh the lynchpin argument for those that uh the lynchpin argument for those that uh believe in intelligent design. They believe in intelligent design. They believe in intelligent design. They always bring up that, you know, the eye always bring up that, you know, the eye always bring up that, you know, the eye couldn't have developed this way. And I couldn't have developed this way. And I couldn't have developed this way. And I could tell you all sorts of things I could tell you all sorts of things I could tell you all sorts of things about evolution of the eyes because I've about evolution of the eyes because I've about evolution of the eyes because I've spent a lot of time with this spent a lot of time with this spent a lot of time with this literature. &gt;&gt; Uh about how some eyes developed with &gt;&gt; Uh about how some eyes developed with &gt;&gt; Uh about how some eyes developed with the photo receptors on one side of the photo receptors on one side of the photo receptors on one side of the retina and the others with the photo retina and the others with the photo retina and the others with the photo receptors facing outward and you receptors facing outward and you receptors facing outward and you know and there are a bunch of different know and there are a bunch of different know and there are a bunch of different solutions to how you take light solutions to how you take light solutions to how you take light information and create perceptions of information and create perceptions of information and create perceptions of the outside world. Mhm. the outside world. Mhm. the outside world. Mhm. &gt;&gt; But if you were to look at any one of &gt;&gt; But if you were to look at any one of &gt;&gt; But if you were to look at any one of those, whether or not it's in a you those, whether or not it's in a you those, whether or not it's in a you know, a crustation that just needs to know, a crustation that just needs to know, a crustation that just needs to see light and dark or uh or a see light and dark or uh or a see light and dark or uh or a some species that only needs to see if some species that only needs to see if some species that only needs to see if something's moving or stationary versus something's moving or stationary versus something's moving or stationary versus us. We have very high resolution vision us. We have very high resolution vision us. We have very high resolution vision or a hawk that has twice our acuity. or a hawk that has twice our acuity. or a hawk that has twice our acuity. &gt;&gt; You'd say, &gt;&gt; You'd say, &gt;&gt; You'd say, &gt;&gt; "Yeah, it's a pretty spectacular thing. &gt;&gt; "Yeah, it's a pretty spectacular thing. &gt;&gt; "Yeah, it's a pretty spectacular thing. three cell layers, couple hundred three cell layers, couple hundred three cell layers, couple hundred different cell types, and you can create different cell types, and you can create different cell types, and you can create this rich experience that we call visual rich experience that we call visual rich experience that we call visual perception. You can close your eyes, you perception. You can close your eyes, you perception. You can close your eyes, you can imagine things that you see. can imagine things that you see. can imagine things that you see. Incredible. It's a good thing for the Incredible. It's a good thing for the Incredible. It's a good thing for the intelligent design folks to hang their intelligent design folks to hang their intelligent design folks to hang their hat on. hat on. hat on. &gt;&gt; And yet anyone that studies evolution of &gt;&gt; And yet anyone that studies evolution of &gt;&gt; And yet anyone that studies evolution of eyes can tell you, all right, let's eyes can tell you, all right, let's eyes can tell you, all right, let's start here. Pack six, the gene leads start here. Pack six, the gene leads start here. Pack six, the gene leads downstream to OTX2 to you know and you downstream to OTX2 to you know and you downstream to OTX2 to you know and you can literally mark someone through the can literally mark someone through the can literally mark someone through the logic that it's all genes, transcription logic that it's all genes, transcription logic that it's all genes, transcription factors and proteins and you get an eye. factors and proteins and you get an eye. factors and proteins and you get an eye. In fact, there are people building eyes In fact, there are people building eyes In fact, there are people building eyes in dishes now from one cell. You can in dishes now from one cell. You can in dishes now from one cell. You can take that cell, proliferate that cell, take that cell, proliferate that cell, take that cell, proliferate that cell, give it the right transcription factor, give it the right transcription factor, give it the right transcription factor, you can build what pretty much looks you can build what pretty much looks you can build what pretty much looks like an eye. like an eye. like an eye. &gt;&gt; So I feel like the um the complexity &gt;&gt; So I feel like the um the complexity &gt;&gt; So I feel like the um the complexity argument, not the spirituality argument argument, not the spirituality argument argument, not the spirituality argument is sometimes used. is sometimes used. is sometimes used. &gt;&gt; Sure. to push back on the idea of God &gt;&gt; Sure. to push back on the idea of God &gt;&gt; Sure. to push back on the idea of God and religion. And I'm just wondering and religion. And I'm just wondering and religion. And I'm just wondering what your thoughts on that are. And uh what your thoughts on that are. And uh what your thoughts on that are. And uh because it's slightly different than because it's slightly different than because it's slightly different than saying who what came first. It's just saying who what came first. It's just saying who what came first. It's just saying, you know, how could you get saying, you know, how could you get saying, you know, how could you get this? And that's I think where society this? And that's I think where society this? And that's I think where society lives right now. Um people who believe lives right now. Um people who believe lives right now. Um people who believe that you could only get that complexity that you could only get that complexity that you could only get that complexity through God and people who believe you through God and people who believe you through God and people who believe you could only get that complexity through could only get that complexity through could only get that complexity through biology &gt;&gt; and they're just sort of clash even &gt;&gt; and they're just sort of clash even &gt;&gt; and they're just sort of clash even though we don't hear about intelligent though we don't hear about intelligent though we don't hear about intelligent design quite so often these days. design quite so often these days. design quite so often these days. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it is related. I mean, this is &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it is related. I mean, this is &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it is related. I mean, this is this is kind of the fine-tuning argument this is kind of the fine-tuning argument this is kind of the fine-tuning argument again as opposed to kind of physical again as opposed to kind of physical again as opposed to kind of physical constants. We're talking about the constants. We're talking about the constants. We're talking about the evolution of the of the eye or of the evolution of the of the eye or of the evolution of the of the eye or of the body. Um, let me say body. Um, let me say body. Um, let me say to me the scientific method was the to me the scientific method was the to me the scientific method was the greatest one of the greatest discoveries greatest one of the greatest discoveries greatest one of the greatest discoveries ever and I'm grateful for it being a ever and I'm grateful for it being a ever and I'm grateful for it being a scientist. I do not believe in scientist. I do not believe in scientist. I do not believe in intelligent design. Um, but we're in one intelligent design. Um, but we're in one intelligent design. Um, but we're in one of those situations again where people of those situations again where people of those situations again where people can interpret it different ways. You can interpret it different ways. You can interpret it different ways. You know, there is every reason to believe know, there is every reason to believe know, there is every reason to believe the eye could have evolved in the way it the eye could have evolved in the way it the eye could have evolved in the way it did and there were probably lots of did and there were probably lots of did and there were probably lots of different mutations that didn't benefit different mutations that didn't benefit different mutations that didn't benefit things and then by probability those all things and then by probability those all things and then by probability those all went away and the ones that did kind of went away and the ones that did kind of went away and the ones that did kind of went forward on and on. Um I think for went forward on and on. Um I think for went forward on and on. Um I think for some people what it really is this some people what it really is this some people what it really is this sense of awe, right? When you see sense of awe, right? When you see sense of awe, right? When you see something that is so something that is so something that is so spectacularly complex like the eye, spectacularly complex like the eye, spectacularly complex like the eye, you're kind of awed by it. How did it you're kind of awed by it. How did it you're kind of awed by it. How did it evolve in just this way? And so that evolve in just this way? And so that evolve in just this way? And so that emotion itself, the experience of awe emotion itself, the experience of awe emotion itself, the experience of awe itself actually makes people more open itself actually makes people more open itself actually makes people more open to supernatural experiences. So this is to supernatural experiences. So this is to supernatural experiences. So this is wonderful work done by a student of mine wonderful work done by a student of mine wonderful work done by a student of mine uh now professor um at St. Olaf uh Carlo uh now professor um at St. Olaf uh Carlo uh now professor um at St. Olaf uh Carlo Vald Solo and what he showed is that Vald Solo and what he showed is that Vald Solo and what he showed is that when you allow people to feel awe by when you allow people to feel awe by when you allow people to feel awe by showing them natural beauty like showing them natural beauty like showing them natural beauty like pictures of the Grand Canyon or pictures of the Grand Canyon or pictures of the Grand Canyon or wonderful sunsets or however you go and wonderful sunsets or however you go and wonderful sunsets or however you go and you induce it architecturally, you induce it architecturally, you induce it architecturally, people suddenly people suddenly people suddenly give more probability give more probability give more probability to the idea that there is something to the idea that there is something to the idea that there is something beyond them. Right? And so here again beyond them. Right? And so here again beyond them. Right? And so here again you're seeing the combo. You're saying, you're seeing the combo. You're saying, you're seeing the combo. You're saying, "Well, this how could this ever formed? "Well, this how could this ever formed? "Well, this how could this ever formed? I'm in awe of it. Oh, I'm feeling that I'm in awe of it. Oh, I'm feeling that I'm in awe of it. Oh, I'm feeling that emotion that makes me more open to the emotion that makes me more open to the emotion that makes me more open to the idea that there is in fact something idea that there is in fact something idea that there is in fact something beyond." And it seems to feel right. And let's And it seems to feel right. And let's And it seems to feel right. And let's face it, most people, if you're not face it, most people, if you're not face it, most people, if you're not trained scientifically, you don't really trained scientifically, you don't really trained scientifically, you don't really understand how to think probabically. understand how to think probabically. understand how to think probabically. And I'm not saying that's a problem with And I'm not saying that's a problem with And I'm not saying that's a problem with people. It's just part of our business, people. It's just part of our business, people. It's just part of our business, right? We we have to learn how to think right? We we have to learn how to think right? We we have to learn how to think that way. Um, and so it just seems like that way. Um, and so it just seems like that way. Um, and so it just seems like so completely so completely so completely impossible that this one out of a impossible that this one out of a impossible that this one out of a trillion thing could happen. But if you trillion thing could happen. But if you trillion thing could happen. But if you think about how many other steps were think about how many other steps were think about how many other steps were taken, how many other different ways the taken, how many other different ways the taken, how many other different ways the lines could have gone in the genetics, lines could have gone in the genetics, lines could have gone in the genetics, it probably did and they probably didn't it probably did and they probably didn't it probably did and they probably didn't work. And so they're left behind. It's work. And so they're left behind. It's work. And so they're left behind. It's kind of like the argument, I never wore kind of like the argument, I never wore kind of like the argument, I never wore a seat belt and I'm alive. Well, you a seat belt and I'm alive. Well, you a seat belt and I'm alive. Well, you are, but a lot of the other people who are, but a lot of the other people who are, but a lot of the other people who didn't aren't, right? And so you can't didn't aren't, right? And so you can't didn't aren't, right? And so you can't prove it that way. So for me, I think prove it that way. So for me, I think prove it that way. So for me, I think again it brings me back to this issue of again it brings me back to this issue of again it brings me back to this issue of why I just don't think it's a relevant why I just don't think it's a relevant why I just don't think it's a relevant scientific question because you can't scientific question because you can't scientific question because you can't prove it one way or the other. And so prove it one way or the other. And so prove it one way or the other. And so it's always going to come down to faith. it's always going to come down to faith. it's always going to come down to faith. And so even people who make intelligent And so even people who make intelligent And so even people who make intelligent design arguments ultimately I find them design arguments ultimately I find them design arguments ultimately I find them not persuasive because as you said we not persuasive because as you said we not persuasive because as you said we can work our way to it. And then how do can work our way to it. And then how do can work our way to it. And then how do you prove there's two routes to get you prove there's two routes to get you prove there's two routes to get there. How do you prove which one it there. How do you prove which one it there. How do you prove which one it was? &gt;&gt; It's an article of faith. &gt;&gt; It's an article of faith. &gt;&gt; It's an article of faith. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well I personally believe in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well I personally believe in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well I personally believe in evolutionary theory. evolutionary theory. evolutionary theory. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Me too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Me too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Me too. &gt;&gt; Um, and I also believe in God and I &gt;&gt; Um, and I also believe in God and I &gt;&gt; Um, and I also believe in God and I don't think they're mutually exclusive. don't think they're mutually exclusive. don't think they're mutually exclusive. &gt;&gt; This is the other problem, right? People &gt;&gt; This is the other problem, right? People &gt;&gt; This is the other problem, right? People say, "Well, I know say, "Well, I know say, "Well, I know what God is and what God did." If there what God is and what God did." If there what God is and what God did." If there is a God and the way God created the is a God and the way God created the is a God and the way God created the universe and did things, none of us have universe and did things, none of us have universe and did things, none of us have any conception of that. It's probably any conception of that. It's probably any conception of that. It's probably beyond our brains ability to understand beyond our brains ability to understand beyond our brains ability to understand what that is. And so for me, like you, I what that is. And so for me, like you, I what that is. And so for me, like you, I don't see any tension. The tension I don't see any tension. The tension I don't see any tension. The tension comes when you become very tied to comes when you become very tied to comes when you become very tied to actual texts, right? And and actual texts, right? And and actual texts, right? And and positions of people interpreting what positions of people interpreting what positions of people interpreting what they think God did or what they think they think God did or what they think they think God did or what they think God said. And that's where you run into God said. And that's where you run into God said. And that's where you run into problems. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I feel like the word that keeps &gt;&gt; Yeah. I feel like the word that keeps &gt;&gt; Yeah. I feel like the word that keeps sneaking up in my mind is overwhelm. I sneaking up in my mind is overwhelm. I sneaking up in my mind is overwhelm. I mean, we could think of awe as a mean, we could think of awe as a mean, we could think of awe as a positive experience. It usually is, but positive experience. It usually is, but positive experience. It usually is, but it in some sense you have to wonder it in some sense you have to wonder it in some sense you have to wonder whether or not uh some of the where one whether or not uh some of the where one whether or not uh some of the where one inserts belief in God versus belief in a inserts belief in God versus belief in a inserts belief in God versus belief in a in a scientific process. Again, not in a scientific process. Again, not in a scientific process. Again, not mutually exclusive, but um has to do mutually exclusive, but um has to do mutually exclusive, but um has to do with where they sort of draw the line of with where they sort of draw the line of with where they sort of draw the line of overwhelm or where the line of overwhelm or where the line of overwhelm or where the line of overwhelm arises for them. Because when I look at arises for them. Because when I look at arises for them. Because when I look at the Grand Canyon, I don't know much the Grand Canyon, I don't know much the Grand Canyon, I don't know much about geology. Uh I have some sense of about geology. Uh I have some sense of about geology. Uh I have some sense of how it got there, but it is kind of how it got there, but it is kind of how it got there, but it is kind of overwhelming, right? I can't just zero overwhelming, right? I can't just zero overwhelming, right? I can't just zero in on one, you know, kind of layer of in on one, you know, kind of layer of in on one, you know, kind of layer of &gt;&gt; sedimentation and know the story of &gt;&gt; sedimentation and know the story of &gt;&gt; sedimentation and know the story of that, which makes perfect sense why that, which makes perfect sense why that, which makes perfect sense why there are, you know, millions of layers there are, you know, millions of layers there are, you know, millions of layers on top of it and then of course you on top of it and then of course you on top of it and then of course you would get that wall within the would get that wall within the would get that wall within the Grand Canyon. Whereas I can look at an Grand Canyon. Whereas I can look at an Grand Canyon. Whereas I can look at an eye um whether or not it's in a eye um whether or not it's in a eye um whether or not it's in a cuttlefish, which have very interesting cuttlefish, which have very interesting cuttlefish, which have very interesting eyes by the way, W-shaped pupils, um or eyes by the way, W-shaped pupils, um or eyes by the way, W-shaped pupils, um or a oldw world primate eye like ours, and a oldw world primate eye like ours, and a oldw world primate eye like ours, and I can say, "Yeah, I you know, if you I can say, "Yeah, I you know, if you I can say, "Yeah, I you know, if you had a couple hours and you were having had a couple hours and you were having had a couple hours and you were having trouble falling asleep, I could tell you trouble falling asleep, I could tell you trouble falling asleep, I could tell you the story of how the photo receptors the story of how the photo receptors the story of how the photo receptors wired up with the bipolar cells, with wired up with the bipolar cells, with wired up with the bipolar cells, with the ganglen cells, and how it tells your the ganglen cells, and how it tells your the ganglen cells, and how it tells your brain everything from time of day your brain everything from time of day your brain everything from time of day to the color and contour of images to the color and contour of images to the color and contour of images in the room." Like, we understand that. in the room." Like, we understand that. in the room." Like, we understand that. &gt;&gt; So there's no overwhelm for me. &gt;&gt; So there's no overwhelm for me. &gt;&gt; So there's no overwhelm for me. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Whereas if I try and think &gt;&gt; Yeah. Whereas if I try and think &gt;&gt; Yeah. Whereas if I try and think about or brain development, I mean I about or brain development, I mean I about or brain development, I mean I teach fetal development. I mean it's teach fetal development. I mean it's teach fetal development. I mean it's amazing. Two cells, sperm and egg and amazing. Two cells, sperm and egg and amazing. Two cells, sperm and egg and you get if all things go well, you get a you get if all things go well, you get a you get if all things go well, you get a baby, you get a human and it's kind of baby, you get a human and it's kind of baby, you get a human and it's kind of like an overwhelming experience, but like an overwhelming experience, but like an overwhelming experience, but we understand a lot of how that happens. we understand a lot of how that happens. we understand a lot of how that happens. It it still is miraculous. It does seem It it still is miraculous. It does seem It it still is miraculous. It does seem like a miracle. So we assign these words like a miracle. So we assign these words like a miracle. So we assign these words like awe or miracle like awe or miracle like awe or miracle &gt;&gt; um to things that I think they sort of &gt;&gt; um to things that I think they sort of &gt;&gt; um to things that I think they sort of are at the line of overwhelm for what are at the line of overwhelm for what are at the line of overwhelm for what our brain can comprehend. And for our brain can comprehend. And for our brain can comprehend. And for different people it's different. Now, as different people it's different. Now, as different people it's different. Now, as I say that, it almost sounds like I'm I say that, it almost sounds like I'm I say that, it almost sounds like I'm drawing a like a distinction between drawing a like a distinction between drawing a like a distinction between those that can have knowledge and can those that can have knowledge and can those that can have knowledge and can handle and th um a concept and those handle and th um a concept and those handle and th um a concept and those that don't. And I'm not because if you that don't. And I'm not because if you that don't. And I'm not because if you were to for instance present me with were to for instance present me with were to for instance present me with &gt;&gt; um well a natural scene like I love &gt;&gt; um well a natural scene like I love &gt;&gt; um well a natural scene like I love Yusede. I go there I'll go there soon to Yusede. I go there I'll go there soon to Yusede. I go there I'll go there soon to watch the meteor shower. I don't know watch the meteor shower. I don't know watch the meteor shower. I don't know how that all that works. I've got how that all that works. I've got how that all that works. I've got colleagues and friends who know pieces colleagues and friends who know pieces colleagues and friends who know pieces of it and it it's much better for me of it and it it's much better for me of it and it it's much better for me to just experience that and think about to just experience that and think about to just experience that and think about how people thousands of years ago saw how people thousands of years ago saw how people thousands of years ago saw the exact same thing and it becomes a the exact same thing and it becomes a the exact same thing and it becomes a spiritual &gt;&gt; religious experience for me. It I you &gt;&gt; religious experience for me. It I you &gt;&gt; religious experience for me. It I you anticipate we'll see how the how much anticipate we'll see how the how much anticipate we'll see how the how much cloud cover there is this year but I cloud cover there is this year but I cloud cover there is this year but I will feel connected to people to God will feel connected to people to God will feel connected to people to God etc. So you see like I feel like this etc. So you see like I feel like this etc. So you see like I feel like this line of overwhelm feels big. Likewise line of overwhelm feels big. Likewise line of overwhelm feels big. Likewise with grief. with grief. with grief. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Birth of a child. &gt;&gt; Birth of a child. &gt;&gt; Birth of a child. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um there's something that like fills us &gt;&gt; Um there's something that like fills us &gt;&gt; Um there's something that like fills us with &gt;&gt; I don't know what you call the emotion. &gt;&gt; I don't know what you call the emotion. &gt;&gt; I don't know what you call the emotion. Maybe it's it but it feels like a Maybe it's it but it feels like a Maybe it's it but it feels like a welling up of like neural activity, welling up of like neural activity, welling up of like neural activity, chemical activity and we come and go chemical activity and we come and go chemical activity and we come and go &gt;&gt; this is a spiritual experience &gt;&gt; this is a spiritual experience &gt;&gt; this is a spiritual experience &gt;&gt; but that's also because I can't break it &gt;&gt; but that's also because I can't break it &gt;&gt; but that's also because I can't break it down &gt;&gt; and I don't want to. &gt;&gt; and I don't want to. &gt;&gt; and I don't want to. &gt;&gt; No. And that's and that's in some ways &gt;&gt; No. And that's and that's in some ways &gt;&gt; No. And that's and that's in some ways what awe is. You're hitting on it what awe is. You're hitting on it what awe is. You're hitting on it exactly right. It's a sense of not exactly right. It's a sense of not exactly right. It's a sense of not being able to fully comprehend feeling being able to fully comprehend feeling being able to fully comprehend feeling small in the presence of it. But I think small in the presence of it. But I think small in the presence of it. But I think the point that you're making that I want the point that you're making that I want the point that you're making that I want to make sure isn't lost is when you can to make sure isn't lost is when you can to make sure isn't lost is when you can understand it still doesn't mean it's understand it still doesn't mean it's understand it still doesn't mean it's not miraculous, right? not miraculous, right? not miraculous, right? &gt;&gt; Or that God, if you're a person of &gt;&gt; Or that God, if you're a person of &gt;&gt; Or that God, if you're a person of faith, didn't set that process in faith, didn't set that process in faith, didn't set that process in motion. And this is again is what I motion. And this is again is what I motion. And this is again is what I think is really important. It's like think is really important. It's like think is really important. It's like when we learn to explain something, we when we learn to explain something, we when we learn to explain something, we get an insight into get an insight into get an insight into the power of creation. And by creation I the power of creation. And by creation I the power of creation. And by creation I mean following evolution, not God mean following evolution, not God mean following evolution, not God created the world in six days creation. created the world in six days creation. created the world in six days creation. But as a lot of scientists who are But as a lot of scientists who are But as a lot of scientists who are people of faith will say that to me is people of faith will say that to me is people of faith will say that to me is awesome. I appreciate the awe of awesome. I appreciate the awe of awesome. I appreciate the awe of creation that it happened this way. creation that it happened this way. creation that it happened this way. It doesn't negate my belief in God It doesn't negate my belief in God It doesn't negate my belief in God because I can explain it. God put us because I can explain it. God put us because I can explain it. God put us here with a brain to learn and to here with a brain to learn and to here with a brain to learn and to understand how God's creation works. Um, understand how God's creation works. Um, understand how God's creation works. Um, and so I think your point about and so I think your point about and so I think your point about overwhelm is right, but I want to make overwhelm is right, but I want to make overwhelm is right, but I want to make sure people realize that it doesn't mean sure people realize that it doesn't mean sure people realize that it doesn't mean that when you can explain it, that when you can explain it, that when you can explain it, &gt;&gt; it's reducible. &gt;&gt; it's reducible. &gt;&gt; it's reducible. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree. I mean, I um recently &gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree. I mean, I um recently &gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree. I mean, I um recently started raising coral, started raising coral, started raising coral, &gt;&gt; and I'm like in awe of coral, &gt;&gt; and I'm like in awe of coral, &gt;&gt; and I'm like in awe of coral, &gt;&gt; and it makes me feel no less um uh in &gt;&gt; and it makes me feel no less um uh in &gt;&gt; and it makes me feel no less um uh in touch with the incredible diversity touch with the incredible diversity touch with the incredible diversity of life and no less in touch with of life and no less in touch with of life and no less in touch with and all the mechanisms, but no less in and all the mechanisms, but no less in and all the mechanisms, but no less in touch with uh notions of God or touch with uh notions of God or touch with uh notions of God or spirituality. The the two seem to blend spirituality. The the two seem to blend spirituality. The the two seem to blend for me, but they did. That wasn't always for me, but they did. That wasn't always for me, but they did. That wasn't always true. In one of Richard Fineman's books, true. In one of Richard Fineman's books, true. In one of Richard Fineman's books, he talks about the fact that someone he talks about the fact that someone he talks about the fact that someone once challenged him with the idea that once challenged him with the idea that once challenged him with the idea that well, you know, if you can understand well, you know, if you can understand well, you know, if you can understand all the elements of a of a rose or I all the elements of a of a rose or I all the elements of a of a rose or I forget what the example was that, you forget what the example was that, you forget what the example was that, you know, doesn't that um you know, at the know, doesn't that um you know, at the know, doesn't that um you know, at the quantum level, doesn't that diminish quantum level, doesn't that diminish quantum level, doesn't that diminish your experience of it? And he said, no, your experience of it? And he said, no, your experience of it? And he said, no, to the contrary, it enriches my to the contrary, it enriches my to the contrary, it enriches my experience of it. I don't know if he was experience of it. I don't know if he was experience of it. I don't know if he was a religious person or not. Something a religious person or not. Something a religious person or not. Something tells me probably not, but who knows? tells me probably not, but who knows? tells me probably not, but who knows? &gt;&gt; I don't know. And then you know and I &gt;&gt; I don't know. And then you know and I &gt;&gt; I don't know. And then you know and I like the anecdote about um Steve Jobs like the anecdote about um Steve Jobs like the anecdote about um Steve Jobs who unfortunately it's at on his who unfortunately it's at on his who unfortunately it's at on his deathbed you know uh he was a deathbed you know uh he was a deathbed you know uh he was a spiritual person into meditation and spiritual person into meditation and spiritual person into meditation and obviously strongly uh oriented obviously strongly uh oriented obviously strongly uh oriented towards technology also but his final towards technology also but his final towards technology also but his final words I think were um like uh wow words I think were um like uh wow words I think were um like uh wow and I think we are all kind of um and I think we are all kind of um and I think we are all kind of um captivated by notions of the passage captivated by notions of the passage captivated by notions of the passage from &gt;&gt; from life to death like what is &gt;&gt; from life to death like what is &gt;&gt; from life to death like what is that? What comes next? that? What comes next? that? What comes next? &gt;&gt; Um none of us still here know uh for &gt;&gt; Um none of us still here know uh for &gt;&gt; Um none of us still here know uh for sure and I do want to raise this sure and I do want to raise this sure and I do want to raise this issue of fear of death. issue of fear of death. issue of fear of death. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; As a I mean philosophers have talked &gt;&gt; As a I mean philosophers have talked &gt;&gt; As a I mean philosophers have talked about this, psychologists have talked about this, psychologists have talked about this, psychologists have talked about this. I mean the one thing that um about this. I mean the one thing that um about this. I mean the one thing that um I think lives in all of our brains I think lives in all of our brains I think lives in all of our brains um conscious or not is a fear of death. um conscious or not is a fear of death. um conscious or not is a fear of death. huge religions are geared around the huge religions are geared around the huge religions are geared around the idea that this life is not the last idea that this life is not the last idea that this life is not the last life. What is known about people's life. What is known about people's life. What is known about people's belief in afterlife in being able to belief in afterlife in being able to belief in afterlife in being able to calm them about fear of death? I've calm them about fear of death? I've calm them about fear of death? I've heard it argued and we'll talk more heard it argued and we'll talk more heard it argued and we'll talk more about addiction in a moment that all about addiction in a moment that all about addiction in a moment that all addiction is fear of death or gambling addiction is fear of death or gambling addiction is fear of death or gambling or both. or both. or both. &gt;&gt; Um that's all gambling addiction. Some &gt;&gt; Um that's all gambling addiction. Some &gt;&gt; Um that's all gambling addiction. Some people gamble in casinos, other people gamble in casinos, other people gamble in casinos, other people gamble in other ways, but that it's if gamble in other ways, but that it's if gamble in other ways, but that it's if you really start peeling back the you really start peeling back the you really start peeling back the layers, it's all fear of death. the layers, it's all fear of death. the layers, it's all fear of death. the death anxiety being the one thing that death anxiety being the one thing that death anxiety being the one thing that binds all of us. So afterlife, fear of binds all of us. So afterlife, fear of binds all of us. So afterlife, fear of death, heaven, hell. death, heaven, hell. death, heaven, hell. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You break it down for us. &gt;&gt; You break it down for us. &gt;&gt; You break it down for us. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So what we know, right, is that um &gt;&gt; Yeah. So what we know, right, is that um &gt;&gt; Yeah. So what we know, right, is that um if you look at uh anxiety around death, if you look at uh anxiety around death, if you look at uh anxiety around death, it's kind of a um an upside down U. it's kind of a um an upside down U. it's kind of a um an upside down U. Right? So people who really believe in Right? So people who really believe in Right? So people who really believe in an afterlife, they have the least an afterlife, they have the least an afterlife, they have the least anxiety about death because they feel anxiety about death because they feel anxiety about death because they feel like I'm going someplace good. like I'm going someplace good. like I'm going someplace good. People who firmly reject any form of People who firmly reject any form of People who firmly reject any form of afterlife, they're a little more anxious afterlife, they're a little more anxious afterlife, they're a little more anxious than the believers, but they're less than the believers, but they're less than the believers, but they're less anxious than one other group, right? anxious than one other group, right? anxious than one other group, right? Because they like, "Oh, I'm gonna end up Because they like, "Oh, I'm gonna end up Because they like, "Oh, I'm gonna end up in the ground. Okay, don't like it. in the ground. Okay, don't like it. in the ground. Okay, don't like it. Fine." The group that is the most Fine." The group that is the most Fine." The group that is the most anxious about death are the people who anxious about death are the people who anxious about death are the people who don't know because they're like, "Oh, don't know because they're like, "Oh, don't know because they're like, "Oh, wait, is there an afterlife? And if wait, is there an afterlife? And if wait, is there an afterlife? And if there is, did I do what I need to get there is, did I do what I need to get there is, did I do what I need to get into that afterlife?" And so those folks into that afterlife?" And so those folks into that afterlife?" And so those folks are the ones because they're struggling are the ones because they're struggling are the ones because they're struggling with the belief like certainty, right? with the belief like certainty, right? with the belief like certainty, right? We know the B the brain likes certainty We know the B the brain likes certainty We know the B the brain likes certainty one way or the other. And certainty that one way or the other. And certainty that one way or the other. And certainty that things are going to be good is better things are going to be good is better things are going to be good is better than certainty that there's just an end than certainty that there's just an end than certainty that there's just an end and there's no suffering. It's just an and there's no suffering. It's just an and there's no suffering. It's just an end. There's no hell you're going to. end. There's no hell you're going to. end. There's no hell you're going to. But the people who don't know, they're But the people who don't know, they're But the people who don't know, they're the ones who are the most anxious. And the ones who are the most anxious. And the ones who are the most anxious. And so, um, I think for I think I think the so, um, I think for I think I think the so, um, I think for I think I think the reason a lot of religions talk about reason a lot of religions talk about reason a lot of religions talk about this, well, there are multiple reasons. this, well, there are multiple reasons. this, well, there are multiple reasons. One is because it's just inherently One is because it's just inherently One is because it's just inherently strange to think that you're a conscious strange to think that you're a conscious strange to think that you're a conscious being and one day that consciousness is being and one day that consciousness is being and one day that consciousness is going to end. So, that's scary. But it going to end. So, that's scary. But it going to end. So, that's scary. But it often gets tied into often gets tied into often gets tied into a way to shape people's behavior. Right? a way to shape people's behavior. Right? a way to shape people's behavior. Right? Religions use that fear as a way to Religions use that fear as a way to Religions use that fear as a way to guide people. Right? you better guide people. Right? you better guide people. Right? you better be a good person or your karma is going be a good person or your karma is going be a good person or your karma is going to be bad and your next life is going to be bad and your next life is going to be bad and your next life is going to be in a worse position or you're going be in a worse position or you're going be in a worse position or you're going to go to hell and have pain for some to go to hell and have pain for some to go to hell and have pain for some period of time or perhaps everlasting. period of time or perhaps everlasting. period of time or perhaps everlasting. And so it takes on this moral tone and And so it takes on this moral tone and And so it takes on this moral tone and that fear is very motivating, right? We that fear is very motivating, right? We that fear is very motivating, right? We know from the psychological literature know from the psychological literature know from the psychological literature if you want to get somebody to do if you want to get somebody to do if you want to get somebody to do something, fear is a great way to something, fear is a great way to something, fear is a great way to motivate them. motivate them. motivate them. The problem with that is if you're The problem with that is if you're The problem with that is if you're constantly afraid of it all the time, constantly afraid of it all the time, constantly afraid of it all the time, your body is in a state of anxiety and your body is in a state of anxiety and your body is in a state of anxiety and that's not healthy for you. And so, um, that's not healthy for you. And so, um, that's not healthy for you. And so, um, I think a lot of faiths try to kind of I think a lot of faiths try to kind of I think a lot of faiths try to kind of reinterpret fear of death in a different way. Death fear of death in a different way. Death fear of death in a different way. Death isn't always bad. So, one thing you'll isn't always bad. So, one thing you'll isn't always bad. So, one thing you'll find in a lot of faiths is they ask you find in a lot of faiths is they ask you find in a lot of faiths is they ask you to contemplate your death. So in to contemplate your death. So in to contemplate your death. So in Buddhism, there are meditations that are Buddhism, there are meditations that are Buddhism, there are meditations that are focused on thinking about yourself focused on thinking about yourself focused on thinking about yourself dying. There's even these intense forms dying. There's even these intense forms dying. There's even these intense forms of meditation. I forget the actual word of meditation. I forget the actual word of meditation. I forget the actual word in the original language, but they're in the original language, but they're in the original language, but they're basically called corpse meditations basically called corpse meditations basically called corpse meditations where people, the monks, will meditate where people, the monks, will meditate where people, the monks, will meditate in front of a decaying corpse over days in front of a decaying corpse over days in front of a decaying corpse over days as a way to tell you that you can as a way to tell you that you can as a way to tell you that you can actually see and experience what will actually see and experience what will actually see and experience what will happen to you. In um Christianity, happen to you. In um Christianity, happen to you. In um Christianity, right, there's this sense of contemplate right, there's this sense of contemplate right, there's this sense of contemplate your death on Ash Wednesday, which is your death on Ash Wednesday, which is your death on Ash Wednesday, which is the start of the season before Easter. the start of the season before Easter. the start of the season before Easter. Uh in many traditions, the priest will Uh in many traditions, the priest will Uh in many traditions, the priest will put ashes on your head and the minister put ashes on your head and the minister put ashes on your head and the minister will put ashes on your head and say, will put ashes on your head and say, will put ashes on your head and say, "From dust you came to dust you will you "From dust you came to dust you will you "From dust you came to dust you will you will go. It's a reminder that you're will go. It's a reminder that you're will go. It's a reminder that you're going to die." In Judaism, it's going to die." In Judaism, it's going to die." In Judaism, it's interesting. Even on their New Year's, interesting. Even on their New Year's, interesting. Even on their New Year's, which is Roshashana, it's a celebratory which is Roshashana, it's a celebratory which is Roshashana, it's a celebratory day. There's this prayer they say in day. There's this prayer they say in day. There's this prayer they say in temple called the unatana tok. And part temple called the unatana tok. And part temple called the unatana tok. And part of that is who's not going to be here of that is who's not going to be here of that is who's not going to be here next year? Look around. Some will die by next year? Look around. Some will die by next year? Look around. Some will die by flood, some by famine, some by illness, flood, some by famine, some by illness, flood, some by famine, some by illness, some by fire. And again, it's a reminder some by fire. And again, it's a reminder some by fire. And again, it's a reminder that life is ephemeral. And so the trick that life is ephemeral. And so the trick that life is ephemeral. And so the trick with this is if you can think about your with this is if you can think about your with this is if you can think about your death not in a morbid way, not in a way death not in a morbid way, not in a way death not in a morbid way, not in a way that you dwell on it, it's actually that you dwell on it, it's actually that you dwell on it, it's actually quite useful. So the one thing we know quite useful. So the one thing we know quite useful. So the one thing we know in psychological science is that as in psychological science is that as in psychological science is that as people age, people age, people age, their values change, right? When you're their values change, right? When you're their values change, right? When you're young, you want the new iPhone. you want young, you want the new iPhone. you want young, you want the new iPhone. you want to go on a great vacation, you want to go on a great vacation, you want to go on a great vacation, you want to get ahead, all of these kind of bucket get ahead, all of these kind of bucket get ahead, all of these kind of bucket list things for um that you think will list things for um that you think will list things for um that you think will make you happy. As you begin to age and make you happy. As you begin to age and make you happy. As you begin to age and you can see the end on the horizon, you can see the end on the horizon, you can see the end on the horizon, people's values change, suddenly they people's values change, suddenly they people's values change, suddenly they value time with loved ones, service to value time with loved ones, service to value time with loved ones, service to others, kind of things that build a others, kind of things that build a others, kind of things that build a legacy, right? Um interestingly, if you legacy, right? Um interestingly, if you legacy, right? Um interestingly, if you look at the literature, those are the look at the literature, those are the look at the literature, those are the things that really bring happiness at things that really bring happiness at things that really bring happiness at any age. Those are the things that any age. Those are the things that any age. Those are the things that experiences of people you love, service experiences of people you love, service experiences of people you love, service to others make you happy. And so as we to others make you happy. And so as we to others make you happy. And so as we age, we come to realize that. age, we come to realize that. age, we come to realize that. Work by the psychologist Laura Work by the psychologist Laura Work by the psychologist Laura Carstensson at Stanford shows that if Carstensson at Stanford shows that if Carstensson at Stanford shows that if you have people contemplate their death you have people contemplate their death you have people contemplate their death when they're young, temporarily it when they're young, temporarily it when they're young, temporarily it reorients their values toward the things reorients their values toward the things reorients their values toward the things that truly bring up hope. Suddenly that truly bring up hope. Suddenly that truly bring up hope. Suddenly they'll start caring about that stuff. they'll start caring about that stuff. they'll start caring about that stuff. And so the idea of contemplating death And so the idea of contemplating death And so the idea of contemplating death that is a part of almost every religious that is a part of almost every religious that is a part of almost every religious tradition if you do it tradition if you do it tradition if you do it for a short period of time and not in a for a short period of time and not in a for a short period of time and not in a morbid way but daily actually points you morbid way but daily actually points you morbid way but daily actually points you toward the things in life that make you toward the things in life that make you toward the things in life that make you more happy. And so if you then become a more happy. And so if you then become a more happy. And so if you then become a person of faith you also believe that person of faith you also believe that person of faith you also believe that the end is going to be good for you as the end is going to be good for you as the end is going to be good for you as well. And so you don't have that well. And so you don't have that well. And so you don't have that anxiety. And so I think religion and anxiety. And so I think religion and anxiety. And so I think religion and death is a complicated thing. There is death is a complicated thing. There is death is a complicated thing. There is fear of death, but there's also a way to fear of death, but there's also a way to fear of death, but there's also a way to use the idea that life is ephemeral to help the idea that life is ephemeral to help the idea that life is ephemeral to help us find happiness sooner than we us find happiness sooner than we us find happiness sooner than we typically do. typically do. typically do. &gt;&gt; On a related note, I think one of the &gt;&gt; On a related note, I think one of the &gt;&gt; On a related note, I think one of the most interesting things about the human most interesting things about the human most interesting things about the human brain, aside from its ability to change brain, aside from its ability to change brain, aside from its ability to change itself, plasticity, is how itself, plasticity, is how itself, plasticity, is how much control we have over our perception much control we have over our perception much control we have over our perception of time. Mhm. of time. Mhm. of time. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And when I say perception of time, I &gt;&gt; And when I say perception of time, I &gt;&gt; And when I say perception of time, I mean our ability to contract or expand mean our ability to contract or expand mean our ability to contract or expand our window of perception. So just like our window of perception. So just like our window of perception. So just like we can contract and expand our visual we can contract and expand our visual we can contract and expand our visual window, u we can contract and expand our window, u we can contract and expand our window, u we can contract and expand our perception of time. So um in a perception of time. So um in a perception of time. So um in a conversation like this, it's a fairly conversation like this, it's a fairly conversation like this, it's a fairly compact I'm thinking about just the now. compact I'm thinking about just the now. compact I'm thinking about just the now. Um, if I were to take a walk this Um, if I were to take a walk this Um, if I were to take a walk this afternoon and I wanted to think about, afternoon and I wanted to think about, afternoon and I wanted to think about, you know, you know, you know, &gt;&gt; who walked on this beach before me and &gt;&gt; who walked on this beach before me and &gt;&gt; who walked on this beach before me and before them and who's going to come and before them and who's going to come and before them and who's going to come after, I can start to um see a bigger after, I can start to um see a bigger after, I can start to um see a bigger time bin, as we call it, time window time bin, as we call it, time window time bin, as we call it, time window &gt;&gt; and then the significance of any one &gt;&gt; and then the significance of any one &gt;&gt; and then the significance of any one thing that's happening in the current thing that's happening in the current thing that's happening in the current moment becomes much smaller. Uh I think moment becomes much smaller. Uh I think moment becomes much smaller. Uh I think about this a lot and there's a wonderful about this a lot and there's a wonderful about this a lot and there's a wonderful book um that's not available in audio book um that's not available in audio book um that's not available in audio form called the secret pulse of time form called the secret pulse of time form called the secret pulse of time that gets into how this uh that gets into how this uh that gets into how this uh expansion contraction works. But um I expansion contraction works. But um I expansion contraction works. But um I feel like thread through every religion feel like thread through every religion feel like thread through every religion and every religious practice is an and every religious practice is an and every religious practice is an attempt to reconcile the uh the need attempt to reconcile the uh the need attempt to reconcile the uh the need to feel quote unquote present to live in to feel quote unquote present to live in to feel quote unquote present to live in the now, to do good deeds now, to not do the now, to do good deeds now, to not do the now, to do good deeds now, to not do bad deeds, to um be uh grateful, all bad deeds, to um be uh grateful, all bad deeds, to um be uh grateful, all of that uh socially connected, but all of that uh socially connected, but all of that uh socially connected, but also to link us to something larger that also to link us to something larger that also to link us to something larger that is basically designed to humble us. that is basically designed to humble us. that is basically designed to humble us. that &gt;&gt; we're not as important as we think. &gt;&gt; we're not as important as we think. &gt;&gt; we're not as important as we think. &gt;&gt; Um, no one problem is as important. Um, &gt;&gt; Um, no one problem is as important. Um, &gt;&gt; Um, no one problem is as important. Um, even the biggest challenge in the world even the biggest challenge in the world even the biggest challenge in the world is um this too shall pass. Maybe not in is um this too shall pass. Maybe not in is um this too shall pass. Maybe not in your lifetime because you're thinking your lifetime because you're thinking your lifetime because you're thinking about it until your last breath. Let's about it until your last breath. Let's about it until your last breath. Let's hope not, but no one else is going to be hope not, but no one else is going to be hope not, but no one else is going to be worried about it afterwards. worried about it afterwards. worried about it afterwards. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; So, I don't quite know how to formulate &gt;&gt; So, I don't quite know how to formulate &gt;&gt; So, I don't quite know how to formulate this question. But what I'm asking is this question. But what I'm asking is this question. But what I'm asking is here um here um here um perhaps again it's the notion that perhaps again it's the notion that perhaps again it's the notion that if one thinks really about the fact that if one thinks really about the fact that if one thinks really about the fact that we're going to die, we're going to die, we're going to die, &gt;&gt; we're all going to die. &gt;&gt; we're all going to die. &gt;&gt; we're all going to die. &gt;&gt; There are people that claiming they're &gt;&gt; There are people that claiming they're &gt;&gt; There are people that claiming they're not going to die, but they too are going not going to die, but they too are going not going to die, but they too are going to die. to die. to die. &gt;&gt; There's a lot of overwhelm in that. If &gt;&gt; There's a lot of overwhelm in that. If &gt;&gt; There's a lot of overwhelm in that. If you really go into that and you re, you really go into that and you re, you really go into that and you re, you know, if you're attached to your present know, if you're attached to your present know, if you're attached to your present life and the present moment as the most life and the present moment as the most life and the present moment as the most important thing, important thing, important thing, &gt;&gt; but if you can access ideas and feelings &gt;&gt; but if you can access ideas and feelings &gt;&gt; but if you can access ideas and feelings around the fact that, you know, you're around the fact that, you know, you're around the fact that, you know, you're part of a continuum, part of a continuum, part of a continuum, &gt;&gt; um, you're connected to people in the &gt;&gt; um, you're connected to people in the &gt;&gt; um, you're connected to people in the past that had the same fears, that alone past that had the same fears, that alone past that had the same fears, that alone makes you feel a little less uh, it makes you feel a little less uh, it makes you feel a little less uh, it seems a little less futile. So the seems a little less futile. So the seems a little less futile. So the question I have is what do you see question I have is what do you see question I have is what do you see across religions that allows people to across religions that allows people to across religions that allows people to bring themselves some peace around the bring themselves some peace around the bring themselves some peace around the reality that they're going to die the reality that they're going to die the reality that they're going to die that is um really about connectedness that is um really about connectedness that is um really about connectedness not just with other people but in time. not just with other people but in time. not just with other people but in time. Um the Buddhists um seem to have Um the Buddhists um seem to have Um the Buddhists um seem to have mastered this through a daily practice mastered this through a daily practice mastered this through a daily practice of meditation. of meditation. of meditation. &gt;&gt; In other religions it seems it comes &gt;&gt; In other religions it seems it comes &gt;&gt; In other religions it seems it comes about through what we call holidays. about through what we call holidays. about through what we call holidays. um you know each year on the same days um you know each year on the same days um you know each year on the same days roughly we go through the same practices roughly we go through the same practices roughly we go through the same practices that kind of links up yeartoear it that kind of links up yeartoear it that kind of links up yeartoear it breaks up the momentto- momentness breaks up the momentto- momentness breaks up the momentto- momentness of things you see where I'm getting with of things you see where I'm getting with of things you see where I'm getting with this I'm sorry this isn't a better this I'm sorry this isn't a better this I'm sorry this isn't a better formulated question but I think about formulated question but I think about formulated question but I think about this all the time I still don't know how this all the time I still don't know how this all the time I still don't know how to talk about it because there really to talk about it because there really to talk about it because there really isn't a language for this time isn't a language for this time isn't a language for this time elasticity &gt;&gt; um anyway I'd love your thoughts on &gt;&gt; um anyway I'd love your thoughts on &gt;&gt; um anyway I'd love your thoughts on this if you would this if you would this if you would &gt;&gt; I have a friend who's a rabbi and not &gt;&gt; I have a friend who's a rabbi and not &gt;&gt; I have a friend who's a rabbi and not being Jewish being Jewish being Jewish One day I said to her, "So, you know, One day I said to her, "So, you know, One day I said to her, "So, you know, why do you still pray in Hebrew? You why do you still pray in Hebrew? You why do you still pray in Hebrew? You know, in Catholicism, we don't pray know, in Catholicism, we don't pray know, in Catholicism, we don't pray in Latin anymore like we pray in Latin anymore like we pray in Latin anymore like we pray in English." &gt;&gt; Yeah, good point. &gt;&gt; Yeah, good point. &gt;&gt; Yeah, good point. &gt;&gt; Right. And what she said was, I mean, &gt;&gt; Right. And what she said was, I mean, &gt;&gt; Right. And what she said was, I mean, part of it is to keep the part of it is to keep the part of it is to keep the culture, but part of it is too, she culture, but part of it is too, she culture, but part of it is too, she says, it is sometimes an amazing says, it is sometimes an amazing says, it is sometimes an amazing experience when I stop to think that the experience when I stop to think that the experience when I stop to think that the words I am saying now have been said by words I am saying now have been said by words I am saying now have been said by Jews for thousands of years going back. Jews for thousands of years going back. Jews for thousands of years going back. And those same words will be said And those same words will be said And those same words will be said hopefully thousands of years going hopefully thousands of years going hopefully thousands of years going forward. And what it does is it situates forward. And what it does is it situates forward. And what it does is it situates me in this sequence of time and I know me in this sequence of time and I know me in this sequence of time and I know that the challenges that I'm facing have that the challenges that I'm facing have that the challenges that I'm facing have been faced by people before and will be been faced by people before and will be been faced by people before and will be faced by people afterward. And in that faced by people afterward. And in that faced by people afterward. And in that experience I feel part of something experience I feel part of something experience I feel part of something greater. And I think you know one thing greater. And I think you know one thing greater. And I think you know one thing we're seeing now you keep hearing on um we're seeing now you keep hearing on um we're seeing now you keep hearing on um on the news uh how um people are leaving on the news uh how um people are leaving on the news uh how um people are leaving traditional faiths and they are but traditional faiths and they are but traditional faiths and they are but there's a subset of people who are there's a subset of people who are there's a subset of people who are actually going back to more orthodox actually going back to more orthodox actually going back to more orthodox faiths traditional Catholicism orthodox faiths traditional Catholicism orthodox faiths traditional Catholicism orthodox Judaism and what they'll often say is there's an and what they'll often say is there's an and what they'll often say is there's an appreciation in these forms where it's appreciation in these forms where it's appreciation in these forms where it's still the Latin mass or other types of still the Latin mass or other types of still the Latin mass or other types of things for things that have felt true things for things that have felt true things for things that have felt true and universal. through time. and universal. through time. and universal. through time. And when I worship that way, I feel that And when I worship that way, I feel that And when I worship that way, I feel that connection to humanity and this sense connection to humanity and this sense connection to humanity and this sense that we're all in this together. And that we're all in this together. And that we're all in this together. And they find and feel a sense of deeper they find and feel a sense of deeper they find and feel a sense of deeper purpose like things just aren't relative purpose like things just aren't relative purpose like things just aren't relative and, you know, changing here and there and, you know, changing here and there and, you know, changing here and there depending upon people's norms and mores depending upon people's norms and mores depending upon people's norms and mores at the moment. And so, you know, there's at the moment. And so, you know, there's at the moment. And so, you know, there's no work that I can think of that points no work that I can think of that points no work that I can think of that points to this, but I think the phenomenon to this, but I think the phenomenon to this, but I think the phenomenon you're describing is one that is very um you're describing is one that is very um you're describing is one that is very um felt by a lot of people, especially if felt by a lot of people, especially if felt by a lot of people, especially if they engage in practices that have a they engage in practices that have a they engage in practices that have a longer tradition going back because I longer tradition going back because I longer tradition going back because I think the human brain's ability to think the human brain's ability to think the human brain's ability to distract itself into task or moments or distract itself into task or moments or distract itself into task or moments or recreation or drug itself um so that you recreation or drug itself um so that you recreation or drug itself um so that you don't pay attention to the passage of don't pay attention to the passage of don't pay attention to the passage of time. This is why I do think that a lot time. This is why I do think that a lot time. This is why I do think that a lot of addictive behavior, but also just a of addictive behavior, but also just a of addictive behavior, but also just a lot of um lot of um lot of um &gt;&gt; what we call kind of unconscious &gt;&gt; what we call kind of unconscious &gt;&gt; what we call kind of unconscious stuff like scrolling or, you know, or stuff like scrolling or, you know, or stuff like scrolling or, you know, or eating food that's not good for us even eating food that's not good for us even eating food that's not good for us even when we're not hungry. Like these things when we're not hungry. Like these things when we're not hungry. Like these things are just, you know, I have a friend are just, you know, I have a friend are just, you know, I have a friend and she said, you know, yeah, I'll get and she said, you know, yeah, I'll get and she said, you know, yeah, I'll get lost in audio books sometimes. I lost in audio books sometimes. I lost in audio books sometimes. I thought audio books are great. Reading thought audio books are great. Reading thought audio books are great. Reading is great. She's like, not the way she's is great. She's like, not the way she's is great. She's like, not the way she's using them, right? To just get lost as a using them, right? To just get lost as a using them, right? To just get lost as a way to distract. We don't know how to way to distract. We don't know how to way to distract. We don't know how to sometimes deal with um sometimes deal with um sometimes deal with um quiet. Why not? Is it because we feel quiet. Why not? Is it because we feel quiet. Why not? Is it because we feel alone? Well, if not, then I think it's alone? Well, if not, then I think it's alone? Well, if not, then I think it's like this I think it is really a fear of like this I think it is really a fear of like this I think it is really a fear of death. &gt;&gt; Um along the lines of addiction, I find &gt;&gt; Um along the lines of addiction, I find &gt;&gt; Um along the lines of addiction, I find it interesting that um in all the it interesting that um in all the it interesting that um in all the different uh sectors of 12step different uh sectors of 12step different uh sectors of 12step programs, which I think the data now programs, which I think the data now programs, which I think the data now show can be very effective uh not for show can be very effective uh not for show can be very effective uh not for everyone, but they can be very effective everyone, but they can be very effective everyone, but they can be very effective for a lot of people. for a lot of people. for a lot of people. One of the requisite One of the requisite One of the requisite steps is giving over to a higher power. steps is giving over to a higher power. steps is giving over to a higher power. &gt;&gt; In that step, it sort of uh spells out &gt;&gt; In that step, it sort of uh spells out &gt;&gt; In that step, it sort of uh spells out that the human brain, one's own brain is that the human brain, one's own brain is that the human brain, one's own brain is not capable of handling it all. Right? not capable of handling it all. Right? not capable of handling it all. Right? It also it says, listen, you're not It also it says, listen, you're not It also it says, listen, you're not supposed to be able to do this alone. supposed to be able to do this alone. supposed to be able to do this alone. You're not even supposed to be able to You're not even supposed to be able to You're not even supposed to be able to do this do this do this &gt;&gt; with a community. You need something &gt;&gt; with a community. You need something &gt;&gt; with a community. You need something else first. The community is important, else first. The community is important, else first. The community is important, but a will to change is important, but a will to change is important, but a will to change is important, but you need help. And the one piece that you need help. And the one piece that you need help. And the one piece that you can't get away with is trying to do you can't get away with is trying to do you can't get away with is trying to do it without some notion of higher power. it without some notion of higher power. it without some notion of higher power. 12 steps very careful not to dictate if 12 steps very careful not to dictate if 12 steps very careful not to dictate if that should be Christianity, Judaism, that should be Christianity, Judaism, that should be Christianity, Judaism, Muslim. It's sort of all-encompassing in Muslim. It's sort of all-encompassing in Muslim. It's sort of all-encompassing in that way. But it can't just be you and that way. But it can't just be you and that way. But it can't just be you and your brain and your and your will, your brain and your and your will, your brain and your and your will, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And it not and it's not you, your brain, &gt;&gt; And it not and it's not you, your brain, &gt;&gt; And it not and it's not you, your brain, your will, and your community of other your will, and your community of other your will, and your community of other people who are rallying against this people who are rallying against this people who are rallying against this thing you're trying to overcome. this thing you're trying to overcome. this thing you're trying to overcome. You have to give yourself give over some You have to give yourself give over some You have to give yourself give over some degree of power. degree of power. degree of power. &gt;&gt; Um this is the serenity prayer, right? &gt;&gt; Um this is the serenity prayer, right? &gt;&gt; Um this is the serenity prayer, right? like you're acknowledging what you can't like you're acknowledging what you can't like you're acknowledging what you can't control. And I find that to be control. And I find that to be control. And I find that to be remarkable, right? Um some people have remarkable, right? Um some people have remarkable, right? Um some people have accused 12step of being a religion or a accused 12step of being a religion or a accused 12step of being a religion or a cult. We'll talk about cults in a cult. We'll talk about cults in a cult. We'll talk about cults in a moment, but I think therein is like this moment, but I think therein is like this moment, but I think therein is like this acceptance that we're the human acceptance that we're the human acceptance that we're the human brain is amazing. brain is amazing. brain is amazing. &gt;&gt; But it can't do all the things that it &gt;&gt; But it can't do all the things that it &gt;&gt; But it can't do all the things that it needs to do on its own. That for me is needs to do on its own. That for me is needs to do on its own. That for me is one of the most convincing reasons to one of the most convincing reasons to one of the most convincing reasons to have a belief in God have a belief in God have a belief in God &gt;&gt; because &gt;&gt; because &gt;&gt; because &gt;&gt; I know a thing or two about the brain. &gt;&gt; I know a thing or two about the brain. &gt;&gt; I know a thing or two about the brain. and I certainly don't know everything and I certainly don't know everything and I certainly don't know everything and it's really good at a lot of things and it's really good at a lot of things and it's really good at a lot of things and it's really dreadful at a lot of and it's really dreadful at a lot of and it's really dreadful at a lot of other things and it's completely other things and it's completely other things and it's completely incapable of other things and there are incapable of other things and there are incapable of other things and there are lots of quote unquote energies in the lots of quote unquote energies in the lots of quote unquote energies in the universe. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I mean there's energies coming out of &gt;&gt; I mean there's energies coming out of &gt;&gt; I mean there's energies coming out of the sun that we can't see or perceive the sun that we can't see or perceive the sun that we can't see or perceive that act on us. So this notion that act on us. So this notion that act on us. So this notion that there would be energies in our universe. there would be energies in our universe. there would be energies in our universe. I know this sounds kind of mystical woo I know this sounds kind of mystical woo I know this sounds kind of mystical woo and new age but literally radioactive and new age but literally radioactive and new age but literally radioactive energies and energies that we can't see energies and energies that we can't see energies and energies that we can't see but have an impact on us. That's not but have an impact on us. That's not but have an impact on us. That's not just something to debate. That's that's just something to debate. That's that's just something to debate. That's that's real. Scientists will agree that's real. Scientists will agree that's real. Scientists will agree that's real. So I guess for me the leap to God So I guess for me the leap to God So I guess for me the leap to God in religion doesn't seem as far in religion doesn't seem as far in religion doesn't seem as far &gt;&gt; anymore. It just seems like it's like &gt;&gt; anymore. It just seems like it's like &gt;&gt; anymore. It just seems like it's like right there. right there. right there. &gt;&gt; I mean things that we you know 30 years &gt;&gt; I mean things that we you know 30 years &gt;&gt; I mean things that we you know 30 years ago if someone told you the way quantum ago if someone told you the way quantum ago if someone told you the way quantum mechanics work, you would have thought mechanics work, you would have thought mechanics work, you would have thought they were insane. And so um I think we they were insane. And so um I think we they were insane. And so um I think we have to have some intellectual humility have to have some intellectual humility have to have some intellectual humility that there are forces in this world as that there are forces in this world as that there are forces in this world as you're saying that we don't have access you're saying that we don't have access you're saying that we don't have access to yet in terms of our conscious to yet in terms of our conscious to yet in terms of our conscious awareness but nonetheless they can act awareness but nonetheless they can act awareness but nonetheless they can act on us. Your point though I think about on us. Your point though I think about on us. Your point though I think about um the 12step programs is an interesting um the 12step programs is an interesting um the 12step programs is an interesting one because they do work for a lot one because they do work for a lot one because they do work for a lot of people and what the data show about of people and what the data show about of people and what the data show about kind of giving over some control kind of giving over some control kind of giving over some control believing in a higher power is it believing in a higher power is it believing in a higher power is it actually is uh useful for avoiding actually is uh useful for avoiding actually is uh useful for avoiding addiction. So people who are engaged addiction. So people who are engaged addiction. So people who are engaged with religious practice have some with religious practice have some with religious practice have some protection against uh addiction. The protection against uh addiction. The protection against uh addiction. The rates are lower. Um, but when you rates are lower. Um, but when you rates are lower. Um, but when you surrender to a higher power, a lot of surrender to a higher power, a lot of surrender to a higher power, a lot of people resist this and they think the people resist this and they think the people resist this and they think the idea is problematic because they idea is problematic because they idea is problematic because they interpret it as meaning you're like an interpret it as meaning you're like an interpret it as meaning you're like an automaton. You're just going to give automaton. You're just going to give automaton. You're just going to give over everything to God and not be a over everything to God and not be a over everything to God and not be a thoughtful person. That's not what it thoughtful person. That's not what it thoughtful person. That's not what it means for the people who actually do means for the people who actually do means for the people who actually do this, right? For the people who this, right? For the people who this, right? For the people who surrender to God, what it means is I'm surrender to God, what it means is I'm surrender to God, what it means is I'm going to try and do the best I can, make going to try and do the best I can, make going to try and do the best I can, make the best decision I can, live the best the best decision I can, live the best the best decision I can, live the best way I can, but I realize that I can't way I can, but I realize that I can't way I can, but I realize that I can't control everything, including my own control everything, including my own control everything, including my own behavior all the time. So, I'm going to behavior all the time. So, I'm going to behavior all the time. So, I'm going to do the best I can and then I'm just do the best I can and then I'm just do the best I can and then I'm just going to give it over and hope that God going to give it over and hope that God going to give it over and hope that God trust that God will help me. And that trust that God will help me. And that trust that God will help me. And that does two things. One is again, it does two things. One is again, it does two things. One is again, it provides the sense that you have a provides the sense that you have a provides the sense that you have a friend, there's someone else who cares friend, there's someone else who cares friend, there's someone else who cares about you. you're kind of like a junior about you. you're kind of like a junior about you. you're kind of like a junior partner with this person working toward partner with this person working toward partner with this person working toward the goal. And that I'm not exactly sure. the goal. And that I'm not exactly sure. the goal. And that I'm not exactly sure. I don't know if any of us know exactly I don't know if any of us know exactly I don't know if any of us know exactly why it works, but that reduces stress why it works, but that reduces stress why it works, but that reduces stress and anxiety a lot because, you know, we and anxiety a lot because, you know, we and anxiety a lot because, you know, we like to think in this world that we're like to think in this world that we're like to think in this world that we're optimizers, right? I'm always like, I optimizers, right? I'm always like, I optimizers, right? I'm always like, I want to buy this car. Well, let me want to buy this car. Well, let me want to buy this car. Well, let me research everything about this car so I research everything about this car so I research everything about this car so I can make sure I get the exact right car. can make sure I get the exact right car. can make sure I get the exact right car. Or if I'm trying to make a decision Or if I'm trying to make a decision Or if I'm trying to make a decision about my health, I'm going to research about my health, I'm going to research about my health, I'm going to research everything I can. But you know at a everything I can. But you know at a everything I can. But you know at a certain point the tyranny of choice too certain point the tyranny of choice too certain point the tyranny of choice too many too much information can drive us many too much information can drive us many too much information can drive us nuts. And so if you do the best you can nuts. And so if you do the best you can nuts. And so if you do the best you can but then trust in something else it but then trust in something else it but then trust in something else it reduces that stress and I think reduces that stress and I think reduces that stress and I think ultimately then makes it easier for you ultimately then makes it easier for you ultimately then makes it easier for you to achieve that goal down the line to achieve that goal down the line to achieve that goal down the line because you also feel like someone else because you also feel like someone else because you also feel like someone else is counting on you. I mean is counting on you. I mean is counting on you. I mean I don't go to the gym. I should go to I don't go to the gym. I should go to I don't go to the gym. I should go to the gym. You know, the one time in my the gym. You know, the one time in my the gym. You know, the one time in my life when I went to the gym, when I had life when I went to the gym, when I had life when I went to the gym, when I had a workout partner who I know if I didn't a workout partner who I know if I didn't a workout partner who I know if I didn't go, I was going to be like, "Dave, you go, I was going to be like, "Dave, you go, I was going to be like, "Dave, you have to come. I'm counting on you." And have to come. I'm counting on you." And have to come. I'm counting on you." And so, you know, there's that added so, you know, there's that added so, you know, there's that added element, too. And so, I think the idea element, too. And so, I think the idea element, too. And so, I think the idea of surrender doesn't mean you're not of surrender doesn't mean you're not of surrender doesn't mean you're not thinking intelligently. It doesn't mean thinking intelligently. It doesn't mean thinking intelligently. It doesn't mean you're giving over control of your life. you're giving over control of your life. you're giving over control of your life. It means you're accepting a partnership It means you're accepting a partnership It means you're accepting a partnership with someone else who's going to try and with someone else who's going to try and with someone else who's going to try and help you. And again, not for me to say help you. And again, not for me to say help you. And again, not for me to say if that's true or not, but I think if that's true or not, but I think if that's true or not, but I think that's how it works for people. We've that's how it works for people. We've that's how it works for people. We've been talking about God and to some been talking about God and to some been talking about God and to some extent religion. How many new religions extent religion. How many new religions extent religion. How many new religions are there? I mean, why don't we see new are there? I mean, why don't we see new are there? I mean, why don't we see new religions? I mean, obviously there are religions? I mean, obviously there are religions? I mean, obviously there are subdivisions. I know, you know, subdivisions. I know, you know, subdivisions. I know, you know, Mormons um LDS as they're uh called um Mormons um LDS as they're uh called um Mormons um LDS as they're uh called um often. Um you have Orthodox, often. Um you have Orthodox, often. Um you have Orthodox, conservative, and reformed Judaism. You conservative, and reformed Judaism. You conservative, and reformed Judaism. You have Catholics and Protestants. And have Catholics and Protestants. And have Catholics and Protestants. And you've got 7day Adventists. And forgive you've got 7day Adventists. And forgive you've got 7day Adventists. And forgive me for not, you know, subdividing um me for not, you know, subdividing um me for not, you know, subdividing um other religions, but you get the idea. other religions, but you get the idea. other religions, but you get the idea. But how often is there a new subdivision But how often is there a new subdivision But how often is there a new subdivision &gt;&gt; and how often is there an entirely new &gt;&gt; and how often is there an entirely new &gt;&gt; and how often is there an entirely new religion and since I haven't heard of religion and since I haven't heard of religion and since I haven't heard of these new religions um how come they these new religions um how come they these new religions um how come they don't stick? It's a good question. In don't stick? It's a good question. In don't stick? It's a good question. In fact, for one episode of my show, we fact, for one episode of my show, we fact, for one episode of my show, we were interested in this because I didn't were interested in this because I didn't were interested in this because I didn't know the statistics and so we invited on know the statistics and so we invited on know the statistics and so we invited on a scholar who studies this and she kind a scholar who studies this and she kind a scholar who studies this and she kind of shocked me because she said that of shocked me because she said that of shocked me because she said that every year there's between 100 and 200 every year there's between 100 and 200 every year there's between 100 and 200 new religions that form. Now, the new religions that form. Now, the new religions that form. Now, the definition there is a little loose, definition there is a little loose, definition there is a little loose, right? Some of those religions we would right? Some of those religions we would right? Some of those religions we would call cults. Some of those religions are, call cults. Some of those religions are, call cults. Some of those religions are, you know, there's a person in Canada who you know, there's a person in Canada who you know, there's a person in Canada who put a Kleenox Kleenex box on her head put a Kleenox Kleenex box on her head put a Kleenox Kleenex box on her head and says she's, you know, getting and says she's, you know, getting and says she's, you know, getting messages from some alien race. And messages from some alien race. And messages from some alien race. And &gt;&gt; did that happen? &gt;&gt; did that happen? &gt;&gt; did that happen? &gt;&gt; Something like that happened. I mean, I &gt;&gt; Something like that happened. I mean, I &gt;&gt; Something like that happened. I mean, I have the details exactly right, but yes, have the details exactly right, but yes, have the details exactly right, but yes, but most of them, the reason you don't but most of them, the reason you don't but most of them, the reason you don't hear about them is because they're hear about them is because they're hear about them is because they're flashes in the pan, right? For religion flashes in the pan, right? For religion flashes in the pan, right? For religion to stick, there's two ways. one is to stick, there's two ways. one is to stick, there's two ways. one is somebody in power, right? You can think somebody in power, right? You can think somebody in power, right? You can think about in the old days the emperor said, about in the old days the emperor said, about in the old days the emperor said, "This is my faith. You all will now be "This is my faith. You all will now be "This is my faith. You all will now be this faith." Um, but in the modern this faith." Um, but in the modern this faith." Um, but in the modern world, that's less. It tends to world, that's less. It tends to world, that's less. It tends to be the case when they speak to some be the case when they speak to some be the case when they speak to some need. Uh, and that is their practices need. Uh, and that is their practices need. Uh, and that is their practices and their ideology address someone in and their ideology address someone in and their ideology address someone in a new way. in a new way. in a new way. &gt;&gt; Um, the people who are leaving faith, &gt;&gt; Um, the people who are leaving faith, &gt;&gt; Um, the people who are leaving faith, they're not becoming atheists. They're they're not becoming atheists. They're they're not becoming atheists. They're looking for new ways to be spiritual. looking for new ways to be spiritual. looking for new ways to be spiritual. Because let's face it, Because let's face it, Because let's face it, most religious institutions, they're most religious institutions, they're most religious institutions, they're human-based institutions. They have human-based institutions. They have human-based institutions. They have moral failures, right? And we know that moral failures, right? And we know that moral failures, right? And we know that there's been abuse and discrimination there's been abuse and discrimination there's been abuse and discrimination and misogyny and all these things and misogyny and all these things and misogyny and all these things attached to faith. And hopefully we can attached to faith. And hopefully we can attached to faith. And hopefully we can talk about that because I don't want talk about that because I don't want talk about that because I don't want people to think that I'm saying religion people to think that I'm saying religion people to think that I'm saying religion is always good, although on average I is always good, although on average I is always good, although on average I think it is. Um, think it is. Um, think it is. Um, it has to speak to you and those are few it has to speak to you and those are few it has to speak to you and those are few and far between. Right now what and far between. Right now what and far between. Right now what astounded me is where people are having astounded me is where people are having astounded me is where people are having profound spiritual experiences is a profound spiritual experiences is a profound spiritual experiences is a burning man. So most people think of burning man. So most people think of burning man. So most people think of burning man as this kind of the boserous burning man as this kind of the boserous burning man as this kind of the boserous party in the desert which for some party in the desert which for some party in the desert which for some people it is it is but uh this is uh people it is it is but uh this is uh people it is it is but uh this is uh work by the neuroscientist Molly work by the neuroscientist Molly work by the neuroscientist Molly Crockett at Princeton. She went to Crockett at Princeton. She went to Crockett at Princeton. She went to Burning Man. She was a burner herself Burning Man. She was a burner herself Burning Man. She was a burner herself but coming up soon. Are you going? but coming up soon. Are you going? but coming up soon. Are you going? &gt;&gt; Yeah. No. God no. I hate the heat. Do &gt;&gt; Yeah. No. God no. I hate the heat. Do &gt;&gt; Yeah. No. God no. I hate the heat. Do you know that uh this year ticket sales you know that uh this year ticket sales you know that uh this year ticket sales are up by a significant amount compared are up by a significant amount compared are up by a significant amount compared to even a few even um before the to even a few even um before the to even a few even um before the pandemic? &gt;&gt; No. It doesn't surprise me that I &gt;&gt; No. It doesn't surprise me that I &gt;&gt; No. It doesn't surprise me that I &gt;&gt; a number of friends um who have never &gt;&gt; a number of friends um who have never &gt;&gt; a number of friends um who have never gone before contacted me in the last gone before contacted me in the last gone before contacted me in the last week are like, "Are you going?" I've week are like, "Are you going?" I've week are like, "Are you going?" I've never been. never been. never been. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you going to go? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you going to go? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you going to go? &gt;&gt; Uh no, this year I'll be abroad, but um &gt;&gt; Uh no, this year I'll be abroad, but um &gt;&gt; Uh no, this year I'll be abroad, but um yeah, you know, uh it could happen. Uh yeah, you know, uh it could happen. Uh yeah, you know, uh it could happen. Uh I'm somewhat curious, but not this year. I'm somewhat curious, but not this year. I'm somewhat curious, but not this year. What she showed is that there's a What she showed is that there's a What she showed is that there's a segment of people there that report segment of people there that report segment of people there that report having profound spiritual experiences. having profound spiritual experiences. having profound spiritual experiences. Now, if you think of Burning Man, right, Now, if you think of Burning Man, right, Now, if you think of Burning Man, right, it's one of these what we it's one of these what we it's one of these what we would call a liinal space, right? It is would call a liinal space, right? It is would call a liinal space, right? It is everything that's normal in life doesn't everything that's normal in life doesn't everything that's normal in life doesn't happen there. People go, they take happen there. People go, they take happen there. People go, they take different names. They wear different names. They wear different names. They wear different clothes. You are exposed to an clothes. You are exposed to an clothes. You are exposed to an environment that is relatively harsh in environment that is relatively harsh in environment that is relatively harsh in the desert. And people have gone tell me the desert. And people have gone tell me the desert. And people have gone tell me the only way that you can really survive the only way that you can really survive the only way that you can really survive is you have to depend on other people. is you have to depend on other people. is you have to depend on other people. And they have this thing there called And they have this thing there called And they have this thing there called the is it the culture of giving or the is it the culture of giving or the is it the culture of giving or gifting? I forget the actual name, but gifting? I forget the actual name, but gifting? I forget the actual name, but there's no money at Burning Man. there's no money at Burning Man. there's no money at Burning Man. Everything is basically through the Everything is basically through the Everything is basically through the kindness of others in exchange. And so kindness of others in exchange. And so kindness of others in exchange. And so people are in this environment where people are in this environment where people are in this environment where their normal life, their normal clothes, their normal life, their normal clothes, their normal life, their normal clothes, their normal identity is stripped away. their normal identity is stripped away. their normal identity is stripped away. They're experiencing the harshness of They're experiencing the harshness of They're experiencing the harshness of the elements of the heat on the playa the elements of the heat on the playa the elements of the heat on the playa and they experience that they can exist and they experience that they can exist and they experience that they can exist there because of the kindness of others there because of the kindness of others there because of the kindness of others and people who interpret it this way and people who interpret it this way and people who interpret it this way Molly finds report not only feeling this Molly finds report not only feeling this Molly finds report not only feeling this profound kind of self-trcending profound kind of self-trcending profound kind of self-trcending experience but when they come back it experience but when they come back it experience but when they come back it stays and they actually tend to be more stays and they actually tend to be more stays and they actually tend to be more pro-social and so some religions have pro-social and so some religions have pro-social and so some religions have realized this now so a friend of mine realized this now so a friend of mine realized this now so a friend of mine named Alex Lee each who's an Episcopal named Alex Lee each who's an Episcopal named Alex Lee each who's an Episcopal minister runs a camp because at Burning minister runs a camp because at Burning minister runs a camp because at Burning Man there are all these camps and his Man there are all these camps and his Man there are all these camps and his camp is called Religious AF. I don't camp is called Religious AF. I don't camp is called Religious AF. I don't know if I can say that word on the show. know if I can say that word on the show. know if I can say that word on the show. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Far worse has been &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Far worse has been &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Far worse has been &gt;&gt; right. Right. Religious as &gt;&gt; right. Right. Religious as &gt;&gt; right. Right. Religious as And so and what they are there and is And so and what they are there and is And so and what they are there and is it is it's he's there and he told me is it is it's he's there and he told me is it is it's he's there and he told me the reason he found this is because when the reason he found this is because when the reason he found this is because when he first started going he said I never he first started going he said I never he first started going he said I never felt God as palpably the presence of God felt God as palpably the presence of God felt God as palpably the presence of God as palpably as I could feel it there as palpably as I could feel it there as palpably as I could feel it there because there were just people because there were just people because there were just people ministering to each other and welcoming ministering to each other and welcoming ministering to each other and welcoming each other and being kind to each other each other and being kind to each other each other and being kind to each other in a way without expectation. And in a way without expectation. And in a way without expectation. And so he runs this camp and there are a lot so he runs this camp and there are a lot so he runs this camp and there are a lot of people who used to be Christian who of people who used to be Christian who of people who used to be Christian who are experiencing this and coming to are experiencing this and coming to are experiencing this and coming to the camp and refinding their faith the camp and refinding their faith the camp and refinding their faith because in that moment they're having because in that moment they're having because in that moment they're having those transcendent experiences that you those transcendent experiences that you those transcendent experiences that you normally don't get when you're just normally don't get when you're just normally don't get when you're just sitting in church sometimes. There's sitting in church sometimes. There's sitting in church sometimes. There's another group, I forget the I think it's another group, I forget the I think it's another group, I forget the I think it's called Milk and Honey. I don't remember, called Milk and Honey. I don't remember, called Milk and Honey. I don't remember, but they have a thousand person Shabbat but they have a thousand person Shabbat but they have a thousand person Shabbat for Jews there. And it's this for Jews there. And it's this for Jews there. And it's this incredible experience people report. And incredible experience people report. And incredible experience people report. And so I think for a lot of people, they're so I think for a lot of people, they're so I think for a lot of people, they're looking for those spiritual experiences looking for those spiritual experiences looking for those spiritual experiences and things like Burning Man are a way to and things like Burning Man are a way to and things like Burning Man are a way to do it. And then they have what do they do it. And then they have what do they do it. And then they have what do they call them? Little burns or remote burns, call them? Little burns or remote burns, call them? Little burns or remote burns, right? Throughout the year, they'll come right? Throughout the year, they'll come right? Throughout the year, they'll come together at different times and do this. together at different times and do this. together at different times and do this. And so I think what you're seeing is a And so I think what you're seeing is a And so I think what you're seeing is a desire of people desire of people desire of people to kind of fill that god-shaped hole in to kind of fill that god-shaped hole in to kind of fill that god-shaped hole in hole in their heart to feel that. And hole in their heart to feel that. And hole in their heart to feel that. And for a lot of them kind of the stayed for a lot of them kind of the stayed for a lot of them kind of the stayed religious rituals that we're kind of religious rituals that we're kind of religious rituals that we're kind of getting now aren't doing that. And so I getting now aren't doing that. And so I getting now aren't doing that. And so I could see something evolving out of that could see something evolving out of that could see something evolving out of that but who knows where we're going. but who knows where we're going. but who knows where we're going. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Um, you know, the Grateful &gt;&gt; Interesting. Um, you know, the Grateful &gt;&gt; Interesting. Um, you know, the Grateful Dead and people that follow the Grateful Dead and people that follow the Grateful Dead and people that follow the Grateful Dead came close to meeting some of the Dead came close to meeting some of the Dead came close to meeting some of the major criteria for a religion, right? major criteria for a religion, right? major criteria for a religion, right? I growing up in the South Bay area in I growing up in the South Bay area in I growing up in the South Bay area in the late '7s and 80s and early 90s. I the late '7s and 80s and early 90s. I the late '7s and 80s and early 90s. I mean, Grateful Dead would come play at mean, Grateful Dead would come play at mean, Grateful Dead would come play at Frost Amphitheater. They play at Frost Amphitheater. They play at Frost Amphitheater. They play at Shoreline. I mean, you get people Shoreline. I mean, you get people Shoreline. I mean, you get people literally following them around the literally following them around the literally following them around the country. It had elements of I'm going to country. It had elements of I'm going to country. It had elements of I'm going to offend some people. My sister was kind offend some people. My sister was kind offend some people. My sister was kind of into the She didn't follow them, but of into the She didn't follow them, but of into the She didn't follow them, but she was a dead head. um I mean had she was a dead head. um I mean had she was a dead head. um I mean had elements of cultism or in the sense elements of cultism or in the sense elements of cultism or in the sense that people were quoteunquote giving up that people were quoteunquote giving up that people were quoteunquote giving up their lives and going but then people their lives and going but then people their lives and going but then people who did that would say no that who did that would say no that who did that would say no that actually was not giving up life that was actually was not giving up life that was actually was not giving up life that was accessing life you know for them and accessing life you know for them and accessing life you know for them and then of course I have some friends who then of course I have some friends who then of course I have some friends who are colleagues at Stanford who are who are colleagues at Stanford who are who are colleagues at Stanford who are who were serious quote unquote dead heads were serious quote unquote dead heads were serious quote unquote dead heads but that was only during the summers so but that was only during the summers so but that was only during the summers so they were like parttime part- timerrs they were like parttime part- timerrs they were like parttime part- timerrs kind of like Burning Man kind of like Burning Man kind of like Burning Man &gt;&gt; yeah few bands however uh at least in &gt;&gt; yeah few bands however uh at least in &gt;&gt; yeah few bands however uh at least in the United States and they were the United States and they were the United States and they were international right um had that kind of international right um had that kind of international right um had that kind of following. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um usually when we hear about followings &gt;&gt; Um usually when we hear about followings &gt;&gt; Um usually when we hear about followings where the main characters have beards um where the main characters have beards um where the main characters have beards um and there's uh drugs involved and there's uh drugs involved and there's uh drugs involved &gt;&gt; um and not every dead head was in super &gt;&gt; um and not every dead head was in super &gt;&gt; um and not every dead head was in super into drugs. I know some that were into drugs. I know some that were into drugs. I know some that were totally uh straightedge actually. Um and totally uh straightedge actually. Um and totally uh straightedge actually. Um and they actually used to have I should just they actually used to have I should just they actually used to have I should just mention AA and NA meetings at shows mention AA and NA meetings at shows mention AA and NA meetings at shows so for people could go who are in so for people could go who are in so for people could go who are in recovery. Um but you know cults recovery. Um but you know cults recovery. Um but you know cults generally include some generally include some generally include some &gt;&gt; um like overs symbolized leader like &gt;&gt; um like overs symbolized leader like &gt;&gt; um like overs symbolized leader like their face some you know I'm thinking of their face some you know I'm thinking of their face some you know I'm thinking of like the skull the like steal I like the skull the like steal I like the skull the like steal I think it's called like steal your steal think it's called like steal your steal think it's called like steal your steal your face is that what that thing is your face is that what that thing is your face is that what that thing is called and then there's Jerry who's kind called and then there's Jerry who's kind called and then there's Jerry who's kind of like the ma Jerry Garcia is like of like the ma Jerry Garcia is like of like the ma Jerry Garcia is like the main one right and then this the main one right and then this the main one right and then this idea that you would do certain things idea that you would do certain things idea that you would do certain things and not do certain it has elements of a and not do certain it has elements of a and not do certain it has elements of a religion yeah religion yeah religion yeah &gt;&gt; um and but cults like the ones that we &gt;&gt; um and but cults like the ones that we &gt;&gt; um and but cults like the ones that we hear about like the Heaven's Gate cult hear about like the Heaven's Gate cult hear about like the Heaven's Gate cult that thought they were going to live that thought they were going to live that thought they were going to live forever. They committed mass suicide forever. They committed mass suicide forever. They committed mass suicide during the Hailbop comet. during the Hailbop comet. during the Hailbop comet. &gt;&gt; Hailbop came through and they were all &gt;&gt; Hailbop came through and they were all &gt;&gt; Hailbop came through and they were all they killed themselves or the they killed themselves or the they killed themselves or the Branch Devidian thing in Waco. You know, Branch Devidian thing in Waco. You know, Branch Devidian thing in Waco. You know, you usually have someone who believes you usually have someone who believes you usually have someone who believes they are special. they are special. they are special. &gt;&gt; This was not true for the Grateful Dead. &gt;&gt; This was not true for the Grateful Dead. &gt;&gt; This was not true for the Grateful Dead. You never heard Jerry Garcia saying that You never heard Jerry Garcia saying that You never heard Jerry Garcia saying that he was like the Messiah or something. he was like the Messiah or something. he was like the Messiah or something. But with David Caresh and the branch But with David Caresh and the branch But with David Caresh and the branch deines you there you had that um a self deines you there you had that um a self deines you there you had that um a self belief that one is extra special. You belief that one is extra special. You belief that one is extra special. You had people really changing their whole had people really changing their whole had people really changing their whole life structure and then oftent times you life structure and then oftent times you life structure and then oftent times you have crime. have crime. have crime. &gt;&gt; You end up with something happening &gt;&gt; You end up with something happening &gt;&gt; You end up with something happening internally where people are being internally where people are being internally where people are being exploited &gt;&gt; and then that's like obvious cult or &gt;&gt; and then that's like obvious cult or &gt;&gt; and then that's like obvious cult or mass suicide or um Jonestown or mass suicide or um Jonestown or mass suicide or um Jonestown or something like that. So, you know, the something like that. So, you know, the something like that. So, you know, the line between cult and new religion is line between cult and new religion is line between cult and new religion is extremely thin. extremely thin. extremely thin. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, so it makes sense to me why not many so it makes sense to me why not many so it makes sense to me why not many would break through. Um, and so I have would break through. Um, and so I have would break through. Um, and so I have this question. Do you think that the this question. Do you think that the this question. Do you think that the existence of Christianity, existence of Christianity, existence of Christianity, Judaism, the Muslim faith, and Buddhism kind of the Muslim faith, and Buddhism kind of the Muslim faith, and Buddhism kind of tiles what the human brain needs in tiles what the human brain needs in tiles what the human brain needs in terms of options? Oh, and atheism and terms of options? Oh, and atheism and terms of options? Oh, and atheism and agnosticism. Like if you take those agnosticism. Like if you take those agnosticism. Like if you take those it sort of like tiles the various um it sort of like tiles the various um it sort of like tiles the various um like anxiety states that the brain has like anxiety states that the brain has like anxiety states that the brain has and you go you know we don't really need and you go you know we don't really need and you go you know we don't really need another one right like all the things another one right like all the things another one right like all the things are handled grief birth enough are handled grief birth enough are handled grief birth enough celebrations each year enough kind of um celebrations each year enough kind of um celebrations each year enough kind of um ideas and flexibility about the ideas and flexibility about the ideas and flexibility about the afterlife enough you know moral afterlife enough you know moral afterlife enough you know moral structure internally not such a huge structure internally not such a huge structure internally not such a huge time commitment for this one but you time commitment for this one but you time commitment for this one but you know if you're an orthodox Jew or you're know if you're an orthodox Jew or you're know if you're an orthodox Jew or you're a very serious Buddhist that's a lot of a very serious Buddhist that's a lot of a very serious Buddhist that's a lot of time yeah time yeah time yeah &gt;&gt; that's a lot of investment in ritual &gt;&gt; that's a lot of investment in ritual &gt;&gt; that's a lot of investment in ritual and meditating, but you know, you can be and meditating, but you know, you can be and meditating, but you know, you can be a &gt;&gt; a really like a darn good Christian by &gt;&gt; a really like a darn good Christian by &gt;&gt; a really like a darn good Christian by going to church on Sunday and praying going to church on Sunday and praying going to church on Sunday and praying each day and doing some Bible reading. each day and doing some Bible reading. each day and doing some Bible reading. Like, you know, that's compatible with Like, you know, that's compatible with Like, you know, that's compatible with a bunch of other things. So, you with a bunch of other things. So, you with a bunch of other things. So, you don't have to give up your whole life to don't have to give up your whole life to don't have to give up your whole life to invest in it. You get see what I'm invest in it. You get see what I'm invest in it. You get see what I'm getting at here. I It could be that getting at here. I It could be that getting at here. I It could be that the that humans as a species have uh the that humans as a species have uh the that humans as a species have uh have figured this out have figured this out have figured this out &gt;&gt; and then someone say, "No, God figured &gt;&gt; and then someone say, "No, God figured &gt;&gt; and then someone say, "No, God figured it out, right? That this is what we it out, right? That this is what we it out, right? That this is what we need. It fills in the gaps." It seems need. It fills in the gaps." It seems need. It fills in the gaps." It seems unlikely that we're going to get a bunch unlikely that we're going to get a bunch unlikely that we're going to get a bunch of other religions. of other religions. of other religions. &gt;&gt; I think so. But I mean, let me talk &gt;&gt; I think so. But I mean, let me talk &gt;&gt; I think so. But I mean, let me talk about the issue of cult versus about the issue of cult versus about the issue of cult versus religion. I think you're absolutely religion. I think you're absolutely religion. I think you're absolutely right. First, cults primarily have the right. First, cults primarily have the right. First, cults primarily have the idea of this charismatic leader, which idea of this charismatic leader, which idea of this charismatic leader, which is why you often kind of hear this is why you often kind of hear this is why you often kind of hear this notion, it's a cult of personality. It's notion, it's a cult of personality. It's notion, it's a cult of personality. It's usually somebody who thinks they're usually somebody who thinks they're usually somebody who thinks they're special. You have to worship that special. You have to worship that special. You have to worship that leader. And when somebody thinks they're leader. And when somebody thinks they're leader. And when somebody thinks they're that special, things often go wrong with that special, things often go wrong with that special, things often go wrong with where they're going to lead people. with where they're going to lead people. with where they're going to lead people. Um, regular religions though can have Um, regular religions though can have Um, regular religions though can have the same problems. I mean, the thing I'd the same problems. I mean, the thing I'd the same problems. I mean, the thing I'd like to say is when you look at like to say is when you look at like to say is when you look at religious practices, a way to think religious practices, a way to think religious practices, a way to think about them is as spiritual technologies, about them is as spiritual technologies, about them is as spiritual technologies, right? They're technologies, mindbody right? They're technologies, mindbody right? They're technologies, mindbody practices that can move hearts and practices that can move hearts and practices that can move hearts and minds. They can move them for good, they minds. They can move them for good, they minds. They can move them for good, they can move them for ill, right? It depends can move them for ill, right? It depends can move them for ill, right? It depends upon the motives of the people who are upon the motives of the people who are upon the motives of the people who are using them. So, you know, people always using them. So, you know, people always using them. So, you know, people always say, Dave, religions are the source of say, Dave, religions are the source of say, Dave, religions are the source of all war. Most wars aren't for about all war. Most wars aren't for about all war. Most wars aren't for about fought about religion. There are some fought about religion. There are some fought about religion. There are some that are like, "Hey, I disagree with that are like, "Hey, I disagree with that are like, "Hey, I disagree with your interpretation of this scripture." your interpretation of this scripture." your interpretation of this scripture." Most of them are about land and Most of them are about land and Most of them are about land and resources, but religion gets pulled in. resources, but religion gets pulled in. resources, but religion gets pulled in. And what we know is that when you are And what we know is that when you are And what we know is that when you are feeling threatened. So the Bible, as you said, is a book of So the Bible, as you said, is a book of So the Bible, as you said, is a book of many voices. There are beautiful many voices. There are beautiful many voices. There are beautiful passages in there about mercy and passages in there about mercy and passages in there about mercy and kindness. There are other passages in kindness. There are other passages in kindness. There are other passages in there about dashing the heads of your there about dashing the heads of your there about dashing the heads of your enemies, babies against rocks, right? to enemies, babies against rocks, right? to enemies, babies against rocks, right? to punish them. And so what we know is that punish them. And so what we know is that punish them. And so what we know is that when people feel more threatened, when people feel more threatened, when people feel more threatened, their conception of God, and this is their conception of God, and this is their conception of God, and this is work by the psychologists Kirk Gray and work by the psychologists Kirk Gray and work by the psychologists Kirk Gray and Joshua Jackson, their conceptions of God Joshua Jackson, their conceptions of God Joshua Jackson, their conceptions of God become more aggressive and punitive. become more aggressive and punitive. become more aggressive and punitive. They believe that God values vengeance They believe that God values vengeance They believe that God values vengeance more. And if you ask them to recall more. And if you ask them to recall more. And if you ask them to recall verses from the Bible, they're going to verses from the Bible, they're going to verses from the Bible, they're going to recall the ones that are about smashing recall the ones that are about smashing recall the ones that are about smashing the baby's heads as opposed to being the baby's heads as opposed to being the baby's heads as opposed to being kind and merciful. And so this is kind and merciful. And so this is kind and merciful. And so this is why you can see things like Christian why you can see things like Christian why you can see things like Christian nationalism form and you can see if you nationalism form and you can see if you nationalism form and you can see if you go to some of these events, you'll see go to some of these events, you'll see go to some of these events, you'll see pictures of Jesus holding an AK-47, pictures of Jesus holding an AK-47, pictures of Jesus holding an AK-47, right? Because our mind to be adaptive right? Because our mind to be adaptive right? Because our mind to be adaptive as if we're not involved to be saints or as if we're not involved to be saints or as if we're not involved to be saints or sinners. When we feel we're threatened, sinners. When we feel we're threatened, sinners. When we feel we're threatened, we want to fight against that. We will we want to fight against that. We will we want to fight against that. We will use religion to justify it. And so the use religion to justify it. And so the use religion to justify it. And so the point that I want to make sure all point that I want to make sure all point that I want to make sure all your listeners know is not saying your listeners know is not saying your listeners know is not saying religion is good. It's a technology that religion is good. It's a technology that religion is good. It's a technology that can be used for evil. You know, I mean, can be used for evil. You know, I mean, can be used for evil. You know, I mean, even Richard Dawkins will say same thing even Richard Dawkins will say same thing even Richard Dawkins will say same thing about science, right? You want to find a about science, right? You want to find a about science, right? You want to find a way to cure people of malades, science way to cure people of malades, science way to cure people of malades, science is your friend. You want to find the is your friend. You want to find the is your friend. You want to find the best way to annihilate a bunch of people best way to annihilate a bunch of people best way to annihilate a bunch of people most efficiently, science is your most efficiently, science is your most efficiently, science is your friend. And so for me, the reason I friend. And so for me, the reason I friend. And so for me, the reason I spend this time talking about religion spend this time talking about religion spend this time talking about religion is I know it can be used for bad, but if is I know it can be used for bad, but if is I know it can be used for bad, but if you look at the data on average in you look at the data on average in you look at the data on average in people's lives, yes, certain people's lives, yes, certain people's lives, yes, certain institutions have caused people to be institutions have caused people to be institutions have caused people to be abused, discriminated against, etc., and abused, discriminated against, etc., and abused, discriminated against, etc., and we should combat those. But on average, we should combat those. But on average, we should combat those. But on average, whether it's a gift from God or a whether it's a gift from God or a whether it's a gift from God or a cultural adaptation, it helps us live cultural adaptation, it helps us live cultural adaptation, it helps us live better. For the most part, I agree with better. For the most part, I agree with better. For the most part, I agree with you that is there's a lot of convergence you that is there's a lot of convergence you that is there's a lot of convergence in the practices of the faith because in the practices of the faith because in the practices of the faith because in some ways we're all the same body and some ways we're all the same body and some ways we're all the same body and brain and it helps us solve those. Um, brain and it helps us solve those. Um, brain and it helps us solve those. Um, and they're all pretty large and have their they're all pretty large and have their they're all pretty large and have their followings and they're attached to the followings and they're attached to the followings and they're attached to the culture you're raised in. But I think culture you're raised in. But I think culture you're raised in. But I think that times of flux, times of change, and that times of flux, times of change, and that times of flux, times of change, and I kind of sense we're getting in one of I kind of sense we're getting in one of I kind of sense we're getting in one of this one of these now. I don't mean like this one of these now. I don't mean like this one of these now. I don't mean like end times, but I mean things with end times, but I mean things with end times, but I mean things with technology, things with norms, the way technology, things with norms, the way technology, things with norms, the way that we have been living, our economic that we have been living, our economic that we have been living, our economic practices are changing really rapidly practices are changing really rapidly practices are changing really rapidly right now. And people are becoming at right now. And people are becoming at right now. And people are becoming at the same time more disillusioned with the same time more disillusioned with the same time more disillusioned with some of the traditional faith. And so some of the traditional faith. And so some of the traditional faith. And so for me, right now, this seems like a for me, right now, this seems like a for me, right now, this seems like a period where there could be a period where there could be a period where there could be a reorientation. And the ones that are reorientation. And the ones that are reorientation. And the ones that are going to happen that are going to come going to happen that are going to come going to happen that are going to come are the ones that speak to people. You are the ones that speak to people. You are the ones that speak to people. You you mentioned AI. There have been you mentioned AI. There have been you mentioned AI. There have been churches, they haven't stuck yet, but I churches, they haven't stuck yet, but I churches, they haven't stuck yet, but I could see this happening where they're I could see this happening where they're I could see this happening where they're built around an AI. The idea is AI will built around an AI. The idea is AI will built around an AI. The idea is AI will become so knowledgeable that it will become so knowledgeable that it will become so knowledgeable that it will almost basically be an omnisient super almost basically be an omnisient super almost basically be an omnisient super intelligence. Omnicient because it can intelligence. Omnicient because it can intelligence. Omnicient because it can know everything about you through what know everything about you through what know everything about you through what you do online and super intelligence you do online and super intelligence you do online and super intelligence because it can solve problems better because it can solve problems better because it can solve problems better than humans can. And so there are people than humans can. And so there are people than humans can. And so there are people who are thinking about churches around who are thinking about churches around who are thinking about churches around AI. Will it stick or not? I don't know. AI. Will it stick or not? I don't know. AI. Will it stick or not? I don't know. But to the extent that they a new faith But to the extent that they a new faith But to the extent that they a new faith can let people feel that presence of God can let people feel that presence of God can let people feel that presence of God can solve some of their problems by can solve some of their problems by can solve some of their problems by helping them helping them helping them feel connected to each other, reduce feel connected to each other, reduce feel connected to each other, reduce anxiety, reduce stress. It wouldn't anxiety, reduce stress. It wouldn't anxiety, reduce stress. It wouldn't surprise me if something else comes now surprise me if something else comes now surprise me if something else comes now in this kind of moment of flux we're in. in this kind of moment of flux we're in. in this kind of moment of flux we're in. I don't know if you're aware of this. I don't know if you're aware of this. I don't know if you're aware of this. Um, most people probably aren't, but the Um, most people probably aren't, but the Um, most people probably aren't, but the person who holds the world record for person who holds the world record for person who holds the world record for highest IQ, this has been verified by highest IQ, this has been verified by highest IQ, this has been verified by Guinness. I know because they posted the Guinness. I know because they posted the Guinness. I know because they posted the Guinness certificate to their account on Guinness certificate to their account on Guinness certificate to their account on X. Um I follow this person out of X. Um I follow this person out of X. Um I follow this person out of interest. Um uh is a self-declared um interest. Um uh is a self-declared um interest. Um uh is a self-declared um Christian ve very much um Christian ve very much um Christian ve very much um &gt;&gt; um aligning their platform as the &gt;&gt; um aligning their platform as the &gt;&gt; um aligning their platform as the highest IQ in the world and by a huge highest IQ in the world and by a huge highest IQ in the world and by a huge margin I should say um with their margin I should say um with their margin I should say um with their understanding of the Bible and why understanding of the Bible and why understanding of the Bible and why Christianity is the best answer Christianity is the best answer Christianity is the best answer to holds the best answers to everything. to holds the best answers to everything. to holds the best answers to everything. I should say I don't align with I should say I don't align with I should say I don't align with everything they post. And so I just want everything they post. And so I just want everything they post. And so I just want to be clear about that. But it's very to be clear about that. But it's very to be clear about that. But it's very interesting to me interesting to me interesting to me &gt;&gt; um that you have people who are using &gt;&gt; um that you have people who are using &gt;&gt; um that you have people who are using technology like social media as a way to technology like social media as a way to technology like social media as a way to platform traditional long-standing platform traditional long-standing platform traditional long-standing religions and merging that with kind of religions and merging that with kind of religions and merging that with kind of u modern notions of intelligence. Right? u modern notions of intelligence. Right? u modern notions of intelligence. Right? IQ tests aren't the only uh way that we IQ tests aren't the only uh way that we IQ tests aren't the only uh way that we gauge intelligence, of course, but I gauge intelligence, of course, but I gauge intelligence, of course, but I think most people place enough value on think most people place enough value on think most people place enough value on people who have high extreme IQ to people who have high extreme IQ to people who have high extreme IQ to um interpret it a certain way. I um interpret it a certain way. I um interpret it a certain way. I wondered until I realized this is wondered until I realized this is wondered until I realized this is actually a person, at least to my actually a person, at least to my actually a person, at least to my knowledge. I wondered like is this an AI knowledge. I wondered like is this an AI knowledge. I wondered like is this an AI thing? Now there's video, so he'll he's thing? Now there's video, so he'll he's thing? Now there's video, so he'll he's in Korea. He'll he'll he speaks English in Korea. He'll he'll he speaks English in Korea. He'll he'll he speaks English and he'll talk about this. and he'll talk about this. and he'll talk about this. &gt;&gt; But you're seeing it similar in &gt;&gt; But you're seeing it similar in &gt;&gt; But you're seeing it similar in Silicon Valley right now. Like I think I Silicon Valley right now. Like I think I Silicon Valley right now. Like I think I think Peter Thiel is embracing think Peter Thiel is embracing think Peter Thiel is embracing Christianity. Really? Yeah. I'm pretty Christianity. Really? Yeah. I'm pretty Christianity. Really? Yeah. I'm pretty sure. &gt;&gt; Even Elon Musk who's I don't think he &gt;&gt; Even Elon Musk who's I don't think he &gt;&gt; Even Elon Musk who's I don't think he says he believes in God, but he says he believes in God, but he says he believes in God, but he says Christianity is a force for good in the Christianity is a force for good in the Christianity is a force for good in the world. &gt;&gt; I recall him saying there's got &gt;&gt; I recall him saying there's got &gt;&gt; I recall him saying there's got to be something there in terms of energy to be something there in terms of energy to be something there in terms of energy in the universe. And when that question in the universe. And when that question in the universe. And when that question was posed, was posed, was posed, &gt;&gt; yeah. And so I think you're seeing &gt;&gt; yeah. And so I think you're seeing &gt;&gt; yeah. And so I think you're seeing this among a lot of tech sophisticates. this among a lot of tech sophisticates. this among a lot of tech sophisticates. I don't have the good answer to why, but I don't have the good answer to why, but I don't have the good answer to why, but it is your point is well taken. it is your point is well taken. it is your point is well taken. that is intelligence. that is intelligence. that is intelligence. How religious you are does not correlate How religious you are does not correlate How religious you are does not correlate with intelligence. Right? There are with intelligence. Right? There are with intelligence. Right? There are really brilliant people who embrace the really brilliant people who embrace the really brilliant people who embrace the idea that there is a god and there is a idea that there is a god and there is a idea that there is a god and there is a creator and there are some that aren't. creator and there are some that aren't. creator and there are some that aren't. And I think it's because those people And I think it's because those people And I think it's because those people realize like I was saying before that if realize like I was saying before that if realize like I was saying before that if you're a person who is really rational you're a person who is really rational you're a person who is really rational and is really intelligent when you look and is really intelligent when you look and is really intelligent when you look at the data there's nothing to refute at the data there's nothing to refute at the data there's nothing to refute it. And so again, no one sees evidence it. And so again, no one sees evidence it. And so again, no one sees evidence of God in the world scientifically, but of God in the world scientifically, but of God in the world scientifically, but we also realize we can't rule it out. we also realize we can't rule it out. we also realize we can't rule it out. And when they have And when they have And when they have whatever their own inner life is, if whatever their own inner life is, if whatever their own inner life is, if they feel they have that connection, they feel they have that connection, they feel they have that connection, why reject it? And so I think it's why reject it? And so I think it's why reject it? And so I think it's important to realize that it's not a important to realize that it's not a important to realize that it's not a marker of poor intelligence unless uh marker of poor intelligence unless uh marker of poor intelligence unless uh there's something I'm not aware of. the there's something I'm not aware of. the there's something I'm not aware of. the person holding the Guinness confirmed person holding the Guinness confirmed person holding the Guinness confirmed highest IQ in the world is certainly highest IQ in the world is certainly highest IQ in the world is certainly highly religious. highly religious. highly religious. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; so we know the uh the boxes are checked &gt;&gt; so we know the uh the boxes are checked &gt;&gt; so we know the uh the boxes are checked at probably all up and down. They're at probably all up and down. They're at probably all up and down. They're probably atheists that have very low probably atheists that have very low probably atheists that have very low intelligence and atheists with very high intelligence and atheists with very high intelligence and atheists with very high intelligence and intelligence and intelligence and &gt;&gt; Christians and Jews and Muslims and the &gt;&gt; Christians and Jews and Muslims and the &gt;&gt; Christians and Jews and Muslims and the and the Buddhists and the and the whole and the Buddhists and the and the whole and the Buddhists and the and the whole business. I think one of the reasons why business. I think one of the reasons why business. I think one of the reasons why certain religions get tacked with um certain religions get tacked with um certain religions get tacked with um stereotypes um are the kind of avatars that we um are the kind of avatars that we um are the kind of avatars that we see in our mind when we think about that see in our mind when we think about that see in our mind when we think about that religion. So for instance um Buddhism we religion. So for instance um Buddhism we religion. So for instance um Buddhism we think about the Daly Lama. The Dollaly think about the Daly Lama. The Dollaly think about the Daly Lama. The Dollaly Lama seems um like what most people Lama seems um like what most people Lama seems um like what most people think about the Dollaly Lama. Um well, think about the Dollaly Lama. Um well, think about the Dollaly Lama. Um well, prior to this recent kind of prior to this recent kind of prior to this recent kind of controversy, I thought the Dollaly Lama controversy, I thought the Dollaly Lama controversy, I thought the Dollaly Lama is just kind of like a just a happy is just kind of like a just a happy is just kind of like a just a happy &gt;&gt; just happy all good with everything, &gt;&gt; just happy all good with everything, &gt;&gt; just happy all good with everything, right? the um even the um style of right? the um even the um style of right? the um even the um style of clothing is very kind of um generic clothing is very kind of um generic clothing is very kind of um generic across monks when the Dollaly Lama's across monks when the Dollaly Lama's across monks when the Dollaly Lama's walking around like you know all in walking around like you know all in walking around like you know all in these orange robes and I look pretty these orange robes and I look pretty these orange robes and I look pretty peaceful and happy and um so pretty peaceful and happy and um so pretty peaceful and happy and um so people I think assume that okay well um people I think assume that okay well um people I think assume that okay well um if you want to feel like that Buddhism if you want to feel like that Buddhism if you want to feel like that Buddhism would be a good idea would be a good idea would be a good idea &gt;&gt; right um whereas other religions tend to &gt;&gt; right um whereas other religions tend to &gt;&gt; right um whereas other religions tend to have a bit more of uh outward their have a bit more of uh outward their have a bit more of uh outward their brand is a bit more varied in terms of brand is a bit more varied in terms of brand is a bit more varied in terms of the emotional tone as you we talked the emotional tone as you we talked the emotional tone as you we talked about Christianity certainly old about Christianity certainly old about Christianity certainly old testament new testament new testament new testament &gt;&gt; what do you think about the branding of &gt;&gt; what do you think about the branding of &gt;&gt; what do you think about the branding of religions because I feel like it's one religions because I feel like it's one religions because I feel like it's one of the most important factors that of the most important factors that of the most important factors that either draws people toward or away from either draws people toward or away from either draws people toward or away from a religion whether or not the person is a religion whether or not the person is a religion whether or not the person is speaking words of love speaking words of love speaking words of love &gt;&gt; universal love only for if you join in &gt;&gt; universal love only for if you join in &gt;&gt; universal love only for if you join in acceptance forgiveness acceptance forgiveness acceptance forgiveness &gt;&gt; um condemning I mean these are the &gt;&gt; um condemning I mean these are the &gt;&gt; um condemning I mean these are the things that people resonate with or that things that people resonate with or that things that people resonate with or that serve as separators. serve as separators. serve as separators. &gt;&gt; And I think um they're also the things &gt;&gt; And I think um they're also the things &gt;&gt; And I think um they're also the things that make us look at some people go that make us look at some people go that make us look at some people go that person crazy. person crazy. person crazy. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like like I mean you didn't really have &gt;&gt; Like like I mean you didn't really have &gt;&gt; Like like I mean you didn't really have to see David Caresh speak for more than to see David Caresh speak for more than to see David Caresh speak for more than a second. You didn't even have to know a second. You didn't even have to know a second. You didn't even have to know about all the criminal stuff going on. about all the criminal stuff going on. about all the criminal stuff going on. &gt;&gt; Crazy eyes. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Crazy eyes. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Crazy eyes. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like the guy's crazy, right? And &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like the guy's crazy, right? And &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like the guy's crazy, right? And and his glasses made him look like and his glasses made him look like and his glasses made him look like Jeffrey Dalmer also. And like there I Jeffrey Dalmer also. And like there I Jeffrey Dalmer also. And like there I don't know what's up with those glasses, don't know what's up with those glasses, don't know what's up with those glasses, but um but um but um you know like this guy's like eerie. You you know like this guy's like eerie. You you know like this guy's like eerie. You wouldn't you wouldn't let them near wouldn't you wouldn't let them near wouldn't you wouldn't let them near anyone you care about. So there there's anyone you care about. So there there's anyone you care about. So there there's this kind of branding issue that I think this kind of branding issue that I think this kind of branding issue that I think is important um at least to discuss is important um at least to discuss is important um at least to discuss because I think when people hear because I think when people hear because I think when people hear religion, their mind goes to that. religion, their mind goes to that. religion, their mind goes to that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; They're not thinking about the &gt;&gt; They're not thinking about the &gt;&gt; They're not thinking about the practices necessarily. They're thinking practices necessarily. They're thinking practices necessarily. They're thinking about the brand. about the brand. about the brand. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I mean if you're not &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I mean if you're not &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I mean if you're not familiar with the religion and same as familiar with the religion and same as familiar with the religion and same as if you're not familiar with the product, if you're not familiar with the product, if you're not familiar with the product, what's going to drive you is the what's going to drive you is the what's going to drive you is the stereotype of the brand. But I think the stereotype of the brand. But I think the stereotype of the brand. But I think the more you look, you realize that those more you look, you realize that those more you look, you realize that those are problematic um for good or for ill. are problematic um for good or for ill. are problematic um for good or for ill. So you know, you raised the point about So you know, you raised the point about So you know, you raised the point about the Daly Lama and you know, my original the Daly Lama and you know, my original the Daly Lama and you know, my original reaction when I first saw it was exactly reaction when I first saw it was exactly reaction when I first saw it was exactly the same as yours. But you know even the same as yours. But you know even the same as yours. But you know even Buddhism a religion that is built on the Buddhism a religion that is built on the Buddhism a religion that is built on the idea of loving kindness and ending idea of loving kindness and ending idea of loving kindness and ending suffering you know in Sri Lanka right suffering you know in Sri Lanka right suffering you know in Sri Lanka right now is being used to justify kind of a now is being used to justify kind of a now is being used to justify kind of a genocide against certain groups and the genocide against certain groups and the genocide against certain groups and the monks themselves are taking up arms monks themselves are taking up arms monks themselves are taking up arms right and that people are shocked when right and that people are shocked when right and that people are shocked when they hear that because any religion can they hear that because any religion can they hear that because any religion can do that. So that the danger in religion do that. So that the danger in religion do that. So that the danger in religion is always that by increasing community is always that by increasing community is always that by increasing community for those who are part of your religion, for those who are part of your religion, for those who are part of your religion, you can be increasing the distance you can be increasing the distance you can be increasing the distance against those who aren't part of your against those who aren't part of your against those who aren't part of your religion. Which is why at heart the true religion. Which is why at heart the true religion. Which is why at heart the true message of religion is not to make it us message of religion is not to make it us message of religion is not to make it us versus them. It's to increase the moral versus them. It's to increase the moral versus them. It's to increase the moral circle of concern such that it includes circle of concern such that it includes circle of concern such that it includes everybody. You know the Bible talks everybody. You know the Bible talks everybody. You know the Bible talks about you should honor your father and about you should honor your father and about you should honor your father and your mother and be good to your family. your mother and be good to your family. your mother and be good to your family. But more than that, if you're counting But more than that, if you're counting But more than that, if you're counting the number of times it says who to be the number of times it says who to be the number of times it says who to be good to, it says be good to the good to, it says be good to the good to, it says be good to the stranger. Be good to the stranger in stranger. Be good to the stranger in stranger. Be good to the stranger in your land. And so it's expanding that your land. And so it's expanding that your land. And so it's expanding that moral circle. But my point is that, you moral circle. But my point is that, you moral circle. But my point is that, you know, and people now say, "Oh, look at know, and people now say, "Oh, look at know, and people now say, "Oh, look at the Christian nationalists. I would the Christian nationalists. I would the Christian nationalists. I would never want to be any part of that, never want to be any part of that, never want to be any part of that, right? It's all, if you're a person on right? It's all, if you're a person on right? It's all, if you're a person on the left, it's all people who are the left, it's all people who are the left, it's all people who are conservative and looking to control conservative and looking to control conservative and looking to control people's lives." And so the branding is people's lives." And so the branding is people's lives." And so the branding is a big problem, but it I think obscures a big problem, but it I think obscures a big problem, but it I think obscures the complexities that are going on in the complexities that are going on in the complexities that are going on in different phases. But you're right, different phases. But you're right, different phases. But you're right, that's going to be the thing that's going to be the thing that's going to be the thing that's going to draw you or repulse you even if going to draw you or repulse you even if going to draw you or repulse you even if it's not accurate. it's not accurate. it's not accurate. We know from medicine that the more We know from medicine that the more We know from medicine that the more similar that your doctor uh looks to you similar that your doctor uh looks to you similar that your doctor uh looks to you and the people you know, the more likely and the people you know, the more likely and the people you know, the more likely you're going to take their advice. Um, I you're going to take their advice. Um, I you're going to take their advice. Um, I think similarly think similarly think similarly the more different the dress of the more different the dress of the more different the dress of a of a religious figure, uh, the more a of a religious figure, uh, the more a of a religious figure, uh, the more different their haircut, the more different their haircut, the more different their haircut, the more different they speak, the less likely different they speak, the less likely different they speak, the less likely you are to join up with them. It feels you are to join up with them. It feels you are to join up with them. It feels far away. And so, it's going to be far away. And so, it's going to be far away. And so, it's going to be interesting to see in the years to come interesting to see in the years to come interesting to see in the years to come how people gravitate toward or repelled how people gravitate toward or repelled how people gravitate toward or repelled by religion in general or specific by religion in general or specific by religion in general or specific religions given that now pretty much religions given that now pretty much religions given that now pretty much everything is visible to everybody, everything is visible to everybody, everything is visible to everybody, right? you know, it's not right? you know, it's not right? you know, it's not sufficient for somebody to just post sufficient for somebody to just post sufficient for somebody to just post things in text. You they have to things in text. You they have to things in text. You they have to actually speak in video, I believe. actually speak in video, I believe. actually speak in video, I believe. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; you have to see them. You have to kind &gt;&gt; you have to see them. You have to kind &gt;&gt; you have to see them. You have to kind of like and so um we used to talk about of like and so um we used to talk about of like and so um we used to talk about scripture, right? But now religious scripture, right? But now religious scripture, right? But now religious figures are we expect to see them figures are we expect to see them figures are we expect to see them directly. &gt;&gt; Um and I think there's going to be less &gt;&gt; Um and I think there's going to be less &gt;&gt; Um and I think there's going to be less shrouding and less separation. And it'll shrouding and less separation. And it'll shrouding and less separation. And it'll be really interesting to see if people be really interesting to see if people be really interesting to see if people um are drawn to or repelled from people. um are drawn to or repelled from people. um are drawn to or repelled from people. I don't know what to I don't know what to I don't know what to &gt;&gt; I don't know either because you could &gt;&gt; I don't know either because you could &gt;&gt; I don't know either because you could think about it as they're making think about it as they're making think about it as they're making themselves more accessible to the public themselves more accessible to the public themselves more accessible to the public and to the masses. But again, there was and to the masses. But again, there was and to the masses. But again, there was something also sometimes when they held something also sometimes when they held something also sometimes when they held themselves as separate as more themselves as separate as more themselves as separate as more holy, more knowledgeable, more someone holy, more knowledgeable, more someone holy, more knowledgeable, more someone not like me who knows more than I not like me who knows more than I not like me who knows more than I do, who I can trust. So, it's a do, who I can trust. So, it's a do, who I can trust. So, it's a good point. Um, I'm not sure which way good point. Um, I'm not sure which way good point. Um, I'm not sure which way it's going to go. it's going to go. it's going to go. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something very true about &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something very true about &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's something very true about the time we're living in now, which is the time we're living in now, which is the time we're living in now, which is very different than just 20 years ago, very different than just 20 years ago, very different than just 20 years ago, which is now the more famous you are, which is now the more famous you are, which is now the more famous you are, the harder it is for you to control your the harder it is for you to control your the harder it is for you to control your reputation. &gt;&gt; That's true. &gt;&gt; That's true. &gt;&gt; That's true. &gt;&gt; Because the real you has to be visible &gt;&gt; Because the real you has to be visible &gt;&gt; Because the real you has to be visible and any flaws are also going to be uh and any flaws are also going to be uh and any flaws are also going to be uh visible at some point. Um, whereas 20 visible at some point. Um, whereas 20 visible at some point. Um, whereas 20 years ago, the more famous you were, the years ago, the more famous you were, the years ago, the more famous you were, the easier it was to maintain your easier it was to maintain your easier it was to maintain your reputation. people could really shroud reputation. people could really shroud reputation. people could really shroud themselves &gt;&gt; and um they could create mystique. &gt;&gt; and um they could create mystique. &gt;&gt; and um they could create mystique. &gt;&gt; Um and this is true in every area, not &gt;&gt; Um and this is true in every area, not &gt;&gt; Um and this is true in every area, not just in terms of celebrity and fame. just in terms of celebrity and fame. just in terms of celebrity and fame. This is true for politicians. This is true for politicians. This is true for politicians. &gt;&gt; Um this is true, I think, for religious &gt;&gt; Um this is true, I think, for religious &gt;&gt; Um this is true, I think, for religious figures. Uh even my friends from the, figures. Uh even my friends from the, figures. Uh even my friends from the, you know, um special operations you know, um special operations you know, um special operations community have said, you know, a lot of community have said, you know, a lot of community have said, you know, a lot of the mystique that empowered them to the mystique that empowered them to the mystique that empowered them to do really difficult things. um a lot you do really difficult things. um a lot you do really difficult things. um a lot you know movies have been made about their know movies have been made about their know movies have been made about their community in ways that has been um community in ways that has been um community in ways that has been um semi-destructive actually to certain semi-destructive actually to certain semi-destructive actually to certain aspects of the work they needed to do aspects of the work they needed to do aspects of the work they needed to do and so I see a lot of parallels here and so I see a lot of parallels here and so I see a lot of parallels here and so it's going to be interesting if we so it's going to be interesting if we so it's going to be interesting if we start to embrace that some of these start to embrace that some of these start to embrace that some of these religious figures also are going to be religious figures also are going to be religious figures also are going to be flawed right I mean the Catholic church flawed right I mean the Catholic church flawed right I mean the Catholic church you know had the veil pulled back on a you know had the veil pulled back on a you know had the veil pulled back on a subset of Catholics certainly wasn't all subset of Catholics certainly wasn't all subset of Catholics certainly wasn't all but a subset of people in the Catholic but a subset of people in the Catholic but a subset of people in the Catholic church doing horrible things um church doing horrible things um church doing horrible things um &gt;&gt; but there's still a lot of Catholics in &gt;&gt; but there's still a lot of Catholics in &gt;&gt; but there's still a lot of Catholics in the world the world the world &gt;&gt; right people who understand uh &gt;&gt; right people who understand uh &gt;&gt; right people who understand uh Catholicism were able to say that's not Catholicism were able to say that's not Catholicism were able to say that's not what Catholicism is about. In fact, what Catholicism is about. In fact, what Catholicism is about. In fact, we're about the exact opposite and we're about the exact opposite and we're about the exact opposite and we're able to I think in by now they able to I think in by now they able to I think in by now they reasonably dissociate themselves from reasonably dissociate themselves from reasonably dissociate themselves from that, right? Yeah. I mean, there still that, right? Yeah. I mean, there still that, right? Yeah. I mean, there still are ongoing debates and what will happen are ongoing debates and what will happen are ongoing debates and what will happen now is you'll have people who are now is you'll have people who are now is you'll have people who are coming up for higher positions within coming up for higher positions within coming up for higher positions within the church and it'll look back and show the church and it'll look back and show the church and it'll look back and show where they even though they didn't do where they even though they didn't do where they even though they didn't do anything, they were covering things up anything, they were covering things up anything, they were covering things up and so the echoes of that go on. But you and so the echoes of that go on. But you and so the echoes of that go on. But you know the point you raised is a good one. know the point you raised is a good one. know the point you raised is a good one. I think it's going to hit certain I think it's going to hit certain I think it's going to hit certain religions more than others. So there are religions more than others. So there are religions more than others. So there are certain religions where it's really certain religions where it's really certain religions where it's really important to have an intermediary like important to have an intermediary like important to have an intermediary like in Catholicism right for you to get in Catholicism right for you to get in Catholicism right for you to get certain sacraments. certain sacraments. certain sacraments. The priest is the mediator right who The priest is the mediator right who The priest is the mediator right who does the priest does this does the priest does this does the priest does this transubstantiation allows the transubstantiation allows the transubstantiation allows the bread and wine to be turned into the bread and wine to be turned into the bread and wine to be turned into the body and blood of Christ that you body and blood of Christ that you body and blood of Christ that you then receive. Um, in many other then receive. Um, in many other then receive. Um, in many other religions, the role of the minister or religions, the role of the minister or religions, the role of the minister or priest or reverend isn't as important, priest or reverend isn't as important, priest or reverend isn't as important, right? There's direct experience. I can right? There's direct experience. I can right? There's direct experience. I can experience God directly in my prayers or experience God directly in my prayers or experience God directly in my prayers or through my practices. And so, I think a through my practices. And so, I think a through my practices. And so, I think a lot will depend on lot will depend on lot will depend on whether you need that mediator or not. whether you need that mediator or not. whether you need that mediator or not. And I think there is this push among And I think there is this push among And I think there is this push among some people to want that direct some people to want that direct some people to want that direct experience to not be hindered or have experience to not be hindered or have experience to not be hindered or have the baggage of the institution upon the baggage of the institution upon the baggage of the institution upon them. Couple of questions for you. them. Couple of questions for you. them. Couple of questions for you. &gt;&gt; Uh if you're willing. Um do you pray? &gt;&gt; Uh if you're willing. Um do you pray? &gt;&gt; Uh if you're willing. Um do you pray? &gt;&gt; I'm one of those people who prays &gt;&gt; I'm one of those people who prays &gt;&gt; I'm one of those people who prays at times at times at times where I'm feeling the stress. So prayer where I'm feeling the stress. So prayer where I'm feeling the stress. So prayer is not a practice of mine. I always feel is not a practice of mine. I always feel is not a practice of mine. I always feel like when I say this, I'm like the like when I say this, I'm like the like when I say this, I'm like the doctor who smokes cigarettes, right? doctor who smokes cigarettes, right? doctor who smokes cigarettes, right? It's like Dave, you tell people prayer It's like Dave, you tell people prayer It's like Dave, you tell people prayer is good. Um I'm still kind of working is good. Um I'm still kind of working is good. Um I'm still kind of working out my belief system. you know that the out my belief system. you know that the out my belief system. you know that the show I do, how God works, is really as show I do, how God works, is really as show I do, how God works, is really as much of a journey for me as it is for much of a journey for me as it is for much of a journey for me as it is for everybody else. And so I believe in everybody else. And so I believe in everybody else. And so I believe in the data. I believe this stuff is good. the data. I believe this stuff is good. the data. I believe this stuff is good. I was raised Catholic. I was an alter I was raised Catholic. I was an alter I was raised Catholic. I was an alter boy. I left the church. Where I am now, boy. I left the church. Where I am now, boy. I left the church. Where I am now, I'm trying to figure it out. But what I I'm trying to figure it out. But what I I'm trying to figure it out. But what I try to do is embrace practices that I try to do is embrace practices that I try to do is embrace practices that I think matter. So I embrace this practice think matter. So I embrace this practice think matter. So I embrace this practice of gratitude, right? rather than praying of gratitude, right? rather than praying of gratitude, right? rather than praying every day to get it, I find ways to every day to get it, I find ways to every day to get it, I find ways to cultivate it daily and see how it cultivate it daily and see how it cultivate it daily and see how it changes me. Um, I try to meditate. Am I changes me. Um, I try to meditate. Am I changes me. Um, I try to meditate. Am I good at it? No. Do I think it's good at it? No. Do I think it's good at it? No. Do I think it's beneficial to me? Yes. And so, I'm beneficial to me? Yes. And so, I'm beneficial to me? Yes. And so, I'm trying to figure out which spiritual trying to figure out which spiritual trying to figure out which spiritual community, if any, I fit in. I'd like to community, if any, I fit in. I'd like to community, if any, I fit in. I'd like to say I'm an agnostic. You know, 20 years say I'm an agnostic. You know, 20 years say I'm an agnostic. You know, 20 years ago, I would have been an atheist. Now, ago, I would have been an atheist. Now, ago, I would have been an atheist. Now, I realize I'm humble enough to say I realize I'm humble enough to say I realize I'm humble enough to say I don't know. I've seen or felt things don't know. I've seen or felt things don't know. I've seen or felt things that I can't explain. Does that tell me that I can't explain. Does that tell me that I can't explain. Does that tell me anything? I don't know. But I'm on this anything? I don't know. But I'm on this anything? I don't know. But I'm on this journey to find out. And I hope, you journey to find out. And I hope, you journey to find out. And I hope, you know, I take my listeners with me on know, I take my listeners with me on know, I take my listeners with me on that journey. that journey. that journey. &gt;&gt; Do you believe in miracles? &gt;&gt; Depends how you define miracles. I &gt;&gt; Depends how you define miracles. I &gt;&gt; Depends how you define miracles. I believe that there are things that believe that there are things that believe that there are things that happen that we cannot explain. And being happen that we cannot explain. And being happen that we cannot explain. And being an agnostic, I'm willing to say that an agnostic, I'm willing to say that an agnostic, I'm willing to say that those could be due to some unseen force. those could be due to some unseen force. those could be due to some unseen force. I just don't know. But I believe there I just don't know. But I believe there I just don't know. But I believe there are things that happen beyond our things that happen beyond our things that happen beyond our understanding and beyond our ability to understanding and beyond our ability to understanding and beyond our ability to predict. &gt;&gt; Well, in addition to your book &gt;&gt; Well, in addition to your book &gt;&gt; Well, in addition to your book &gt;&gt; um and your podcast, um if somebody is &gt;&gt; um and your podcast, um if somebody is &gt;&gt; um and your podcast, um if somebody is interested in exploring these questions, interested in exploring these questions, interested in exploring these questions, they want to live in the question, which they want to live in the question, which they want to live in the question, which it sounds like you're doing, right? it sounds like you're doing, right? it sounds like you're doing, right? You're living very much so living in the You're living very much so living in the You're living very much so living in the question um question um question um of is there a God? what role does of is there a God? what role does of is there a God? what role does God play um in one's life etc. If God play um in one's life etc. If God play um in one's life etc. If somebody's interested in exploring those somebody's interested in exploring those somebody's interested in exploring those questions in addition to reading your questions in addition to reading your questions in addition to reading your book and listening to your podcast which book and listening to your podcast which book and listening to your podcast which they definitely should do because I they definitely should do because I they definitely should do because I think it provides a really u elegant think it provides a really u elegant think it provides a really u elegant framework for how to approach these framework for how to approach these framework for how to approach these things um what else do you recommend? Um things um what else do you recommend? Um things um what else do you recommend? Um you know you are in a position to make you know you are in a position to make you know you are in a position to make recommendations um understanding that recommendations um understanding that recommendations um understanding that people will make their choices either people will make their choices either people will make their choices either way. So, so let me take off my scientist way. So, so let me take off my scientist way. So, so let me take off my scientist hat for one moment and just talk to hat for one moment and just talk to hat for one moment and just talk to you as me. What I believe, um, you as me. What I believe, um, you as me. What I believe, um, if there is a God, I believe that it's a if there is a God, I believe that it's a if there is a God, I believe that it's a God who would care for all of God's God who would care for all of God's God who would care for all of God's creatures, that there wouldn't be one creatures, that there wouldn't be one creatures, that there wouldn't be one religion that is right. And what I've religion that is right. And what I've religion that is right. And what I've seen in enough different faith, the ones seen in enough different faith, the ones seen in enough different faith, the ones that have lasted a while and um that have lasted a while and um that have lasted a while and um meet people's needs, is that they meet people's needs, is that they meet people's needs, is that they provide ways to live better lives. And provide ways to live better lives. And provide ways to live better lives. And so I would say try on different ones. so I would say try on different ones. so I would say try on different ones. See what resonates with you. I mean See what resonates with you. I mean See what resonates with you. I mean people convert, people leave. And I people convert, people leave. And I people convert, people leave. And I think really there are multiple routes think really there are multiple routes think really there are multiple routes to God if God exists. And there are to God if God exists. And there are to God if God exists. And there are multiple ways to use this wisdom to multiple ways to use this wisdom to multiple ways to use this wisdom to improve your life if God doesn't exist. improve your life if God doesn't exist. improve your life if God doesn't exist. And it's okay to sample. It's okay to And it's okay to sample. It's okay to And it's okay to sample. It's okay to try. It's okay to ask your questions. try. It's okay to ask your questions. try. It's okay to ask your questions. But what I want to urge them to do is But what I want to urge them to do is But what I want to urge them to do is please don't just assume that there's no please don't just assume that there's no please don't just assume that there's no rational reason to think about religion. rational reason to think about religion. rational reason to think about religion. And the best piece of advice I can give And the best piece of advice I can give And the best piece of advice I can give you is a is advice that a wise rabbi you is a is advice that a wise rabbi you is a is advice that a wise rabbi once told me. And the Hebrew I'm not once told me. And the Hebrew I'm not once told me. And the Hebrew I'm not going to pronounce it correctly, but the going to pronounce it correctly, but the going to pronounce it correctly, but the Hebrew saying is Hebrew saying is Hebrew saying is venishma. And that basically means we venishma. And that basically means we venishma. And that basically means we will do and then we will understand. And will do and then we will understand. And will do and then we will understand. And this comes from when Moses in the book this comes from when Moses in the book this comes from when Moses in the book of Exodus was coming down from the of Exodus was coming down from the of Exodus was coming down from the mountain with the Ten Commandments and mountain with the Ten Commandments and mountain with the Ten Commandments and he was teaching the Israelites about it he was teaching the Israelites about it he was teaching the Israelites about it and they're like, "What? I don't quite and they're like, "What? I don't quite and they're like, "What? I don't quite understand this, but okay, I'm going to understand this, but okay, I'm going to understand this, but okay, I'm going to do it." And sometimes it's in the doing do it." And sometimes it's in the doing do it." And sometimes it's in the doing of the practice that the understanding of the practice that the understanding of the practice that the understanding comes later of why it's important or how comes later of why it's important or how comes later of why it's important or how it can help you. If you have to work out it can help you. If you have to work out it can help you. If you have to work out all the logic first, it can be an all the logic first, it can be an all the logic first, it can be an impediment. And so try. impediment. And so try. impediment. And so try. Thank you. I appreciate that and I know Thank you. I appreciate that and I know Thank you. I appreciate that and I know everyone will appreciate hearing that. everyone will appreciate hearing that. everyone will appreciate hearing that. &gt;&gt; I want to thank you for the work that &gt;&gt; I want to thank you for the work that &gt;&gt; I want to thank you for the work that you're doing in your laboratory and you're doing in your laboratory and you're doing in your laboratory and teaching um and the fact that you're teaching um and the fact that you're teaching um and the fact that you're writing books about hard topics writing books about hard topics writing books about hard topics &gt;&gt; and that you're coming to those hard &gt;&gt; and that you're coming to those hard &gt;&gt; and that you're coming to those hard topics. You know, topics. You know, topics. You know, &gt;&gt; you have tremendous support out there of &gt;&gt; you have tremendous support out there of &gt;&gt; you have tremendous support out there of course um but you know it's a bold thing course um but you know it's a bold thing course um but you know it's a bold thing for a scientist. Um for a scientist. Um for a scientist. Um &gt;&gt; don't do it before tenure. That's the &gt;&gt; don't do it before tenure. That's the &gt;&gt; don't do it before tenure. That's the advice that I have. Yeah, that's what I advice that I have. Yeah, that's what I advice that I have. Yeah, that's what I said about starting a podcast said about starting a podcast said about starting a podcast &gt;&gt; and that you're taking the time to come &gt;&gt; and that you're taking the time to come &gt;&gt; and that you're taking the time to come here today to teach and to educate. You here today to teach and to educate. You here today to teach and to educate. You have your own podcast and your book. have your own podcast and your book. have your own podcast and your book. We'll provide links to those in the show We'll provide links to those in the show We'll provide links to those in the show not captions obviously and um I'm a huge not captions obviously and um I'm a huge not captions obviously and um I'm a huge fan of your work. Today's conversation fan of your work. Today's conversation fan of your work. Today's conversation really reinforced for me a number of really reinforced for me a number of really reinforced for me a number of things. Um one, how important it is to things. Um one, how important it is to things. Um one, how important it is to live it in these very important live it in these very important live it in these very important questions regardless of where one lands questions regardless of where one lands questions regardless of where one lands or happens to be, regardless of what or happens to be, regardless of what or happens to be, regardless of what religion you were raised with or lack religion you were raised with or lack religion you were raised with or lack thereof. And also that you know there thereof. And also that you know there thereof. And also that you know there are a lot of questions that bind humans are a lot of questions that bind humans are a lot of questions that bind humans um and a lot of them are scary like what um and a lot of them are scary like what um and a lot of them are scary like what happens after I die you know what um happens after I die you know what um happens after I die you know what um what's the meaning of all this um you what's the meaning of all this um you what's the meaning of all this um you know is there a god those sorts of know is there a god those sorts of know is there a god those sorts of things and I feel like you're providing things and I feel like you're providing things and I feel like you're providing a very useful roadmap for people to a very useful roadmap for people to a very useful roadmap for people to continue to ask those questions without continue to ask those questions without continue to ask those questions without telling them what to believe certainly telling them what to believe certainly telling them what to believe certainly nor who to believe nor um if what nor who to believe nor um if what nor who to believe nor um if what they're hearing out there is correct or they're hearing out there is correct or they're hearing out there is correct or not but you're giving people a not but you're giving people a not but you're giving people a road map for how to pose was really good road map for how to pose was really good road map for how to pose was really good questions and I think the fact that um questions and I think the fact that um questions and I think the fact that um the data clearly show that there's the data clearly show that there's the data clearly show that there's benefit to practices. We keep coming benefit to practices. We keep coming benefit to practices. We keep coming back to this as you just did that back to this as you just did that back to this as you just did that practices and in the doing there's a lot practices and in the doing there's a lot practices and in the doing there's a lot of information. Um I hear a tacit of information. Um I hear a tacit of information. Um I hear a tacit message also that you know one shouldn't message also that you know one shouldn't message also that you know one shouldn't be worried that you're going to like get be worried that you're going to like get be worried that you're going to like get swept down the um the path of swept down the um the path of swept down the um the path of lack of self-control. It's it's actually lack of self-control. It's it's actually lack of self-control. It's it's actually about having more agency um in as one about having more agency um in as one about having more agency um in as one asks these questions. So, thank you for asks these questions. So, thank you for asks these questions. So, thank you for doing the work you do at every level. doing the work you do at every level. doing the work you do at every level. You're working at so many different You're working at so many different You're working at so many different levels um to explore these ideas and to levels um to explore these ideas and to levels um to explore these ideas and to educate people. Certainly, I've learned educate people. Certainly, I've learned educate people. Certainly, I've learned a ton today and I know our listeners a ton today and I know our listeners a ton today and I know our listeners have too. have too. have too. &gt;&gt; Well, thank you for having me on. I &gt;&gt; Well, thank you for having me on. I &gt;&gt; Well, thank you for having me on. I appreciate the opportunity. Oh, appreciate the opportunity. Oh, appreciate the opportunity. Oh, &gt;&gt; thank you. We'll come back again. Thank &gt;&gt; thank you. We'll come back again. Thank &gt;&gt; thank you. We'll come back again. Thank you for joining me for today's you for joining me for today's you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. David Denno. To find discussion with Dr. David Denno. To find discussion with Dr. David Denno. To find links to his research as well as to links to his research as well as to links to his research as well as to learn more about his books, including learn more about his books, including learn more about his books, including his most recent one entitled How God his most recent one entitled How God his most recent one entitled How God Works: The Science Behind the Benefits Works: The Science Behind the Benefits Works: The Science Behind the Benefits of Religion, please see the show note of Religion, please see the show note of Religion, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. David Denno. today's discussion with Dr. David Denno. today's discussion with Dr. David Denno. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]