Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing fitness. Fitness, of are discussing fitness. Fitness, of are discussing fitness. Fitness, of course, is vitally important for course, is vitally important for course, is vitally important for cardiovascular health, for strength, for cardiovascular health, for strength, for cardiovascular health, for strength, for endurance, for lifespan, for healthspan. endurance, for lifespan, for healthspan. endurance, for lifespan, for healthspan. I can't think of anyone out there that I can't think of anyone out there that I can't think of anyone out there that wouldn't want to have healthy hormonal wouldn't want to have healthy hormonal wouldn't want to have healthy hormonal function, healthy cardiovascular function, healthy cardiovascular function, healthy cardiovascular function, to live a long time and to function, to live a long time and to function, to live a long time and to feel vital, that is, to have a long feel vital, that is, to have a long feel vital, that is, to have a long healthspan as well as a long lifespan. healthspan as well as a long lifespan. healthspan as well as a long lifespan. Fitness and fitness protocols are Fitness and fitness protocols are Fitness and fitness protocols are tremendously powerful for developing all tremendously powerful for developing all tremendously powerful for developing all of that. However, despite there being an of that. However, despite there being an of that. However, despite there being an enormous amount of information out there enormous amount of information out there enormous amount of information out there on the internet, and in books, and on the internet, and in books, and on the internet, and in books, and elsewhere, it can be a bit overwhelming. elsewhere, it can be a bit overwhelming. elsewhere, it can be a bit overwhelming. So, today's episode is really designed So, today's episode is really designed So, today's episode is really designed to synthesize science-based tools that to synthesize science-based tools that to synthesize science-based tools that we've covered on the podcast, some with we've covered on the podcast, some with we've covered on the podcast, some with expert guests like Dr. Andy Galpin or expert guests like Dr. Andy Galpin or expert guests like Dr. Andy Galpin or Dr. Peter Attia, or world-renowned Dr. Peter Attia, or world-renowned Dr. Peter Attia, or world-renowned movement specialist Ido Portal, or movement specialist Ido Portal, or movement specialist Ido Portal, or physiotherapist and strength and physiotherapist and strength and physiotherapist and strength and conditioning coach Jeff Cavalier. We've conditioning coach Jeff Cavalier. We've conditioning coach Jeff Cavalier. We've had all of them as guests on the had all of them as guests on the had all of them as guests on the podcast, and each and every one of them podcast, and each and every one of them podcast, and each and every one of them provided a wealth of knowledge in terms provided a wealth of knowledge in terms provided a wealth of knowledge in terms of the various things that you can do to of the various things that you can do to of the various things that you can do to optimize very specific or multiple optimize very specific or multiple optimize very specific or multiple aspects of fitness. aspects of fitness. aspects of fitness. Today, we're going to do something a Today, we're going to do something a Today, we're going to do something a little bit different than usual. little bit different than usual. little bit different than usual. Typically, on the Huberman Lab podcast, Typically, on the Huberman Lab podcast, Typically, on the Huberman Lab podcast, I offer mechanism up front, or first, I offer mechanism up front, or first, I offer mechanism up front, or first, and then we talk about protocols that and then we talk about protocols that and then we talk about protocols that you can use that really lean on those you can use that really lean on those you can use that really lean on those science and science-based mechanisms. science and science-based mechanisms. science and science-based mechanisms. Today, I'm going to describe a specific Today, I'm going to describe a specific Today, I'm going to describe a specific protocol that serves as a general protocol that serves as a general protocol that serves as a general template that anyone, in fact, everyone template that anyone, in fact, everyone template that anyone, in fact, everyone can use in order to maximize all aspects can use in order to maximize all aspects can use in order to maximize all aspects of fitness, so that includes endurance, of fitness, so that includes endurance, of fitness, so that includes endurance, strength, flexibility, hypertrophy, strength, flexibility, hypertrophy, strength, flexibility, hypertrophy, aesthetic changes, et cetera. aesthetic changes, et cetera. aesthetic changes, et cetera. However, this general framework can also However, this general framework can also However, this general framework can also be modified, that is, customized to your be modified, that is, customized to your be modified, that is, customized to your particular needs. So, if you're somebody particular needs. So, if you're somebody particular needs. So, if you're somebody who really wants to build more strength who really wants to build more strength who really wants to build more strength or bigger muscles, you can change the or bigger muscles, you can change the or bigger muscles, you can change the protocol and the overall program protocol and the overall program protocol and the overall program according to that. And I'll talk about according to that. And I'll talk about according to that. And I'll talk about very specific ways to do that. Or if very specific ways to do that. Or if very specific ways to do that. Or if you're somebody who really just wants to you're somebody who really just wants to you're somebody who really just wants to maintain strength, but you want to build maintain strength, but you want to build maintain strength, but you want to build endurance, we'll talk about that. endurance, we'll talk about that. endurance, we'll talk about that. And of course we will cover real life And of course we will cover real life And of course we will cover real life issues such as should you train if you issues such as should you train if you issues such as should you train if you are sleep deprived? What about food? are sleep deprived? What about food? are sleep deprived? What about food? When should you eat? What if you haven't When should you eat? What if you haven't When should you eat? What if you haven't eaten and you're hungry? Should you eaten and you're hungry? Should you eaten and you're hungry? Should you still train? Etc. We're going to still train? Etc. We're going to still train? Etc. We're going to cover all of that again in the context cover all of that again in the context cover all of that again in the context of this what I would call foundational of this what I would call foundational of this what I would call foundational template of fitness. This foundational template of fitness. This foundational template of fitness. This foundational template of fitness is something that I template of fitness is something that I template of fitness is something that I personally use. In fact, I've used it personally use. In fact, I've used it personally use. In fact, I've used it for over three decades. Hard to believe for over three decades. Hard to believe for over three decades. Hard to believe that I'm that old, but I just recently that I'm that old, but I just recently that I'm that old, but I just recently turned 47 and I still use this basic turned 47 and I still use this basic turned 47 and I still use this basic protocol or template across the week and protocol or template across the week and protocol or template across the week and modify it according to what my modify it according to what my modify it according to what my particular goals are that year, that particular goals are that year, that particular goals are that year, that month, even that day because I like you month, even that day because I like you month, even that day because I like you live in the real world and sometimes live in the real world and sometimes live in the real world and sometimes I've been traveling or I miss a workout. I've been traveling or I miss a workout. I've been traveling or I miss a workout. Yes, it does happen. Or life isn't Yes, it does happen. Or life isn't Yes, it does happen. Or life isn't organized in exactly the way that I need organized in exactly the way that I need organized in exactly the way that I need to in order to have everything go to in order to have everything go to in order to have everything go according to the protocol that's on according to the protocol that's on according to the protocol that's on paper. So we're going to discuss real paper. So we're going to discuss real paper. So we're going to discuss real world issues and how to work with the world issues and how to work with the world issues and how to work with the real world issues in order to get the real world issues in order to get the real world issues in order to get the most out of your fitness program. And most out of your fitness program. And most out of your fitness program. And again, by the end of today's program, I again, by the end of today's program, I again, by the end of today's program, I can assure you will have can assure you will have can assure you will have a template protocol that you can build a template protocol that you can build a template protocol that you can build up from, build out, change and modify up from, build out, change and modify up from, build out, change and modify and that will really serve your fitness and that will really serve your fitness and that will really serve your fitness goals according to the science and what goals according to the science and what goals according to the science and what peer-reviewed studies and the experts peer-reviewed studies and the experts peer-reviewed studies and the experts that have appeared on this podcast and that have appeared on this podcast and that have appeared on this podcast and other podcasts really tell us is best other podcasts really tell us is best other podcasts really tell us is best and optimal for our fitness. I'm pleased and optimal for our fitness. I'm pleased and optimal for our fitness. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab to announce that the Huberman Lab to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast has now launched a premium Podcast has now launched a premium Podcast has now launched a premium channel. I want to be very clear that channel. I want to be very clear that channel. I want to be very clear that the Huberman Lab Podcast will continue the Huberman Lab Podcast will continue the Huberman Lab Podcast will continue to be released every Monday at zero cost to be released every Monday at zero cost to be released every Monday at zero cost to consumer and there will be no change to consumer and there will be no change to consumer and there will be no change in the format of these podcasts. The in the format of these podcasts. The in the format of these podcasts. The premium channel is a response to the premium channel is a response to the premium channel is a response to the many questions we get about specific many questions we get about specific many questions we get about specific topics and it will allow me to really topics and it will allow me to really topics and it will allow me to really drill deep into specific answers related drill deep into specific answers related drill deep into specific answers related to those topics. So once a month I'm to those topics. So once a month I'm to those topics. So once a month I'm going to host an ask me anything, going to host an ask me anything, going to host an ask me anything, so-called AMA, where you can ask me so-called AMA, where you can ask me so-called AMA, where you can ask me anything about specific topics covered anything about specific topics covered anything about specific topics covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast and I will on the Huberman Lab Podcast and I will on the Huberman Lab Podcast and I will answer those questions. Those of course answer those questions. Those of course answer those questions. Those of course will be recorded. There will also be will be recorded. There will also be will be recorded. There will also be other premium content available to other premium content available to other premium content available to premium subscribers, such as transcripts premium subscribers, such as transcripts premium subscribers, such as transcripts and short videos of new tools and unique and short videos of new tools and unique and short videos of new tools and unique tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If you want to health, and performance. If you want to health, and performance. If you want to check out the premium channel, you can check out the premium channel, you can check out the premium channel, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium. go to hubermanlab.com/premium. go to hubermanlab.com/premium. There is a $10 a month charge or $100 There is a $10 a month charge or $100 There is a $10 a month charge or $100 per year and I should mention that a per year and I should mention that a per year and I should mention that a large portion of the proceeds from the large portion of the proceeds from the large portion of the proceeds from the Huberman Lab premium channel will go to Huberman Lab premium channel will go to Huberman Lab premium channel will go to support scientific research that support scientific research that support scientific research that develops the very sorts of tools that we develops the very sorts of tools that we develops the very sorts of tools that we talk about on the Huberman Lab Podcast. talk about on the Huberman Lab Podcast. talk about on the Huberman Lab Podcast. The rest of the support for the Huberman The rest of the support for the Huberman The rest of the support for the Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel will go to Lab Podcast premium channel will go to Lab Podcast premium channel will go to supporting the regular Huberman Lab supporting the regular Huberman Lab supporting the regular Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's Podcast. Again, that's Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Before we dive into today's content Before we dive into today's content Before we dive into today's content about fitness and fitness protocols, I about fitness and fitness protocols, I about fitness and fitness protocols, I want to tell you about a brand new study want to tell you about a brand new study want to tell you about a brand new study that is very exciting and frankly very that is very exciting and frankly very that is very exciting and frankly very unusual. This is a study that was published out This is a study that was published out This is a study that was published out of the University of Houston examining a of the University of Houston examining a of the University of Houston examining a what I would call a micro exercise or a what I would call a micro exercise or a what I would call a micro exercise or a micro movement. It's a very small micro movement. It's a very small micro movement. It's a very small movement of a very small movement of a very small movement of a very small portion of your body, in fact just 1% of portion of your body, in fact just 1% of portion of your body, in fact just 1% of your musculature, that when it's your musculature, that when it's your musculature, that when it's performed continuously while seated, has performed continuously while seated, has performed continuously while seated, has at least what they report are very at least what they report are very at least what they report are very dramatic positive changes in terms of dramatic positive changes in terms of dramatic positive changes in terms of blood sugar utilization and metabolism. blood sugar utilization and metabolism. blood sugar utilization and metabolism. So the title of this study is a potent So the title of this study is a potent So the title of this study is a potent physiological method to magnify and physiological method to magnify and physiological method to magnify and sustain soleus oxidative metabolism sustain soleus oxidative metabolism sustain soleus oxidative metabolism improves glucose and lipid regulation. improves glucose and lipid regulation. improves glucose and lipid regulation. This study was published in iScience and This study was published in iScience and This study was published in iScience and as I mentioned earlier, it is getting a as I mentioned earlier, it is getting a as I mentioned earlier, it is getting a lot of attention and it's very unusual. lot of attention and it's very unusual. lot of attention and it's very unusual. Without going into all the details of Without going into all the details of Without going into all the details of the study, let me just briefly give you the study, let me just briefly give you the study, let me just briefly give you a little bit of the background. First of a little bit of the background. First of a little bit of the background. First of all, you have a muscle called the all, you have a muscle called the all, you have a muscle called the soleus. The soleus muscle is a more or soleus. The soleus muscle is a more or soleus. The soleus muscle is a more or less wide, flat muscle that sits beneath less wide, flat muscle that sits beneath less wide, flat muscle that sits beneath what most people think of as their calf, what most people think of as their calf, what most people think of as their calf, although it's part of the calf muscle. although it's part of the calf muscle. although it's part of the calf muscle. The other portion of the calf is called The other portion of the calf is called The other portion of the calf is called the gastrocnemius. The soleus sits below the gastrocnemius. The soleus sits below the gastrocnemius. The soleus sits below that. Now, the soleus muscle is a unique that. Now, the soleus muscle is a unique that. Now, the soleus muscle is a unique muscle because it's largely slow-twitch muscle because it's largely slow-twitch muscle because it's largely slow-twitch muscle fibers. It's designed to be used muscle fibers. It's designed to be used muscle fibers. It's designed to be used continuously over and over again for continuously over and over again for continuously over and over again for stabilizing your body when you're stabilizing your body when you're stabilizing your body when you're standing upright, standing upright, standing upright, for walking. This is a muscle that's for walking. This is a muscle that's for walking. This is a muscle that's designed to contract over and over and designed to contract over and over and designed to contract over and over and over again. In fact, you could walk all over again. In fact, you could walk all over again. In fact, you could walk all day on this muscle and most likely it day on this muscle and most likely it day on this muscle and most likely it would not get sore. would not get sore. would not get sore. And you've probably done that and it did And you've probably done that and it did And you've probably done that and it did not get sore. not get sore. not get sore. In contrast, a muscle like your bicep or In contrast, a muscle like your bicep or In contrast, a muscle like your bicep or your tricep, if I were to have you your tricep, if I were to have you your tricep, if I were to have you perform hundreds or thousands of perform hundreds or thousands of perform hundreds or thousands of repetitions, even with a very light repetitions, even with a very light repetitions, even with a very light weight, you know, 1-lb weight or 2-lb weight, you know, 1-lb weight or 2-lb weight, you know, 1-lb weight or 2-lb weight, eventually it would fatigue. weight, eventually it would fatigue. weight, eventually it would fatigue. You would feel a sort of a burn there. You would feel a sort of a burn there. You would feel a sort of a burn there. It's a very unusual set of muscles to It's a very unusual set of muscles to It's a very unusual set of muscles to use repeatedly. But, the soleus is an use repeatedly. But, the soleus is an use repeatedly. But, the soleus is an unusual muscle in that it really is unusual muscle in that it really is unusual muscle in that it really is designed to be used continuously. Now, designed to be used continuously. Now, designed to be used continuously. Now, this study was focused on how people who this study was focused on how people who this study was focused on how people who sit a lot of the day and don't have the sit a lot of the day and don't have the sit a lot of the day and don't have the opportunity for a lot of physical opportunity for a lot of physical opportunity for a lot of physical movement or maybe who don't even movement or maybe who don't even movement or maybe who don't even exercise at all exercise at all exercise at all can improve their metabolism and glucose can improve their metabolism and glucose can improve their metabolism and glucose utilization. Without going into a deep utilization. Without going into a deep utilization. Without going into a deep dive about glucose utilization, because dive about glucose utilization, because dive about glucose utilization, because we've done the deep dive on this podcast we've done the deep dive on this podcast we've done the deep dive on this podcast episodes such as metabolism, et cetera, episodes such as metabolism, et cetera, episodes such as metabolism, et cetera, you can look those up at you can look those up at you can look those up at hubermanlab.com. They're all hubermanlab.com. They're all hubermanlab.com. They're all time-stamped and available there. time-stamped and available there. time-stamped and available there. Anytime you eat, your blood sugar goes Anytime you eat, your blood sugar goes Anytime you eat, your blood sugar goes up to some extent, so your blood up to some extent, so your blood up to some extent, so your blood glucose, as it's called, goes up to some glucose, as it's called, goes up to some glucose, as it's called, goes up to some extent, and then insulin is a hormone extent, and then insulin is a hormone extent, and then insulin is a hormone that's used to that's used to that's used to essentially chaperone and sequester and essentially chaperone and sequester and essentially chaperone and sequester and use that blood glucose. Or use that blood glucose. Or use that blood glucose. Or basically, the idea is you don't want basically, the idea is you don't want basically, the idea is you don't want blood glucose to go too high. blood glucose to go too high. blood glucose to go too high. Hyperinsulinemia is something associated with blood is something associated with blood is something associated with blood glucose that's too high because insulin glucose that's too high because insulin glucose that's too high because insulin goes up to essentially match the level goes up to essentially match the level goes up to essentially match the level of blood glucose. You don't also don't of blood glucose. You don't also don't of blood glucose. You don't also don't want to be hypoglycemic. You don't want to be hypoglycemic. You don't want to be hypoglycemic. You don't want to have blood sugar to have blood sugar to have blood sugar that's too low. And insulin is involved that's too low. And insulin is involved that's too low. And insulin is involved in both regulating peaks and troughs in both regulating peaks and troughs in both regulating peaks and troughs in blood sugar, blood glucose. So, we can blood sugar, blood glucose. So, we can blood sugar, blood glucose. So, we can basically say, and this is very simple, basically say, and this is very simple, basically say, and this is very simple, but we can basically say that you don't but we can basically say that you don't but we can basically say that you don't want blood glucose to be elevated too want blood glucose to be elevated too want blood glucose to be elevated too much or for too long. That's not good. much or for too long. That's not good. much or for too long. That's not good. In fact, people who have diabetes In fact, people who have diabetes In fact, people who have diabetes because they don't make insulin, people because they don't make insulin, people because they don't make insulin, people with type 1 diabetes do not make insulin with type 1 diabetes do not make insulin with type 1 diabetes do not make insulin at all, their blood glucose has is so at all, their blood glucose has is so at all, their blood glucose has is so high that they actually have to take high that they actually have to take high that they actually have to take insulin in order to regulate it. insulin in order to regulate it. insulin in order to regulate it. Otherwise, their blood glucose can go so Otherwise, their blood glucose can go so Otherwise, their blood glucose can go so high that it can damage cells and damage high that it can damage cells and damage high that it can damage cells and damage organs. It can even kill people. organs. It can even kill people. organs. It can even kill people. People with type 2 diabetes are People with type 2 diabetes are People with type 2 diabetes are so-called insulin insensitive. They make so-called insulin insensitive. They make so-called insulin insensitive. They make insulin, but the receptors to insulin insulin, but the receptors to insulin insulin, but the receptors to insulin are not sensitive to it. And so, they are not sensitive to it. And so, they are not sensitive to it. And so, they make more insulin than normally would be make more insulin than normally would be make more insulin than normally would be made, and blood glucose isn't regulated made, and blood glucose isn't regulated made, and blood glucose isn't regulated properly, etc., etc. properly, etc., etc. properly, etc., etc. The take-home message about blood The take-home message about blood The take-home message about blood glucose is that you want your blood glucose is that you want your blood glucose is that you want your blood glucose levels to go up when you eat, glucose levels to go up when you eat, glucose levels to go up when you eat, but not too high, and you don't want but not too high, and you don't want but not too high, and you don't want them to stay elevated for too long. them to stay elevated for too long. them to stay elevated for too long. This study looked at how people who are This study looked at how people who are This study looked at how people who are largely sedentary, or at least sitting, largely sedentary, or at least sitting, largely sedentary, or at least sitting, can increase the utilization, the can increase the utilization, the can increase the utilization, the clearance of glucose from the clearance of glucose from the clearance of glucose from the bloodstream after eating. And they also bloodstream after eating. And they also bloodstream after eating. And they also looked at overall metabolism for people, looked at overall metabolism for people, looked at overall metabolism for people, get this, that were using just that 1% get this, that were using just that 1% get this, that were using just that 1% of muscle, the soleus, by doing it what of muscle, the soleus, by doing it what of muscle, the soleus, by doing it what they call a soleus push-up. So, the they call a soleus push-up. So, the they call a soleus push-up. So, the soleus push-up can be described very soleus push-up can be described very soleus push-up can be described very simply as if you're sitting down with simply as if you're sitting down with simply as if you're sitting down with your knee bent at an approximately right your knee bent at an approximately right your knee bent at an approximately right angle, like a square corner, and pushing up, or like a square corner, and pushing up, or like a square corner, and pushing up, or I should say lifting your heel while I should say lifting your heel while I should say lifting your heel while pushing down on your toe, and pushing down on your toe, and pushing down on your toe, and contracting the calf muscle, as it were, contracting the calf muscle, as it were, contracting the calf muscle, as it were, and then lowering the heel, and then in and then lowering the heel, and then in and then lowering the heel, and then in lifting the heel again, lowering the lifting the heel again, lowering the lifting the heel again, lowering the heel, lifting the heel again. Each one heel, lifting the heel again. Each one heel, lifting the heel again. Each one of those is what they call a soleus of those is what they call a soleus of those is what they call a soleus push-up. This study had people continuously do This study had people continuously do This study had people continuously do soleus push-ups, soleus push-ups, soleus push-ups, and they looked at things like blood and they looked at things like blood and they looked at things like blood glucose utilization, they looked at glucose utilization, they looked at glucose utilization, they looked at metabolism, and so on. Now, a couple of metabolism, and so on. Now, a couple of metabolism, and so on. Now, a couple of important things about this study before important things about this study before important things about this study before I tell you what they discovered, which I tell you what they discovered, which I tell you what they discovered, which was, frankly, pretty miraculous, almost was, frankly, pretty miraculous, almost was, frankly, pretty miraculous, almost hard to believe, and yet I believe the hard to believe, and yet I believe the hard to believe, and yet I believe the data. The data look to be collected data. The data look to be collected data. The data look to be collected quite well, and there are a lot of quite well, and there are a lot of quite well, and there are a lot of statistics, and the study looks to be statistics, and the study looks to be statistics, and the study looks to be quite thorough. First of all, they used quite thorough. First of all, they used quite thorough. First of all, they used an equal number of male and female an equal number of male and female an equal number of male and female subjects. There were wide range of body subjects. There were wide range of body subjects. There were wide range of body mass indices, okay? So, this wasn't just mass indices, okay? So, this wasn't just mass indices, okay? So, this wasn't just super fit people or people that were super fit people or people that were super fit people or people that were purely sedentary not fit. They used a purely sedentary not fit. They used a purely sedentary not fit. They used a wide variety of ages, time of day, wide variety of ages, time of day, wide variety of ages, time of day, people who tended to walk a lot or not people who tended to walk a lot or not people who tended to walk a lot or not walk a lot. They measured changes in walk a lot. They measured changes in walk a lot. They measured changes in metabolism and blood glucose utilization metabolism and blood glucose utilization metabolism and blood glucose utilization in people that had done these soleus in people that had done these soleus in people that had done these soleus push-ups while seated in the laboratory. push-ups while seated in the laboratory. push-ups while seated in the laboratory. And I must say they had them do these And I must say they had them do these And I must say they had them do these soleus push-ups for quite a long while soleus push-ups for quite a long while soleus push-ups for quite a long while continuously. So, they had them do it continuously. So, they had them do it continuously. So, they had them do it for as long as 270 minutes total for as long as 270 minutes total for as long as 270 minutes total throughout the day. So, if you divide throughout the day. So, if you divide throughout the day. So, if you divide that, that's 4 and 1/2 hours. You might that, that's 4 and 1/2 hours. You might that, that's 4 and 1/2 hours. You might say, "Well, 4 and 1/2 hours of lifting say, "Well, 4 and 1/2 hours of lifting say, "Well, 4 and 1/2 hours of lifting the heel and putting the heel down, the heel and putting the heel down, the heel and putting the heel down, lifting the heel, putting the heel down. lifting the heel, putting the heel down. lifting the heel, putting the heel down. That's a lot." But, they didn't always That's a lot." But, they didn't always That's a lot." But, they didn't always do it continuously. They had some breaks do it continuously. They had some breaks do it continuously. They had some breaks in there. So, this is the sort of thing in there. So, this is the sort of thing in there. So, this is the sort of thing that you could imagine you or other that you could imagine you or other that you could imagine you or other people could do while seated, while people could do while seated, while people could do while seated, while doing zooms, or doing zooms, or doing zooms, or uh while on calls, or maybe even while on calls, or maybe even while on calls, or maybe even while eating, doing that sort of thing. eating, doing that sort of thing. eating, doing that sort of thing. Although, I'm not suggesting that you Although, I'm not suggesting that you Although, I'm not suggesting that you constantly be focusing on soleus constantly be focusing on soleus constantly be focusing on soleus push-ups throughout your life. The point push-ups throughout your life. The point push-ups throughout your life. The point is that people who did these soleus is that people who did these soleus is that people who did these soleus push-ups experienced dramatic push-ups experienced dramatic push-ups experienced dramatic improvements in blood sugar regulation improvements in blood sugar regulation improvements in blood sugar regulation and in metabolism despite the fact that and in metabolism despite the fact that and in metabolism despite the fact that the soleus is just 1% of the total the soleus is just 1% of the total the soleus is just 1% of the total musculature. So, here I'm going to read musculature. So, here I'm going to read musculature. So, here I'm going to read from the abstract about what they found. from the abstract about what they found. from the abstract about what they found. People who did these soleus push-ups People who did these soleus push-ups People who did these soleus push-ups despite being a tiny muscle and using very being a tiny muscle and using very being a tiny muscle and using very little local energy. In fact, they little local energy. In fact, they little local energy. In fact, they measured muscle glycogen, the burn or measured muscle glycogen, the burn or measured muscle glycogen, the burn or essentially the utilization of fuel essentially the utilization of fuel essentially the utilization of fuel within the muscle, and there was very within the muscle, and there was very within the muscle, and there was very little utilization of fuel within the little utilization of fuel within the little utilization of fuel within the soleus itself. And that's because the soleus itself. And that's because the soleus itself. And that's because the soleus has this unique property of soleus has this unique property of soleus has this unique property of needing to basically keep you going all needing to basically keep you going all needing to basically keep you going all day, walking all day, or moving all day. day, walking all day, or moving all day. day, walking all day, or moving all day. What they saw was a large magnitude What they saw was a large magnitude What they saw was a large magnitude for example, 52% less postprandial, for example, 52% less postprandial, for example, 52% less postprandial, that's after a meal, glucose excursion. that's after a meal, glucose excursion. that's after a meal, glucose excursion. So, 52% less increase in blood glucose. So, 52% less increase in blood glucose. So, 52% less increase in blood glucose. And 60% 6 0 less hyperinsulinemia, so And 60% 6 0 less hyperinsulinemia, so And 60% 6 0 less hyperinsulinemia, so reduced levels of insulin. They also reduced levels of insulin. They also reduced levels of insulin. They also miraculously observed that despite this miraculously observed that despite this miraculously observed that despite this being again a small being again a small being again a small muscle, 1% of the total muscle mass, so muscle, 1% of the total muscle mass, so muscle, 1% of the total muscle mass, so very small oxidative use, they saw big very small oxidative use, they saw big very small oxidative use, they saw big improvements in systemic metabolic improvements in systemic metabolic improvements in systemic metabolic regulation. So, this is interesting and regulation. So, this is interesting and regulation. So, this is interesting and I think I think I think something that we should at least know something that we should at least know something that we should at least know about. I'm not aware that anyone's about. I'm not aware that anyone's about. I'm not aware that anyone's replicated this study yet. I know replicated this study yet. I know replicated this study yet. I know there's a ton of excitement about this there's a ton of excitement about this there's a ton of excitement about this study in the popular press, and if the study in the popular press, and if the study in the popular press, and if the data turn out to hold up, which I like data turn out to hold up, which I like data turn out to hold up, which I like to imagine they will, to imagine they will, to imagine they will, I can understand why there's so much I can understand why there's so much I can understand why there's so much excitement. What this means is that if excitement. What this means is that if excitement. What this means is that if you're somebody who cares about blood you're somebody who cares about blood you're somebody who cares about blood glucose regulation, you want to keep glucose regulation, you want to keep glucose regulation, you want to keep your metabolism running, your metabolism running, your metabolism running, please don't stop exercising the other please don't stop exercising the other please don't stop exercising the other ways that you exercise. But, if you're ways that you exercise. But, if you're ways that you exercise. But, if you're somebody who wants to maximize your somebody who wants to maximize your somebody who wants to maximize your health, doing these soleus push-ups health, doing these soleus push-ups health, doing these soleus push-ups fairly continuously while seated is fairly continuously while seated is fairly continuously while seated is going to be beneficial. going to be beneficial. going to be beneficial. And in addition to that, I know that And in addition to that, I know that And in addition to that, I know that there're going to be people out there there're going to be people out there there're going to be people out there who, for instance, might be injured, or who, for instance, might be injured, or who, for instance, might be injured, or you're traveling and you're stuck on a you're traveling and you're stuck on a you're traveling and you're stuck on a plane, or you're in the classroom and plane, or you're in the classroom and plane, or you're in the classroom and you're forced to study all day or take you're forced to study all day or take you're forced to study all day or take notes all day. You're just not getting notes all day. You're just not getting notes all day. You're just not getting enough opportunity to get those steps enough opportunity to get those steps enough opportunity to get those steps that you want to take, whether or not that you want to take, whether or not that you want to take, whether or not it's 10,000 or fewer or more, getting it's 10,000 or fewer or more, getting it's 10,000 or fewer or more, getting enough steps or movement. Maybe you enough steps or movement. Maybe you enough steps or movement. Maybe you don't have time to get out and do your don't have time to get out and do your don't have time to get out and do your run, or maybe you're also running, run, or maybe you're also running, run, or maybe you're also running, weightlifting, and doing yoga classes weightlifting, and doing yoga classes weightlifting, and doing yoga classes and things of that sort, but you want to and things of that sort, but you want to and things of that sort, but you want to further improve your fitness, at least further improve your fitness, at least further improve your fitness, at least in terms of your metabolic health. This in terms of your metabolic health. This in terms of your metabolic health. This seems like a terrific, very seems like a terrific, very seems like a terrific, very low-investment way to do it, certainly low-investment way to do it, certainly low-investment way to do it, certainly zero cost. It does take a little bit of zero cost. It does take a little bit of zero cost. It does take a little bit of attention, so you have to divert your attention, so you have to divert your attention, so you have to divert your attention from other things you're doing attention from other things you're doing attention from other things you're doing to make sure that you're still doing to make sure that you're still doing to make sure that you're still doing these soleus push-ups. I'm sure that these soleus push-ups. I'm sure that these soleus push-ups. I'm sure that many of you are going to have a lot of many of you are going to have a lot of many of you are going to have a lot of detailed questions such as, you know, detailed questions such as, you know, detailed questions such as, you know, how high did they lift the heel, and did how high did they lift the heel, and did how high did they lift the heel, and did they contract the muscle very hard or they contract the muscle very hard or they contract the muscle very hard or not. Couple of things about that, they did Couple of things about that, they did Couple of things about that, they did not have subjects really contract the not have subjects really contract the not have subjects really contract the muscle hard. They did measure the angle muscle hard. They did measure the angle muscle hard. They did measure the angle of heel raise, um and it was anywhere of heel raise, um and it was anywhere of heel raise, um and it was anywhere from 10 to 15 degrees, so you they from 10 to 15 degrees, so you they from 10 to 15 degrees, so you they didn't have to go way, way up on their didn't have to go way, way up on their didn't have to go way, way up on their tippy toes or things of that sort. tippy toes or things of that sort. tippy toes or things of that sort. In any event, In any event, In any event, 270 minutes, 4 and 1/2 hours of doing 270 minutes, 4 and 1/2 hours of doing 270 minutes, 4 and 1/2 hours of doing these uh soleus push-ups is a lot, but these uh soleus push-ups is a lot, but these uh soleus push-ups is a lot, but by my read of the data and the rather by my read of the data and the rather by my read of the data and the rather significant, or I should say very significant, or I should say very significant, or I should say very significant, effects that they observed significant, effects that they observed significant, effects that they observed on blood glucose regulation and on blood glucose regulation and on blood glucose regulation and metabolism, et cetera, metabolism, et cetera, metabolism, et cetera, seems to me that doing less would still seems to me that doing less would still seems to me that doing less would still be beneficial be beneficial be beneficial and that you don't necessarily have to and that you don't necessarily have to and that you don't necessarily have to do the full 270 minutes in order to get do the full 270 minutes in order to get do the full 270 minutes in order to get the benefits that they observed. the benefits that they observed. the benefits that they observed. More about the study includes the fact More about the study includes the fact More about the study includes the fact that the benefits they observed were that the benefits they observed were that the benefits they observed were very long-lasting as long as 2 hours very long-lasting as long as 2 hours very long-lasting as long as 2 hours after a meal, they could still see this after a meal, they could still see this after a meal, they could still see this improved blood glucose utilization. I improved blood glucose utilization. I improved blood glucose utilization. I don't know because I wasn't able to find don't know because I wasn't able to find don't know because I wasn't able to find it in the methods whether or not they it in the methods whether or not they it in the methods whether or not they were doing the soleus push-ups while were doing the soleus push-ups while were doing the soleus push-ups while they were consuming um blood sugar in they were consuming um blood sugar in they were consuming um blood sugar in this study. this study. this study. The point being that if you're somebody The point being that if you're somebody The point being that if you're somebody who cares about their fitness, this who cares about their fitness, this who cares about their fitness, this study is interesting because what it study is interesting because what it study is interesting because what it means is that, again, if you are forced means is that, again, if you are forced means is that, again, if you are forced to be immobile or sitting longer than to be immobile or sitting longer than to be immobile or sitting longer than you would like, you would like, you would like, feel stuck in a meeting or zooms or feel stuck in a meeting or zooms or feel stuck in a meeting or zooms or class or on a plane, et cetera, class or on a plane, et cetera, class or on a plane, et cetera, or if you're simply trying to add a bit or if you're simply trying to add a bit or if you're simply trying to add a bit more of fitness and metabolic health to more of fitness and metabolic health to more of fitness and metabolic health to your overall regimen, soleus push-ups, your overall regimen, soleus push-ups, your overall regimen, soleus push-ups, at least to me, seem like a very low at least to me, seem like a very low at least to me, seem like a very low investment, simple, zero-cost tool to investment, simple, zero-cost tool to investment, simple, zero-cost tool to improve your metabolic health. For those improve your metabolic health. For those improve your metabolic health. For those of you that want to peruse the study in of you that want to peruse the study in of you that want to peruse the study in more detail, we will provide a link to more detail, we will provide a link to more detail, we will provide a link to this paper published in iScience in the this paper published in iScience in the this paper published in iScience in the show note caption. Before we begin, I'd show note caption. Before we begin, I'd show note caption. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring of my desire and effort to bring of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about zero-cost to consumer information about zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is today's podcast. Our first sponsor is today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals. Now, help you meet your health goals. Now, help you meet your health goals. Now, I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple regular blood work done for the simple regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that reason that many of the factors that reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term impact your immediate and long-term impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a health can only be analyzed from a health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with quality blood test. One issue with quality blood test. One issue with lot of blood tests and DNA tests out lot of blood tests and DNA tests out lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get there, however, is that you get there, however, is that you get information back about hormones, blood information back about hormones, blood information back about hormones, blood lipids, etc. But, you don't know what to lipids, etc. But, you don't know what to lipids, etc. But, you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker do with that information. InsideTracker do with that information. InsideTracker makes understanding all of that very makes understanding all of that very makes understanding all of that very easy, and even better, points to easy, and even better, points to easy, and even better, points to specific directives. That is, things you specific directives. That is, things you specific directives. That is, things you can do in terms of your lifestyle, your can do in terms of your lifestyle, your can do in terms of your lifestyle, your nutrition, supplementation, etc. in nutrition, supplementation, etc. in nutrition, supplementation, etc. in order to bring those numbers related to order to bring those numbers related to order to bring those numbers related to metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, etc. into the ranges that are optimal etc. into the ranges that are optimal etc. into the ranges that are optimal for you, your immediate and long-term for you, your immediate and long-term for you, your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to InsideTracker.com/huberman can go to InsideTracker.com/huberman can go to InsideTracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's InsideTracker.com/huberman plans. That's InsideTracker.com/huberman plans. That's InsideTracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also to get 20% off. Today's episode is also to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka. Roka makes brought to us by Roka. Roka makes brought to us by Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. The the absolute highest quality. The the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two All-American company was founded by two All-American company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything swimmers from Stanford, and everything swimmers from Stanford, and everything about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. were designed with performance in mind. were designed with performance in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the I've spent a lifetime working on the I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that visual system, and I can tell you that visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with your visual system has to contend with your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in an enormous number of challenges in an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly. order for you to be able to see clearly. order for you to be able to see clearly. Roka understands this, and has designed Roka understands this, and has designed Roka understands this, and has designed their sunglasses and eyeglasses to be their sunglasses and eyeglasses to be their sunglasses and eyeglasses to be worn in any number of different worn in any number of different worn in any number of different conditions, and for you to still be able conditions, and for you to still be able conditions, and for you to still be able to see with crystal clarity. Now, I wear to see with crystal clarity. Now, I wear to see with crystal clarity. Now, I wear eyeglasses at night when I work or when eyeglasses at night when I work or when eyeglasses at night when I work or when I drive, and I wear sunglasses during I drive, and I wear sunglasses during I drive, and I wear sunglasses during the day. I don't wear sunglasses when I the day. I don't wear sunglasses when I the day. I don't wear sunglasses when I get my morning sunlight viewing, a get my morning sunlight viewing, a get my morning sunlight viewing, a practice that I'm absolutely religious practice that I'm absolutely religious practice that I'm absolutely religious about every single morning. But, about every single morning. But, about every single morning. But, throughout the day, I'll wear sunglasses throughout the day, I'll wear sunglasses throughout the day, I'll wear sunglasses when I drive, or if I'm heading into when I drive, or if I'm heading into when I drive, or if I'm heading into bright sunlight to protect my eyes. bright sunlight to protect my eyes. bright sunlight to protect my eyes. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are terrific because they were designed for terrific because they were designed for terrific because they were designed for performance. So, they were designed for performance. So, they were designed for performance. So, they were designed for things like cycling and running. So, things like cycling and running. So, things like cycling and running. So, they won't slip off your face if they won't slip off your face if they won't slip off your face if they get sweaty. They're extremely get sweaty. They're extremely get sweaty. They're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time, lightweight. In fact, most of the time, lightweight. In fact, most of the time, I can't even remember that they're on my I can't even remember that they're on my I can't even remember that they're on my face. They're so lightweight. However, face. They're so lightweight. However, face. They're so lightweight. However, they also can be worn anywhere, to work, they also can be worn anywhere, to work, they also can be worn anywhere, to work, to dinner, etc. They have a terrific to dinner, etc. They have a terrific to dinner, etc. They have a terrific aesthetics. Unlike a lot of other aesthetics. Unlike a lot of other aesthetics. Unlike a lot of other performance eyeglasses out there that performance eyeglasses out there that performance eyeglasses out there that you can only find in designs that really you can only find in designs that really you can only find in designs that really make people look like a cyborg. Roka make people look like a cyborg. Roka make people look like a cyborg. Roka makes the cyborg versions. Some people makes the cyborg versions. Some people makes the cyborg versions. Some people like those, but they also make versions like those, but they also make versions like those, but they also make versions of their eyeglasses and sunglasses with of their eyeglasses and sunglasses with of their eyeglasses and sunglasses with frames that you can wear out to dinner, frames that you can wear out to dinner, frames that you can wear out to dinner, to work, etc. If you'd like to try Roka to work, etc. If you'd like to try Roka to work, etc. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses, go to eyeglasses and sunglasses, go to eyeglasses and sunglasses, go to roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first code Huberman to save 20% off your first code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com order. Again, that's roka.com order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are mattresses and pillows that are mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep needs. customized to your unique sleep needs. customized to your unique sleep needs. Sleep is the fundamental layer that is Sleep is the fundamental layer that is Sleep is the fundamental layer that is the most important aspect of mental the most important aspect of mental the most important aspect of mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I said that before on this performance. I said that before on this performance. I said that before on this podcast and I'm going to be saying it podcast and I'm going to be saying it podcast and I'm going to be saying it over and over again. If you're sleeping over and over again. If you're sleeping over and over again. If you're sleeping well, everything else is better and if well, everything else is better and if well, everything else is better and if you're not sleeping well, everything you're not sleeping well, everything you're not sleeping well, everything else gets far worse. So, sleep is vital else gets far worse. So, sleep is vital else gets far worse. So, sleep is vital and sleeping on the correct mattress is and sleeping on the correct mattress is and sleeping on the correct mattress is absolutely vital. Helix understands this absolutely vital. Helix understands this absolutely vital. Helix understands this and they have a brief quiz that you can and they have a brief quiz that you can and they have a brief quiz that you can take. So, you simply go to their take. So, you simply go to their take. So, you simply go to their website, you take this quiz, it asks you website, you take this quiz, it asks you website, you take this quiz, it asks you questions such as you tend to run hot or questions such as you tend to run hot or questions such as you tend to run hot or cold during the night, do you tend to cold during the night, do you tend to cold during the night, do you tend to sleep on your back, your side, or your sleep on your back, your side, or your sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach, or maybe you don't know and stomach, or maybe you don't know and stomach, or maybe you don't know and they match you to a mattress that's they match you to a mattress that's they match you to a mattress that's ideal for your particular sleep needs. ideal for your particular sleep needs. ideal for your particular sleep needs. For me, that was the Dusk mattress, For me, that was the Dusk mattress, For me, that was the Dusk mattress, DUSK. I've been sleeping on a Dusk DUSK. I've been sleeping on a Dusk DUSK. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress for well over a year now and it's the for well over a year now and it's the for well over a year now and it's the best sleep I've ever had. If you'd like best sleep I've ever had. If you'd like best sleep I've ever had. If you'd like to try Helix mattress, you can go to try Helix mattress, you can go to try Helix mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. Take that brief 2-minute sleep quiz and Take that brief 2-minute sleep quiz and Take that brief 2-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized mattress for your sleep needs. You'll mattress for your sleep needs. You'll mattress for your sleep needs. You'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders get up to $200 off all mattress orders get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, if you're and two free pillows. Again, if you're and two free pillows. Again, if you're interested, you go to interested, you go to interested, you go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. for up to $200 off and two free pillows. for up to $200 off and two free pillows. The Huberman Lab podcast is now The Huberman Lab podcast is now The Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. To partnered with Momentous supplements. To partnered with Momentous supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the find the supplements we discuss on the find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled OUS, livemomentous, spelled OUS, livemomentous, spelled OUS, livemomentous.com/huberman. And I should just mention that the And I should just mention that the And I should just mention that the library of those supplements is library of those supplements is library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's constantly expanding. Again, that's constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Let's talk about fitness and let's talk Let's talk about fitness and let's talk Let's talk about fitness and let's talk about how you can develop the optimal about how you can develop the optimal about how you can develop the optimal fitness protocols for you. So, that fitness protocols for you. So, that fitness protocols for you. So, that includes what to do each day of the week includes what to do each day of the week includes what to do each day of the week and your fitness protocol across the and your fitness protocol across the and your fitness protocol across the week and indeed across the month and the week and indeed across the month and the week and indeed across the month and the year and even year to year. year and even year to year. year and even year to year. When we had Dr. Andy Galpin on the When we had Dr. Andy Galpin on the When we had Dr. Andy Galpin on the podcast, he said something very podcast, he said something very podcast, he said something very important that we want to keep in mind important that we want to keep in mind important that we want to keep in mind today. Which is concepts are few, today. Which is concepts are few, today. Which is concepts are few, methods are many. That is, there are an methods are many. That is, there are an methods are many. That is, there are an infinite number of different programs infinite number of different programs infinite number of different programs and exercises and set and rep schemes and exercises and set and rep schemes and exercises and set and rep schemes and different runs and different runs and different runs and burpees and push-ups, etc., etc. that burpees and push-ups, etc., etc. that burpees and push-ups, etc., etc. that one can follow. However, one can follow. However, one can follow. However, there are really just a few basic there are really just a few basic there are really just a few basic concepts or principles of muscle concepts or principles of muscle concepts or principles of muscle physiology, of cardiovascular function, physiology, of cardiovascular function, physiology, of cardiovascular function, of connective tissue function that of connective tissue function that of connective tissue function that provide or set the basis for the provide or set the basis for the provide or set the basis for the adaptations that we call fitness or that adaptations that we call fitness or that adaptations that we call fitness or that lead to fitness. So, I'm going to list lead to fitness. So, I'm going to list lead to fitness. So, I'm going to list those off now. those off now. those off now. We can talk about a fitness protocol We can talk about a fitness protocol We can talk about a fitness protocol that's really aimed mainly toward that's really aimed mainly toward that's really aimed mainly toward developing skill. That's one. Or speed, developing skill. That's one. Or speed, developing skill. That's one. Or speed, that's another. that's another. that's another. Or power, which is speed times strength. Or power, which is speed times strength. Or power, which is speed times strength. Or specifically strength. Or specifically strength. Or specifically strength. Or hypertrophy, growth of muscles. Or hypertrophy, growth of muscles. Or hypertrophy, growth of muscles. Or endurance, such as muscular endurance. endurance, such as muscular endurance. endurance, such as muscular endurance. Muscular endurance is, for instance, Muscular endurance is, for instance, Muscular endurance is, for instance, your ability to stay in a plank position your ability to stay in a plank position your ability to stay in a plank position or to do a wall sit, you know, to sit on or to do a wall sit, you know, to sit on or to do a wall sit, you know, to sit on an invisible chair against a wall. an invisible chair against a wall. an invisible chair against a wall. Or other forms of endurance like Or other forms of endurance like Or other forms of endurance like near pure anaerobic endurance. So, a near pure anaerobic endurance. So, a near pure anaerobic endurance. So, a 1-minute sprint or less. Or a 1-minute sprint or less. Or a 1-minute sprint or less. Or a 1-minute all-out cycling on a stationary bike, all-out cycling on a stationary bike, all-out cycling on a stationary bike, this sort of thing. Or this sort of thing. Or this sort of thing. Or endurance that occurs in the kind of 3- endurance that occurs in the kind of 3- endurance that occurs in the kind of 3- to 12-minute total duration range. So, to 12-minute total duration range. So, to 12-minute total duration range. So, that might be that might be that might be sprints or high-intensity interval-type sprints or high-intensity interval-type sprints or high-intensity interval-type training. It could be a all-out swim. It training. It could be a all-out swim. It training. It could be a all-out swim. It could be all-out row. could be all-out row. could be all-out row. That's another form of endurance, taps That's another form of endurance, taps That's another form of endurance, taps into different fuel systems, different into different fuel systems, different into different fuel systems, different certain aspects of muscle physiology, certain aspects of muscle physiology, certain aspects of muscle physiology, etc. And then endurance that lasts 30 etc. And then endurance that lasts 30 etc. And then endurance that lasts 30 minutes or more, which is typically what minutes or more, which is typically what minutes or more, which is typically what people think about when they think about people think about when they think about people think about when they think about endurance. But, of course, the other endurance. But, of course, the other endurance. But, of course, the other forms of endurance matter. So, we've got forms of endurance matter. So, we've got forms of endurance matter. So, we've got skill, speed, power, strength, skill, speed, power, strength, skill, speed, power, strength, hypertrophy, muscular endurance, hypertrophy, muscular endurance, hypertrophy, muscular endurance, anaerobic endurance, anaerobic endurance, anaerobic endurance, what I would call 3- to 12-minute what I would call 3- to 12-minute what I would call 3- to 12-minute endurance, although it goes by other endurance, although it goes by other endurance, although it goes by other names as well, and 30 minutes or more names as well, and 30 minutes or more names as well, and 30 minutes or more endurance type exercise and adaptations. endurance type exercise and adaptations. endurance type exercise and adaptations. Each and every one of these Each and every one of these Each and every one of these requires different principles, different requires different principles, different requires different principles, different concepts, in order to improve concepts, in order to improve concepts, in order to improve say your muscular strength or your say your muscular strength or your say your muscular strength or your hypertrophy or both. However, there's a hypertrophy or both. However, there's a hypertrophy or both. However, there's a general theme that sits beneath all general theme that sits beneath all general theme that sits beneath all adaptations leading to fitness, and adaptations leading to fitness, and adaptations leading to fitness, and that's what we're really going to set that's what we're really going to set that's what we're really going to set down as the base layer, the foundation down as the base layer, the foundation down as the base layer, the foundation of everything we talk about today. And of everything we talk about today. And of everything we talk about today. And that's that we need to think about what that's that we need to think about what that's that we need to think about what are the modifiable variables. Again, I'm are the modifiable variables. Again, I'm are the modifiable variables. Again, I'm borrowing directly from the episode with borrowing directly from the episode with borrowing directly from the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. He was the one that Dr. Andy Galpin. He was the one that Dr. Andy Galpin. He was the one that said modifiable variables are the key said modifiable variables are the key said modifiable variables are the key thing to think about. What are you going thing to think about. What are you going thing to think about. What are you going to modify? What are you going to change to modify? What are you going to change to modify? What are you going to change in order to increase one or some of the in order to increase one or some of the in order to increase one or some of the various things I listed off before, various things I listed off before, various things I listed off before, skill, speed, power, strength, skill, speed, power, strength, skill, speed, power, strength, hypertrophy, endurance, etc., etc. hypertrophy, endurance, etc., etc. hypertrophy, endurance, etc., etc. And some of the key concepts that emerge some of the key concepts that emerge some of the key concepts that emerge from that discussion are that we need to from that discussion are that we need to from that discussion are that we need to think about progressive overload. think about progressive overload. think about progressive overload. Normally, when people hear about Normally, when people hear about Normally, when people hear about progressive overload, they think about progressive overload, they think about progressive overload, they think about adding more weight to a bar or picking adding more weight to a bar or picking adding more weight to a bar or picking up heavier dumbbells, but that could up heavier dumbbells, but that could up heavier dumbbells, but that could also be progressive overload in the also be progressive overload in the also be progressive overload in the context of running up a hill of steeper context of running up a hill of steeper context of running up a hill of steeper incline or running a little bit faster incline or running a little bit faster incline or running a little bit faster or a little bit further, and so on and or a little bit further, and so on and or a little bit further, and so on and so forth. Now, as I promised earlier, so forth. Now, as I promised earlier, so forth. Now, as I promised earlier, today we are not going to drill into today we are not going to drill into today we are not going to drill into each and every one of the mechanisms each and every one of the mechanisms each and every one of the mechanisms that underlie the different adaptations that underlie the different adaptations that underlie the different adaptations that are going to develop speed and that are going to develop speed and that are going to develop speed and strength and endurance, etc., because strength and endurance, etc., because strength and endurance, etc., because that was covered in the podcast with Dr. that was covered in the podcast with Dr. that was covered in the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin and the other podcasts with Andy Galpin and the other podcasts with Andy Galpin and the other podcasts with experts that I mentioned earlier. And we experts that I mentioned earlier. And we experts that I mentioned earlier. And we again will provide links to those again will provide links to those again will provide links to those podcasts if you want to drill into those podcasts if you want to drill into those podcasts if you want to drill into those mechanisms. Instead, what we're going to do is we're Instead, what we're going to do is we're Instead, what we're going to do is we're going to start with a program that going to start with a program that going to start with a program that essentially is designed for you to essentially is designed for you to essentially is designed for you to maximize all aspects of fitness to the maximize all aspects of fitness to the maximize all aspects of fitness to the extent that you can simultaneously extent that you can simultaneously extent that you can simultaneously maximize all aspects of fitness, but maximize all aspects of fitness, but maximize all aspects of fitness, but then to change or modify that protocol then to change or modify that protocol then to change or modify that protocol so that if you want to build up more, so that if you want to build up more, so that if you want to build up more, for strength, and you want to just for strength, and you want to just for strength, and you want to just hold on to the endurance you have, hold on to the endurance you have, hold on to the endurance you have, you don't want to build endurance, at you don't want to build endurance, at you don't want to build endurance, at least not in that week or that month, least not in that week or that month, least not in that week or that month, you can do that. Or if you want to you can do that. Or if you want to you can do that. Or if you want to improve your endurance while maintaining improve your endurance while maintaining improve your endurance while maintaining your strength, you can do that. your strength, you can do that. your strength, you can do that. And so on and so forth. And so on and so forth. And so on and so forth. Most people, I do believe, would like a Most people, I do believe, would like a Most people, I do believe, would like a combination of strength and endurance combination of strength and endurance combination of strength and endurance and flexibility and maybe even and flexibility and maybe even and flexibility and maybe even hypertrophy, particularly for certain hypertrophy, particularly for certain hypertrophy, particularly for certain muscle groups that maybe are not as well muscle groups that maybe are not as well muscle groups that maybe are not as well developed as other muscle groups. They developed as other muscle groups. They developed as other muscle groups. They want to bring balance to their physique, want to bring balance to their physique, want to bring balance to their physique, both for sake of aesthetics and for sake both for sake of aesthetics and for sake both for sake of aesthetics and for sake of health and for sake of, of health and for sake of, of health and for sake of, you know, general functioning, to maybe you know, general functioning, to maybe you know, general functioning, to maybe even to eliminate pain. The protocol even to eliminate pain. The protocol even to eliminate pain. The protocol that I'm going to describe really works that I'm going to describe really works that I'm going to describe really works as a foundational template for that as a foundational template for that as a foundational template for that as well. So, let's drill into that well. So, let's drill into that well. So, let's drill into that foundational protocol, and I'll keep foundational protocol, and I'll keep foundational protocol, and I'll keep referring to it as the foundational referring to it as the foundational referring to it as the foundational protocol, not because it's the one that protocol, not because it's the one that protocol, not because it's the one that I use, although it is the one that I use, although it is the one that I use, although it is the one that I use, and not because it's the one that use, and not because it's the one that use, and not because it's the one that we're talking about today, although it's we're talking about today, although it's we're talking about today, although it's the one we're talking about today, but the one we're talking about today, but the one we're talking about today, but because we need some general framework because we need some general framework because we need some general framework from which to build out the more from which to build out the more from which to build out the more specific protocols that we'll get into specific protocols that we'll get into specific protocols that we'll get into in a bit more detail later. So, in this in a bit more detail later. So, in this in a bit more detail later. So, in this foundational protocol for fitness, what foundational protocol for fitness, what foundational protocol for fitness, what you'll notice is that on any one given you'll notice is that on any one given you'll notice is that on any one given day, you're going to focus on one day, you're going to focus on one day, you're going to focus on one particular aspect of fitness. Maybe it's particular aspect of fitness. Maybe it's particular aspect of fitness. Maybe it's endurance, maybe it's strength, maybe endurance, maybe it's strength, maybe endurance, maybe it's strength, maybe it's hypertrophy. it's hypertrophy. it's hypertrophy. In particular, it might be hypertrophy In particular, it might be hypertrophy In particular, it might be hypertrophy for a particular muscle group or muscle for a particular muscle group or muscle for a particular muscle group or muscle groups. That said, across the entire week, it's That said, across the entire week, it's That said, across the entire week, it's designed to bring fitness and different designed to bring fitness and different designed to bring fitness and different forms of fitness forms of fitness forms of fitness to all aspects of your body. to all aspects of your body. to all aspects of your body. So, this particular protocol begins on So, this particular protocol begins on So, this particular protocol begins on Sunday, although Sunday, although Sunday, although that's simply the day that I happen to that's simply the day that I happen to that's simply the day that I happen to begin the protocol. And again, this begin the protocol. And again, this begin the protocol. And again, this protocol is not important because it's protocol is not important because it's protocol is not important because it's the one that I follow. I follow it the one that I follow. I follow it the one that I follow. I follow it because it is important. In other words, because it is important. In other words, because it is important. In other words, it's a protocol that's really gleaned it's a protocol that's really gleaned it's a protocol that's really gleaned from the scientific literature and the from the scientific literature and the from the scientific literature and the experts that is for you. So, this experts that is for you. So, this experts that is for you. So, this fitness protocol is really about you. I fitness protocol is really about you. I fitness protocol is really about you. I just may refer to it as the one that I just may refer to it as the one that I just may refer to it as the one that I follow simply for ease of communication. follow simply for ease of communication. follow simply for ease of communication. And for me, my week begins on Sunday. And for me, my week begins on Sunday. And for me, my week begins on Sunday. So, I So, I So, I do my very best to get a workout in on do my very best to get a workout in on do my very best to get a workout in on Sunday. And for me, that workout is that Sunday. And for me, that workout is that Sunday. And for me, that workout is that of a endurance workout. It's designed to of a endurance workout. It's designed to of a endurance workout. It's designed to either maintain or increase my either maintain or increase my either maintain or increase my endurance. And the endurance type that I'm And the endurance type that I'm And the endurance type that I'm referring to is endurance of 30 minutes referring to is endurance of 30 minutes referring to is endurance of 30 minutes or more. In fact, or more. In fact, or more. In fact, for me, the goal is always to get either for me, the goal is always to get either for me, the goal is always to get either 60 to 75 minutes of jogging. So, this 60 to 75 minutes of jogging. So, this 60 to 75 minutes of jogging. So, this would be so-called zone two cardio. would be so-called zone two cardio. would be so-called zone two cardio. People probably have heard of zone two People probably have heard of zone two People probably have heard of zone two cardio, but if you haven't, that's okay. cardio, but if you haven't, that's okay. cardio, but if you haven't, that's okay. Zone two cardio is something that you Zone two cardio is something that you Zone two cardio is something that you could measure with a heart rate monitor could measure with a heart rate monitor could measure with a heart rate monitor or other device, but you don't need to. or other device, but you don't need to. or other device, but you don't need to. Zone two cardio is the kind of Zone two cardio is the kind of Zone two cardio is the kind of cardiovascular exercise in which cardiovascular exercise in which cardiovascular exercise in which you're pushing yourself to move you're pushing yourself to move you're pushing yourself to move such that you're breathing faster than such that you're breathing faster than such that you're breathing faster than normal, your heart is beating faster normal, your heart is beating faster normal, your heart is beating faster than normal. However, you are still able than normal. However, you are still able than normal. However, you are still able to sustain a conversation, but if you to sustain a conversation, but if you to sustain a conversation, but if you were to push yourself any harder, that were to push yourself any harder, that were to push yourself any harder, that is move faster or go up a steeper is move faster or go up a steeper is move faster or go up a steeper incline at the same rate you happen to incline at the same rate you happen to incline at the same rate you happen to be at any one moment, you would lose be at any one moment, you would lose be at any one moment, you would lose that ability to speak. You wouldn't be that ability to speak. You wouldn't be that ability to speak. You wouldn't be able to complete sentences. You would be able to complete sentences. You would be able to complete sentences. You would be out of breath or you'd have to pause out of breath or you'd have to pause out of breath or you'd have to pause mid-sentence. Now, it's near impossible, mid-sentence. Now, it's near impossible, mid-sentence. Now, it's near impossible, even with a heart rate monitor, to stay even with a heart rate monitor, to stay even with a heart rate monitor, to stay exactly in zone two unless you're very, exactly in zone two unless you're very, exactly in zone two unless you're very, very skilled at that. So, I don't obsess very skilled at that. So, I don't obsess very skilled at that. So, I don't obsess over that, and in fact, I don't wear a over that, and in fact, I don't wear a over that, and in fact, I don't wear a heart rate monitor when I do this heart rate monitor when I do this heart rate monitor when I do this exercise. But for me, the goal is to exercise. But for me, the goal is to exercise. But for me, the goal is to head out on Sunday and get 60 to 75 head out on Sunday and get 60 to 75 head out on Sunday and get 60 to 75 minutes of jogging in zone two. Now, of minutes of jogging in zone two. Now, of minutes of jogging in zone two. Now, of course, I like to jog, but that doesn't course, I like to jog, but that doesn't course, I like to jog, but that doesn't mean that you have to jog. You could mean that you have to jog. You could mean that you have to jog. You could replace jogging with replace jogging with replace jogging with rowing on a rowing machine or maybe even rowing on a rowing machine or maybe even rowing on a rowing machine or maybe even rowing an actual boat if you have access rowing an actual boat if you have access rowing an actual boat if you have access to that, or cycling, or swimming, to that, or cycling, or swimming, to that, or cycling, or swimming, something that allows you continuous something that allows you continuous something that allows you continuous movement for 60 to 75 minutes at that movement for 60 to 75 minutes at that movement for 60 to 75 minutes at that zone two threshold zone two threshold zone two threshold we talked about earlier. we talked about earlier. we talked about earlier. For me, that can include some hills, and For me, that can include some hills, and For me, that can include some hills, and when I say hills, they could be very when I say hills, they could be very when I say hills, they could be very steep hills, but I simply slow my pace steep hills, but I simply slow my pace steep hills, but I simply slow my pace down in order to stay in that roughly zone in order to stay in that roughly zone in order to stay in that roughly zone two range. Or it could be that they are two range. Or it could be that they are two range. Or it could be that they are more low-grade hills and I might, you more low-grade hills and I might, you more low-grade hills and I might, you know, just slow down a little bit or I know, just slow down a little bit or I know, just slow down a little bit or I might even push myself a tiny bit that might even push myself a tiny bit that might even push myself a tiny bit that day, but really I'm just trying to build day, but really I'm just trying to build day, but really I'm just trying to build that long endurance. I'm trying to build that long endurance. I'm trying to build that long endurance. I'm trying to build up my capacity or maintain my capacity up my capacity or maintain my capacity up my capacity or maintain my capacity to go a long distance without fatiguing. to go a long distance without fatiguing. to go a long distance without fatiguing. Now, some days, meaning some Sundays, Now, some days, meaning some Sundays, Now, some days, meaning some Sundays, since I tend to do this almost always on since I tend to do this almost always on since I tend to do this almost always on Sunday, although there are exceptions, Sunday, although there are exceptions, Sunday, although there are exceptions, instead of doing the 60 to 75-minute instead of doing the 60 to 75-minute instead of doing the 60 to 75-minute jog, what I'll do is I will head out for jog, what I'll do is I will head out for jog, what I'll do is I will head out for a long hike. That could be 2 and 1/2 a long hike. That could be 2 and 1/2 a long hike. That could be 2 and 1/2 hours or 3 hours or maybe even a 4-hour hours or 3 hours or maybe even a 4-hour hours or 3 hours or maybe even a 4-hour or 5-hour hike. Sometimes it's very or 5-hour hike. Sometimes it's very or 5-hour hike. Sometimes it's very long. And I'll do that sometimes simply to mix And I'll do that sometimes simply to mix And I'll do that sometimes simply to mix up the routine up the routine up the routine because sometimes jogging and jogging because sometimes jogging and jogging because sometimes jogging and jogging the same routes gets boring to me. I do the same routes gets boring to me. I do the same routes gets boring to me. I do enjoy running. That's something I've enjoy running. That's something I've enjoy running. That's something I've been doing for a very long time, but been doing for a very long time, but been doing for a very long time, but sometimes it just gets a little bit sometimes it just gets a little bit sometimes it just gets a little bit tedious and I want to do something tedious and I want to do something tedious and I want to do something different. Also, sometimes I want to be different. Also, sometimes I want to be different. Also, sometimes I want to be social on Sundays. I want to head out on social on Sundays. I want to head out on social on Sundays. I want to head out on a hike with my partner or I want to meet a hike with my partner or I want to meet a hike with my partner or I want to meet up with friends and hike with them. And up with friends and hike with them. And up with friends and hike with them. And so, taking a long hike on Sunday is so, taking a long hike on Sunday is so, taking a long hike on Sunday is something that also could be quite something that also could be quite something that also could be quite social. And then I don't have to worry social. And then I don't have to worry social. And then I don't have to worry about also getting in my workout when about also getting in my workout when about also getting in my workout when heading out on a hike with my partner or heading out on a hike with my partner or heading out on a hike with my partner or going out to meet with friends or things of out to meet with friends or things of out to meet with friends or things of that sort. that sort. that sort. I will say that there's a specific I will say that there's a specific I will say that there's a specific tool or a specific change that you can tool or a specific change that you can tool or a specific change that you can make to this Sunday long endurance, or make to this Sunday long endurance, or make to this Sunday long endurance, or at least what I consider long for me. I at least what I consider long for me. I at least what I consider long for me. I mean, it's by no means a marathon or an mean, it's by no means a marathon or an mean, it's by no means a marathon or an Ironman, but Ironman, but Ironman, but this long endurance training. And that's this long endurance training. And that's this long endurance training. And that's the use of a weight vest. So, something the use of a weight vest. So, something the use of a weight vest. So, something that I've really started utilizing that I've really started utilizing that I've really started utilizing more recently, and by more recently I more recently, and by more recently I more recently, and by more recently I really mean within the last year or so, really mean within the last year or so, really mean within the last year or so, is I purchased one of these weight vests is I purchased one of these weight vests is I purchased one of these weight vests that can be anywhere from 10 to 50 lb. that can be anywhere from 10 to 50 lb. that can be anywhere from 10 to 50 lb. What I use in the weight vest is What I use in the weight vest is What I use in the weight vest is irrelevant, but it certainly irrelevant, but it certainly irrelevant, but it certainly changes the level of effort required changes the level of effort required changes the level of effort required when taking a hike or even a walk. Now, when taking a hike or even a walk. Now, when taking a hike or even a walk. Now, there's an additional benefit of the there's an additional benefit of the there's an additional benefit of the weight vest, which is that if you are weight vest, which is that if you are weight vest, which is that if you are going out for a hike or even for a walk for out for a hike or even for a walk for out for a hike or even for a walk for social reasons and you're with somebody social reasons and you're with somebody social reasons and you're with somebody that's not quite at the same fitness that's not quite at the same fitness that's not quite at the same fitness level that you are, level that you are, level that you are, frankly, it's a little bit rude to just frankly, it's a little bit rude to just frankly, it's a little bit rude to just keep walking ahead of them and running keep walking ahead of them and running keep walking ahead of them and running back or running ahead and running back. back or running ahead and running back. back or running ahead and running back. You know, oftentimes you really want to You know, oftentimes you really want to You know, oftentimes you really want to spend time with the person and you don't spend time with the person and you don't spend time with the person and you don't want them to feel as if they're holding want them to feel as if they're holding want them to feel as if they're holding you up. And so, the weight vest is a you up. And so, the weight vest is a you up. And so, the weight vest is a terrific way to get some additional work terrific way to get some additional work terrific way to get some additional work and as you'll find if you wear a weight and as you'll find if you wear a weight and as you'll find if you wear a weight vest, it is additional work, it is additional work, it is additional work, on say a shorter hike. So, maybe the on say a shorter hike. So, maybe the on say a shorter hike. So, maybe the person you're with person you're with person you're with only has time for an hour-long hike or only has time for an hour-long hike or only has time for an hour-long hike or maybe they just don't have the fitness maybe they just don't have the fitness maybe they just don't have the fitness to do a 2-hour or 3-hour hike. So, I'll to do a 2-hour or 3-hour hike. So, I'll to do a 2-hour or 3-hour hike. So, I'll throw on the weight vest and I'll head throw on the weight vest and I'll head throw on the weight vest and I'll head out for a walk with them or a hike with out for a walk with them or a hike with out for a walk with them or a hike with them or sometimes I'll go out on a long them or sometimes I'll go out on a long them or sometimes I'll go out on a long hike with the weight vest myself. hike with the weight vest myself. hike with the weight vest myself. So, again, the point of this for me So, again, the point of this for me So, again, the point of this for me Sunday, although it could fall on any Sunday, although it could fall on any Sunday, although it could fall on any day for you, workout is really to build day for you, workout is really to build day for you, workout is really to build up that long-form endurance. And this up that long-form endurance. And this up that long-form endurance. And this fits well with what Dr. Andy Galpin fits well with what Dr. Andy Galpin fits well with what Dr. Andy Galpin and Dr. Peter Attia referred to as the and Dr. Peter Attia referred to as the and Dr. Peter Attia referred to as the real need to get in some long endurance real need to get in some long endurance real need to get in some long endurance type work at some point or even multiple type work at some point or even multiple type work at some point or even multiple points throughout the week. For me, this points throughout the week. For me, this points throughout the week. For me, this long Sunday jog of 60 to 75 minutes or long Sunday jog of 60 to 75 minutes or long Sunday jog of 60 to 75 minutes or long Sunday hike or weighted walk or long Sunday hike or weighted walk or long Sunday hike or weighted walk or weighted hike really accomplishes that weighted hike really accomplishes that weighted hike really accomplishes that goal. Sometimes leads to a little bit of goal. Sometimes leads to a little bit of goal. Sometimes leads to a little bit of soreness, um particularly in my calves soreness, um particularly in my calves soreness, um particularly in my calves or if I'm wearing the weight vest, or if I'm wearing the weight vest, or if I'm wearing the weight vest, sometimes my midsection sometimes my midsection sometimes my midsection will get sore because I'm trying to will get sore because I'm trying to will get sore because I'm trying to remain upright. So, I think it also remain upright. So, I think it also remain upright. So, I think it also builds up some muscular endurance, not builds up some muscular endurance, not builds up some muscular endurance, not just cardiovascular endurance. But just cardiovascular endurance. But just cardiovascular endurance. But again, throughout the entire time that again, throughout the entire time that again, throughout the entire time that I'm jogging or hiking, what I'm trying I'm jogging or hiking, what I'm trying I'm jogging or hiking, what I'm trying to get to is a place where I can feel to get to is a place where I can feel to get to is a place where I can feel that my pulse rate is definitely that my pulse rate is definitely that my pulse rate is definitely elevated, but it's not so elevated that elevated, but it's not so elevated that elevated, but it's not so elevated that I have to stop because I'm out of I have to stop because I'm out of I have to stop because I'm out of breath. And because I know some people breath. And because I know some people breath. And because I know some people out there might be really neurotic about out there might be really neurotic about out there might be really neurotic about this sort of thing, if you have to stop this sort of thing, if you have to stop this sort of thing, if you have to stop because you're out of breath, that because you're out of breath, that because you're out of breath, that doesn't mean that you blew the workout, doesn't mean that you blew the workout, doesn't mean that you blew the workout, that you know, you aren't getting that you know, you aren't getting that you know, you aren't getting endurance. Of course, you're getting endurance. Of course, you're getting endurance. Of course, you're getting benefits from it. So, I'm not absolutely benefits from it. So, I'm not absolutely benefits from it. So, I'm not absolutely neurotic about always staying exactly in neurotic about always staying exactly in neurotic about always staying exactly in that heart rate zone. I might stop and that heart rate zone. I might stop and that heart rate zone. I might stop and have a conversation for a moment if it's have a conversation for a moment if it's have a conversation for a moment if it's a longer hike, although I really try and a longer hike, although I really try and a longer hike, although I really try and keep moving and I try and push myself keep moving and I try and push myself keep moving and I try and push myself just a little bit further than where I'm just a little bit further than where I'm just a little bit further than where I'm exceedingly comfortable. And so, for me, exceedingly comfortable. And so, for me, exceedingly comfortable. And so, for me, doing this long Sunday hike or jog doing this long Sunday hike or jog doing this long Sunday hike or jog really provides a foundation, a base for really provides a foundation, a base for really provides a foundation, a base for endurance that then the other endurance that then the other endurance that then the other endurance workouts that I'll describe later and workouts that I'll describe later and workouts that I'll describe later and that take place later in the week can that take place later in the week can that take place later in the week can build on. build on. build on. Now, as I mentioned earlier, we will get Now, as I mentioned earlier, we will get Now, as I mentioned earlier, we will get back to the mechanisms that this taps back to the mechanisms that this taps back to the mechanisms that this taps into and why this is so useful. into and why this is so useful. into and why this is so useful. There are multiple benefits to doing There are multiple benefits to doing There are multiple benefits to doing these kinds of endurance type workouts these kinds of endurance type workouts these kinds of endurance type workouts and zone two cardio. and zone two cardio. and zone two cardio. But, by But, by But, by putting it at the start of my week, putting it at the start of my week, putting it at the start of my week, again, my week starts on Sunday, again, my week starts on Sunday, again, my week starts on Sunday, I'm sure that regardless of how the rest I'm sure that regardless of how the rest I'm sure that regardless of how the rest of the week goes, that I got my of the week goes, that I got my of the week goes, that I got my endurance training in. And of course, endurance training in. And of course, endurance training in. And of course, I'm going to want to and I will do I'm going to want to and I will do I'm going to want to and I will do endurance training other days during the endurance training other days during the endurance training other days during the week, but if something comes up or I week, but if something comes up or I week, but if something comes up or I happen to get sick or I'm really behind happen to get sick or I'm really behind happen to get sick or I'm really behind in terms of work and I can't get other in terms of work and I can't get other in terms of work and I can't get other workouts in, this Sunday long jog or workouts in, this Sunday long jog or workouts in, this Sunday long jog or hike really provides that fundamental hike really provides that fundamental hike really provides that fundamental can honestly say foundation for can honestly say foundation for can honestly say foundation for cardiovascular fitness and endurance cardiovascular fitness and endurance cardiovascular fitness and endurance that I can hang my hat on and say, that I can hang my hat on and say, that I can hang my hat on and say, "Okay, I've got that one in the bag." "Okay, I've got that one in the bag." "Okay, I've got that one in the bag." And I can then look to other days of the And I can then look to other days of the And I can then look to other days of the week to focus on other aspects of week to focus on other aspects of week to focus on other aspects of fitness. Now, really important point to fitness. Now, really important point to fitness. Now, really important point to make about this Sunday endurance workout make about this Sunday endurance workout make about this Sunday endurance workout is that allows you to check off a box is that allows you to check off a box is that allows you to check off a box and that box is 75 or so minutes of zone and that box is 75 or so minutes of zone and that box is 75 or so minutes of zone two cardio. Because, as you may have two cardio. Because, as you may have two cardio. Because, as you may have heard, either in this podcast or from others either in this podcast or from others either in this podcast or from others out there like Dr. Peter Attia, getting out there like Dr. Peter Attia, getting out there like Dr. Peter Attia, getting 180 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio 180 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio 180 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week has enormous positive effects per week has enormous positive effects per week has enormous positive effects on longevity and enormous positive on longevity and enormous positive on longevity and enormous positive effects on general health. effects on general health. effects on general health. Again, in terms of cardiovascular Again, in terms of cardiovascular Again, in terms of cardiovascular function, but also metabolic fuel function, but also metabolic fuel function, but also metabolic fuel utilization, also in terms of your utilization, also in terms of your utilization, also in terms of your musculature and your ability to use your musculature and your ability to use your musculature and your ability to use your body over long distances for long body over long distances for long body over long distances for long periods of time. So, while it doesn't periods of time. So, while it doesn't periods of time. So, while it doesn't complete all 180 to 200 minutes per complete all 180 to 200 minutes per complete all 180 to 200 minutes per week, it certainly gets you a good distance, it certainly gets you a good distance, it certainly gets you a good distance, pun intended, toward that goal. Now, I pun intended, toward that goal. Now, I pun intended, toward that goal. Now, I want to acknowledge that some people want to acknowledge that some people want to acknowledge that some people might be starting a fitness program, and might be starting a fitness program, and might be starting a fitness program, and so 60 to 75 minutes of jogging might be so 60 to 75 minutes of jogging might be so 60 to 75 minutes of jogging might be too long, or a 3-hour weighted vested too long, or a 3-hour weighted vested too long, or a 3-hour weighted vested hike, or some people might even do hike, or some people might even do hike, or some people might even do what's called a rock, like you wear a what's called a rock, like you wear a what's called a rock, like you wear a rucksack, that might be too much. In rucksack, that might be too much. In rucksack, that might be too much. In which case, which case, which case, certainly start with less, and go on certainly start with less, and go on certainly start with less, and go on flat ground, and go at the rate that flat ground, and go at the rate that flat ground, and go at the rate that allows you to get into zone two, but allows you to get into zone two, but allows you to get into zone two, but that is not excessively difficult for that is not excessively difficult for that is not excessively difficult for you. And then, as you build up fitness, you. And then, as you build up fitness, you. And then, as you build up fitness, you can add time, or you can add weight you can add time, or you can add weight you can add time, or you can add weight through a weight vest, or if you don't through a weight vest, or if you don't through a weight vest, or if you don't want to buy a weight vest, or can't want to buy a weight vest, or can't want to buy a weight vest, or can't afford one, afford one, afford one, there's a simple solution to that. I there's a simple solution to that. I there's a simple solution to that. I actually have a good anecdote about actually have a good anecdote about actually have a good anecdote about that. One time I was um heading out for that. One time I was um heading out for that. One time I was um heading out for a hike with a friend of mine. He was a hike with a friend of mine. He was a hike with a friend of mine. He was a former SEAL Team operator. I'll never former SEAL Team operator. I'll never former SEAL Team operator. I'll never forget this, and he said, "Oh, yeah, forget this, and he said, "Oh, yeah, forget this, and he said, "Oh, yeah, I'll bring you um I'll bring you a I'll bring you um I'll bring you a I'll bring you um I'll bring you a sack." And I thought he meant like a sack." And I thought he meant like a sack." And I thought he meant like a sack lunch, like he was going to bring sack lunch, like he was going to bring sack lunch, like he was going to bring lunch. And I showed up, and he basically lunch. And I showed up, and he basically lunch. And I showed up, and he basically gave me a backpack that was loaded with gave me a backpack that was loaded with gave me a backpack that was loaded with a bunch of stuff, and the backpack a bunch of stuff, and the backpack a bunch of stuff, and the backpack weighed about 40 lb. And then, we took a weighed about 40 lb. And then, we took a weighed about 40 lb. And then, we took a hike. So, um I was thinking lunch, he hike. So, um I was thinking lunch, he hike. So, um I was thinking lunch, he was thinking weighted backpack. And a was thinking weighted backpack. And a was thinking weighted backpack. And a weighted backpack, or even just any kind weighted backpack, or even just any kind weighted backpack, or even just any kind of strong sack that you can put over of strong sack that you can put over of strong sack that you can put over your shoulders, or even carry in your shoulders, or even carry in your shoulders, or even carry in your arms, is going to work exceedingly well arms, is going to work exceedingly well arms, is going to work exceedingly well to build in some extra requirement for to build in some extra requirement for to build in some extra requirement for effort. So, you certainly don't have to effort. So, you certainly don't have to effort. So, you certainly don't have to purchase a weight vest purchase a weight vest purchase a weight vest in order to uh in order to get the in order to uh in order to get the in order to uh in order to get the benefits of bringing additional weight benefits of bringing additional weight benefits of bringing additional weight along with you on these long along with you on these long along with you on these long cardiovascular events. But again, build cardiovascular events. But again, build cardiovascular events. But again, build up over time. You can add time, you can up over time. You can add time, you can up over time. You can add time, you can add weight. And that's also a really add weight. And that's also a really add weight. And that's also a really nice feature of adding weight, which is nice feature of adding weight, which is nice feature of adding weight, which is at some point your schedule might be at some point your schedule might be at some point your schedule might be such, or you just don't really want to such, or you just don't really want to such, or you just don't really want to keep adding more and more and more time keep adding more and more and more time keep adding more and more and more time on this long endurance Sunday, in this on this long endurance Sunday, in this on this long endurance Sunday, in this case, workout. In that case, add weight. You workout. In that case, add weight. You workout. In that case, add weight. You can also, as you build up fitness, you can also, as you build up fitness, you can also, as you build up fitness, you can add speed to it. Your zone two, and can add speed to it. Your zone two, and can add speed to it. Your zone two, and what zone two is, won't shift, but what zone two is, won't shift, but what zone two is, won't shift, but what work is required from you in order to work is required from you in order to work is required from you in order to get into zone two will shift. That is, get into zone two will shift. That is, get into zone two will shift. That is, as you get more and more fit, you'll as you get more and more fit, you'll as you get more and more fit, you'll have to move faster, and or bring more have to move faster, and or bring more have to move faster, and or bring more weight in order to stay in zone two, and weight in order to stay in zone two, and weight in order to stay in zone two, and that will simply tell you that you are that will simply tell you that you are that will simply tell you that you are indeed improving your endurance. Okay, indeed improving your endurance. Okay, indeed improving your endurance. Okay, so then Monday rolls around, and I like, so then Monday rolls around, and I like, so then Monday rolls around, and I like, most everyone else out there, I work on most everyone else out there, I work on most everyone else out there, I work on Monday. I get right into my emails and I get right into my emails and I get right into my emails and preparation for podcasts and running my preparation for podcasts and running my preparation for podcasts and running my laboratory, etc. However, I make sure laboratory, etc. However, I make sure laboratory, etc. However, I make sure that at some point on Monday, and for me that at some point on Monday, and for me that at some point on Monday, and for me that some point is typically and ideally that some point is typically and ideally that some point is typically and ideally early in the morning, so 7:00 a.m. or early in the morning, so 7:00 a.m. or early in the morning, so 7:00 a.m. or so, I train my legs on Monday. So, that I train my legs on Monday. So, that I train my legs on Monday. So, that includes quadriceps, hamstrings, and includes quadriceps, hamstrings, and includes quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves. Why do I do that workout on calves. Why do I do that workout on calves. Why do I do that workout on Monday, and what is that workout Monday, and what is that workout Monday, and what is that workout designed to do? Well, that workout is designed to do? Well, that workout is designed to do? Well, that workout is really designed to make sure that I'm really designed to make sure that I'm really designed to make sure that I'm either maintaining or building strength either maintaining or building strength either maintaining or building strength in my legs. in my legs. in my legs. And this is not simply for aesthetic And this is not simply for aesthetic And this is not simply for aesthetic reasons. This is not simply to grow reasons. This is not simply to grow reasons. This is not simply to grow bigger calves or grow bigger quadriceps bigger calves or grow bigger quadriceps bigger calves or grow bigger quadriceps and hamstrings. Although, it can and hamstrings. Although, it can and hamstrings. Although, it can accomplish that as well, depending on accomplish that as well, depending on accomplish that as well, depending on how you train. We'll talk about details how you train. We'll talk about details how you train. We'll talk about details of training. The reason for training of training. The reason for training of training. The reason for training legs on Monday is severalfold. First of legs on Monday is severalfold. First of legs on Monday is severalfold. First of all, they are the largest muscle groups all, they are the largest muscle groups all, they are the largest muscle groups of the body, and by training your legs of the body, and by training your legs of the body, and by training your legs on Monday, it sets in motion a large on Monday, it sets in motion a large on Monday, it sets in motion a large number of metabolic processes that carry number of metabolic processes that carry number of metabolic processes that carry you some distance even through the whole you some distance even through the whole you some distance even through the whole week in terms of elevating metabolism, week in terms of elevating metabolism, week in terms of elevating metabolism, in terms of amplifying certain hormonal in terms of amplifying certain hormonal in terms of amplifying certain hormonal events in your body, events in your body, events in your body, etc., that are really beneficial. In etc., that are really beneficial. In etc., that are really beneficial. In addition to that, I'm of the belief that addition to that, I'm of the belief that addition to that, I'm of the belief that the legs are the foundation of the body, the legs are the foundation of the body, the legs are the foundation of the body, and provided you can train legs safely, and provided you can train legs safely, and provided you can train legs safely, that training legs is vitally important that training legs is vitally important that training legs is vitally important not just for strength of the legs, not just for strength of the legs, not just for strength of the legs, but also for strength of your entire but also for strength of your entire but also for strength of your entire body. Again, some of that is through body. Again, some of that is through body. Again, some of that is through systemic hormonal effects, because if systemic hormonal effects, because if systemic hormonal effects, because if you're going to train the large muscle you're going to train the large muscle you're going to train the large muscle groups of your body under substantial groups of your body under substantial groups of your body under substantial loads, you will get systemic release of loads, you will get systemic release of loads, you will get systemic release of hormones, not just testosterone, hormones, not just testosterone, hormones, not just testosterone, although certainly testosterone, but although certainly testosterone, but although certainly testosterone, but also things like growth hormone, you get also things like growth hormone, you get also things like growth hormone, you get increases in all sorts of so-called increases in all sorts of so-called increases in all sorts of so-called anabolic hormones that even if you're anabolic hormones that even if you're anabolic hormones that even if you're somebody who's not trying to increase somebody who's not trying to increase somebody who's not trying to increase muscle size, because I realize a lot of muscle size, because I realize a lot of muscle size, because I realize a lot of people are not trying to do that, people are not trying to do that, people are not trying to do that, these are hormones that shift your these are hormones that shift your these are hormones that shift your metabolism and your overall tendon metabolism and your overall tendon metabolism and your overall tendon strength and ligament strength and strength and ligament strength and strength and ligament strength and overall musculature into what I would overall musculature into what I would overall musculature into what I would call a strong foundation. So, for me, call a strong foundation. So, for me, call a strong foundation. So, for me, Monday is leg workout. It also just Monday is leg workout. It also just Monday is leg workout. It also just feels good to get the leg workout out of feels good to get the leg workout out of feels good to get the leg workout out of the way early in the week and it the way early in the week and it the way early in the week and it accomplishes another goal, which is that accomplishes another goal, which is that accomplishes another goal, which is that I sometimes will take one or two days I sometimes will take one or two days I sometimes will take one or two days off of a leg workout because they can be off of a leg workout because they can be off of a leg workout because they can be very intense and they are large muscle very intense and they are large muscle very intense and they are large muscle groups. And I'll explain what I do on groups. And I'll explain what I do on groups. And I'll explain what I do on the off days. They're not pure off days. the off days. They're not pure off days. the off days. They're not pure off days. They actually include some recovery type They actually include some recovery type They actually include some recovery type training or even some all-out training. training or even some all-out training. training or even some all-out training. But, by training legs on Monday, But, by training legs on Monday, But, by training legs on Monday, I'm able to get what I consider the I'm able to get what I consider the I'm able to get what I consider the hardest strength and hypertrophy workout out of strength and hypertrophy workout out of strength and hypertrophy workout out of the way and again set all those positive the way and again set all those positive the way and again set all those positive physiological effects in motion for the physiological effects in motion for the physiological effects in motion for the entire week. The other thing is that no entire week. The other thing is that no entire week. The other thing is that no workout exists in isolation. What you do workout exists in isolation. What you do workout exists in isolation. What you do one day is going to be determined by one day is going to be determined by one day is going to be determined by what you did the previous day. And even what you did the previous day. And even what you did the previous day. And even though the previous day I may have taken though the previous day I may have taken though the previous day I may have taken a 3-hour weight-vested hike, never are a 3-hour weight-vested hike, never are a 3-hour weight-vested hike, never are my legs so sore from that long slow my legs so sore from that long slow my legs so sore from that long slow endurance work, because it is long and endurance work, because it is long and endurance work, because it is long and slow, that I'm unable to train legs. slow, that I'm unable to train legs. slow, that I'm unable to train legs. Contrast that with a say high-intensity Contrast that with a say high-intensity Contrast that with a say high-intensity interval training workout, which comes interval training workout, which comes interval training workout, which comes later in the week, and my legs might be later in the week, and my legs might be later in the week, and my legs might be sore. In fact, they might not even be sore. In fact, they might not even be sore. In fact, they might not even be recovered such that I'm able to recovered such that I'm able to recovered such that I'm able to do a real leg workout. When I say a real do a real leg workout. When I say a real do a real leg workout. When I say a real workout, I'll describe what I that means workout, I'll describe what I that means workout, I'll describe what I that means in a moment. So, legs come on Monday and in a moment. So, legs come on Monday and in a moment. So, legs come on Monday and I think that for those of you that are I think that for those of you that are I think that for those of you that are using or interested in using resistance using or interested in using resistance using or interested in using resistance training, I suggest getting your leg training, I suggest getting your leg training, I suggest getting your leg workout done early in the week. And for workout done early in the week. And for workout done early in the week. And for those of you that have heard the those of you that have heard the those of you that have heard the phrase, you know, don't skip leg day, phrase, you know, don't skip leg day, phrase, you know, don't skip leg day, I will go a step further and say don't I will go a step further and say don't I will go a step further and say don't skip leg day. In fact, in fact, make leg skip leg day. In fact, in fact, make leg skip leg day. In fact, in fact, make leg day your first day of strength and day your first day of strength and day your first day of strength and hypertrophy training. Put it on Monday. hypertrophy training. Put it on Monday. hypertrophy training. Put it on Monday. Okay, so now that we're talking about Okay, so now that we're talking about Okay, so now that we're talking about resistance training, the question is resistance training, the question is resistance training, the question is going to come up about sets and reps and going to come up about sets and reps and going to come up about sets and reps and all of that business. That was covered all of that business. That was covered all of that business. That was covered in a lot of detail on the podcast with in a lot of detail on the podcast with in a lot of detail on the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin and I'm going to get Dr. Andy Galpin and I'm going to get Dr. Andy Galpin and I'm going to get into some of that detail now, but I'm into some of that detail now, but I'm into some of that detail now, but I'm going to wait until I describe the going to wait until I describe the going to wait until I describe the entire set of workouts for the week entire set of workouts for the week entire set of workouts for the week before I go into even more detail before I go into even more detail before I go into even more detail because there's a way of what's called because there's a way of what's called because there's a way of what's called periodizing, that is changing the sets periodizing, that is changing the sets periodizing, that is changing the sets and reps, etc., across the week and reps, etc., across the week and reps, etc., across the week and indeed from month to month that's really indeed from month to month that's really indeed from month to month that's really optimal. But, I don't want to make it optimal. But, I don't want to make it optimal. But, I don't want to make it seem as if all of that just pertains to seem as if all of that just pertains to seem as if all of that just pertains to the leg workout. It actually pertains to the leg workout. It actually pertains to the leg workout. It actually pertains to all of the resistance training. So, I'll all of the resistance training. So, I'll all of the resistance training. So, I'll just give you a couple of teasers about just give you a couple of teasers about just give you a couple of teasers about the key principles of resistance the key principles of resistance the key principles of resistance training that I think are training that I think are training that I think are almost universally, if not universally, almost universally, if not universally, almost universally, if not universally, then generally accepted in the strength then generally accepted in the strength then generally accepted in the strength training and physiology community. training and physiology community. training and physiology community. And then later I'll get back to some of the then later I'll get back to some of the then later I'll get back to some of the overarching principles that overarching principles that overarching principles that apply to all strength and hypertrophy apply to all strength and hypertrophy apply to all strength and hypertrophy workouts across the week, including the workouts across the week, including the workouts across the week, including the ones for the torso, the arms, etc. Okay, ones for the torso, the arms, etc. Okay, ones for the torso, the arms, etc. Okay, so legs fall on Monday. so legs fall on Monday. so legs fall on Monday. I should say that leg workouts, like all I should say that leg workouts, like all I should say that leg workouts, like all resistance training workouts for me, resistance training workouts for me, resistance training workouts for me, consist of about, again, I'm not consist of about, again, I'm not consist of about, again, I'm not neurotically attached to this, but about neurotically attached to this, but about neurotically attached to this, but about 10 minutes of warming up and then about 10 minutes of warming up and then about 10 minutes of warming up and then about 50 5-0 to 60 minutes of real work. Now, 50 5-0 to 60 minutes of real work. Now, 50 5-0 to 60 minutes of real work. Now, of course, some of that is going to be of course, some of that is going to be of course, some of that is going to be rest between sets, but by real work, I rest between sets, but by real work, I rest between sets, but by real work, I mean really hard work, not necessarily mean really hard work, not necessarily mean really hard work, not necessarily to failure. We'll talk about failure in to failure. We'll talk about failure in to failure. We'll talk about failure in a little bit, but hard work where I'm a little bit, but hard work where I'm a little bit, but hard work where I'm struggling to complete the final struggling to complete the final struggling to complete the final repetitions, if not going to failure repetitions, if not going to failure repetitions, if not going to failure to continue to move the weight to continue to move the weight to continue to move the weight repetitions. And again, the entire work portion of And again, the entire work portion of And again, the entire work portion of that workout is about 50 to 60 minutes. that workout is about 50 to 60 minutes. that workout is about 50 to 60 minutes. Why? Well, past 60 minutes, you start Why? Well, past 60 minutes, you start Why? Well, past 60 minutes, you start getting increases in cortisol that getting increases in cortisol that getting increases in cortisol that really impede recovery. And I personally really impede recovery. And I personally really impede recovery. And I personally am somebody am somebody am somebody that does not recover very well from that does not recover very well from that does not recover very well from high-intensity exercise. I realize that high-intensity exercise. I realize that high-intensity exercise. I realize that within the literature, within the literature, within the literature, it is it is it is believed, and I think generally believed, and I think generally believed, and I think generally accepted, that accepted, that accepted, that when you stimulate muscle hypertrophy or when you stimulate muscle hypertrophy or when you stimulate muscle hypertrophy or strength increases, it impacts the strength increases, it impacts the strength increases, it impacts the nervous system, It also causes things nervous system, It also causes things nervous system, It also causes things like protein synthesis, etc. There are a like protein synthesis, etc. There are a like protein synthesis, etc. There are a number of different forms of adaptation number of different forms of adaptation number of different forms of adaptation that occur to give you muscle strength that occur to give you muscle strength that occur to give you muscle strength and size changes. and size changes. and size changes. And these days people talk a lot about And these days people talk a lot about And these days people talk a lot about needing to stimulate muscle growth or needing to stimulate muscle growth or needing to stimulate muscle growth or muscle strength at least every 48 hours. muscle strength at least every 48 hours. muscle strength at least every 48 hours. But I can tell you that I recover rather But I can tell you that I recover rather But I can tell you that I recover rather slowly and I benefit from working the slowly and I benefit from working the slowly and I benefit from working the same muscle group about twice per week same muscle group about twice per week same muscle group about twice per week with longer with longer with longer or I should say more days of rest in or I should say more days of rest in or I should say more days of rest in between those workouts. So if I train between those workouts. So if I train between those workouts. So if I train legs on Monday, believe it or not, I'm legs on Monday, believe it or not, I'm legs on Monday, believe it or not, I'm only training legs on Monday. I do not only training legs on Monday. I do not only training legs on Monday. I do not have a second leg workout during the have a second leg workout during the have a second leg workout during the week. However, week. However, week. However, on Friday, I do a high-intensity on Friday, I do a high-intensity on Friday, I do a high-intensity interval training session that serves interval training session that serves interval training session that serves two purposes. One is it serves the two purposes. One is it serves the two purposes. One is it serves the purpose of triggering a certain type of purpose of triggering a certain type of purpose of triggering a certain type of endurance and getting my heart rate very, very and getting my heart rate very, very and getting my heart rate very, very high. And in addition to that, because high. And in addition to that, because high. And in addition to that, because of the way I do that workout, it acts as of the way I do that workout, it acts as of the way I do that workout, it acts as a sort of supplement or a more moderate a sort of supplement or a more moderate a sort of supplement or a more moderate intensity workout for workout for workout for quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves such quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves such quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves such that I at least never lose strength and that I at least never lose strength and that I at least never lose strength and in fact generally build strength from in fact generally build strength from in fact generally build strength from one leg workout to the next provided I'm one leg workout to the next provided I'm one leg workout to the next provided I'm doing things correctly. doing things correctly. doing things correctly. So what I'm not referring to is the kind So what I'm not referring to is the kind So what I'm not referring to is the kind of classic uh you know, super of classic uh you know, super of classic uh you know, super high-intensity training once per week high-intensity training once per week high-intensity training once per week and then not actually training that and then not actually training that and then not actually training that muscle group again. muscle group again. muscle group again. For me, it's really training each muscle For me, it's really training each muscle For me, it's really training each muscle group twice per week, once directly and group twice per week, once directly and group twice per week, once directly and then once indirectly then once indirectly then once indirectly either during another weight training either during another weight training either during another weight training workout or during a cardiovascular, I workout or during a cardiovascular, I workout or during a cardiovascular, I should say endurance training workout. should say endurance training workout. should say endurance training workout. So again, legs on Monday, the workout is So again, legs on Monday, the workout is So again, legs on Monday, the workout is 50 to 60 minutes after a brief warm-up. 50 to 60 minutes after a brief warm-up. 50 to 60 minutes after a brief warm-up. I generally pick two exercises per I generally pick two exercises per I generally pick two exercises per muscle group. So again, I'm doing muscle group. So again, I'm doing muscle group. So again, I'm doing calves, I'm doing quadriceps, and I'm doing I'm doing quadriceps, and I'm doing I'm doing quadriceps, and I'm doing hamstrings. You should pick the hamstrings. You should pick the hamstrings. You should pick the exercises that work for you. So that's exercises that work for you. So that's exercises that work for you. So that's why I'm actually not going to share why I'm actually not going to share why I'm actually not going to share which exercises I use. I'll give you a which exercises I use. I'll give you a which exercises I use. I'll give you a couple suggestions about the ones I do couple suggestions about the ones I do couple suggestions about the ones I do use, but really exercise selection, as use, but really exercise selection, as use, but really exercise selection, as Dr. Andy Galpin pointed out, is a very Dr. Andy Galpin pointed out, is a very Dr. Andy Galpin pointed out, is a very important variable. And the key thing to important variable. And the key thing to important variable. And the key thing to emphasize for that variable is that you emphasize for that variable is that you emphasize for that variable is that you need to be able to perform the movement need to be able to perform the movement need to be able to perform the movement safely. So, I know there's a huge debate safely. So, I know there's a huge debate safely. So, I know there's a huge debate out there, and people love to argue out there, and people love to argue out there, and people love to argue about whether or not one can squat or about whether or not one can squat or about whether or not one can squat or deadlift for long periods of time, or deadlift for long periods of time, or deadlift for long periods of time, or should or should not. Some people say should or should not. Some people say should or should not. Some people say you absolutely should. I personally do you absolutely should. I personally do you absolutely should. I personally do not squat and do not deadlift. I've not squat and do not deadlift. I've not squat and do not deadlift. I've actually never done much squatting or actually never done much squatting or actually never done much squatting or deadlifting. I know some people out deadlifting. I know some people out deadlifting. I know some people out there are probably rolling their eyes or there are probably rolling their eyes or there are probably rolling their eyes or switching the channel at this point. Um switching the channel at this point. Um switching the channel at this point. Um but I can but I can but I can say that for me, I've been able to say that for me, I've been able to say that for me, I've been able to achieve the strength and hypertrophy achieve the strength and hypertrophy achieve the strength and hypertrophy goals that I've been seeking doing goals that I've been seeking doing goals that I've been seeking doing things like leg extensions and hack things like leg extensions and hack things like leg extensions and hack squats, or for hamstrings doing things squats, or for hamstrings doing things squats, or for hamstrings doing things like leg curls and glute ham raises, or like leg curls and glute ham raises, or like leg curls and glute ham raises, or for calves doing standing and seated for calves doing standing and seated for calves doing standing and seated calf raises, and so on. I think a key calf raises, and so on. I think a key calf raises, and so on. I think a key principle that everyone should pay principle that everyone should pay principle that everyone should pay attention to is one that was taught to attention to is one that was taught to attention to is one that was taught to me by an excellent strength coach years ago, an excellent strength coach years ago, an excellent strength coach years ago, and I still use this, and it At least it and I still use this, and it At least it and I still use this, and it At least it works for me. For each muscle group, try works for me. For each muscle group, try works for me. For each muscle group, try and find an exercise in which you get and find an exercise in which you get and find an exercise in which you get that muscle into a weighted stretch that muscle into a weighted stretch that muscle into a weighted stretch position. So, this would be, for position. So, this would be, for position. So, this would be, for instance, the standing calf raise. You instance, the standing calf raise. You instance, the standing calf raise. You know, down at the bottom, it's weighted, know, down at the bottom, it's weighted, know, down at the bottom, it's weighted, and you're in a in a deep stretch, and you're in a in a deep stretch, and you're in a in a deep stretch, provided you're doing the uh the provided you're doing the uh the provided you're doing the uh the movement correctly. As well as another movement correctly. As well as another movement correctly. As well as another exercise where you're getting exercise where you're getting exercise where you're getting contraction in the shortened position of contraction in the shortened position of contraction in the shortened position of the muscle. So, for the hamstrings, that the muscle. So, for the hamstrings, that the muscle. So, for the hamstrings, that would be the leg curl. For uh the would be the leg curl. For uh the would be the leg curl. For uh the calves, it would be a seated calf raise. calves, it would be a seated calf raise. calves, it would be a seated calf raise. Or for the quadriceps, the uh the leg Or for the quadriceps, the uh the leg Or for the quadriceps, the uh the leg extension is, you know, if the machine extension is, you know, if the machine extension is, you know, if the machine is designed right and you're doing it is designed right and you're doing it is designed right and you're doing it correctly, the peak contraction is correctly, the peak contraction is correctly, the peak contraction is largely going to occur at the at the largely going to occur at the at the largely going to occur at the at the leg's extended position. But then leg's extended position. But then leg's extended position. But then another exercise for each muscle group another exercise for each muscle group another exercise for each muscle group that puts the muscle into more of a that puts the muscle into more of a that puts the muscle into more of a stretched, or at least a stretched, or at least a stretched, or at least a larger range of motion, or compound type larger range of motion, or compound type larger range of motion, or compound type movement, but ideally where there's some movement, but ideally where there's some movement, but ideally where there's some stretch there. So, I guess I will tell stretch there. So, I guess I will tell stretch there. So, I guess I will tell you what exercise I exercise I do. For you what exercise I exercise I do. For you what exercise I exercise I do. For the quadriceps, it's going to be leg the quadriceps, it's going to be leg the quadriceps, it's going to be leg extensions and hack squats. I use hack extensions and hack squats. I use hack extensions and hack squats. I use hack squats because I don't do free bar squats because I don't do free bar squats because I don't do free bar squats for safety reasons and I like the squats for safety reasons and I like the squats for safety reasons and I like the hack squat machine. I'll do leg curls hack squat machine. I'll do leg curls hack squat machine. I'll do leg curls and glute ham raises and glute ham raises and glute ham raises for hamstrings and I'll do standing calf for hamstrings and I'll do standing calf for hamstrings and I'll do standing calf raises and seated calf raises for the raises and seated calf raises for the raises and seated calf raises for the calves. Again, those are the movements calves. Again, those are the movements calves. Again, those are the movements that I use because I can perform them that I use because I can perform them that I use because I can perform them safely in the repetition ranges and with safely in the repetition ranges and with safely in the repetition ranges and with the weights that are required for me to the weights that are required for me to the weights that are required for me to either maintain or build leg strength either maintain or build leg strength either maintain or build leg strength and calf strength, but you might decide and calf strength, but you might decide and calf strength, but you might decide that for you deadlifts are absolutely that for you deadlifts are absolutely that for you deadlifts are absolutely essential and terrific or squats, free essential and terrific or squats, free essential and terrific or squats, free bar squats are absolutely terrific or bar squats are absolutely terrific or bar squats are absolutely terrific or front, you know, front squats. I'm not front, you know, front squats. I'm not front, you know, front squats. I'm not here to tell you which exercises to do here to tell you which exercises to do here to tell you which exercises to do or not do. I am telling you that it's or not do. I am telling you that it's or not do. I am telling you that it's probably wise to at least consider probably wise to at least consider probably wise to at least consider doing at least two exercises per muscle doing at least two exercises per muscle doing at least two exercises per muscle group, probably three maximum if you ask group, probably three maximum if you ask group, probably three maximum if you ask me if you're doing your entire legs and me if you're doing your entire legs and me if you're doing your entire legs and calves in one day, but to think about calves in one day, but to think about calves in one day, but to think about doing one exercise where the muscle is doing one exercise where the muscle is doing one exercise where the muscle is brought into that shortened peak brought into that shortened peak brought into that shortened peak contraction position, like leg curls or contraction position, like leg curls or contraction position, like leg curls or leg extensions or seated calf raise and leg extensions or seated calf raise and leg extensions or seated calf raise and then another exercise for each muscle then another exercise for each muscle then another exercise for each muscle group where there's more of a elongation group where there's more of a elongation group where there's more of a elongation and maybe even a stretch on the muscle and maybe even a stretch on the muscle and maybe even a stretch on the muscle group. In fact, that's a principle that group. In fact, that's a principle that group. In fact, that's a principle that you'll hear me talk about later when I you'll hear me talk about later when I you'll hear me talk about later when I talk about training talk about training talk about training other muscle groups for strength and other muscle groups for strength and other muscle groups for strength and hypertrophy. So now you know hypertrophy. So now you know hypertrophy. So now you know approximately how long to train. approximately how long to train. approximately how long to train. You might be somebody who can get away You might be somebody who can get away You might be somebody who can get away with training for an hour and a half with training for an hour and a half with training for an hour and a half and that won't impede your recovery. For and that won't impede your recovery. For and that won't impede your recovery. For me that really starts to impede my me that really starts to impede my me that really starts to impede my recovery. Also, if I'm staying on task, recovery. Also, if I'm staying on task, recovery. Also, if I'm staying on task, that 60-minute limit really works well that 60-minute limit really works well that 60-minute limit really works well for me. for me. for me. Do I occasionally train for 75 minutes? Do I occasionally train for 75 minutes? Do I occasionally train for 75 minutes? Yes, because if I'm waiting for a piece Yes, because if I'm waiting for a piece Yes, because if I'm waiting for a piece of equipment, sometimes I have to just of equipment, sometimes I have to just of equipment, sometimes I have to just wait longer, so that happens, but I wait longer, so that happens, but I wait longer, so that happens, but I really try and keep the total duration really try and keep the total duration really try and keep the total duration of the workout shorter. How many sets of the workout shorter. How many sets of the workout shorter. How many sets and reps and rest intervals? Well, that and reps and rest intervals? Well, that and reps and rest intervals? Well, that was covered by Dr. Andy Galpin as well. was covered by Dr. Andy Galpin as well. was covered by Dr. Andy Galpin as well. Without getting into the total science, Without getting into the total science, Without getting into the total science, here's a brief summary of how to here's a brief summary of how to here's a brief summary of how to structure that. structure that. structure that. It's pretty clear that if you're going It's pretty clear that if you're going It's pretty clear that if you're going to do to do to do lower repetitions lower repetitions lower repetitions and heavier weights and heavier weights and heavier weights that you're going to want to do a bit that you're going to want to do a bit that you're going to want to do a bit more volume. I know that this spits in more volume. I know that this spits in more volume. I know that this spits in the face of what a lot of people think, the face of what a lot of people think, the face of what a lot of people think, but so if you're going to do five sets but so if you're going to do five sets but so if you're going to do five sets of five, and I would consider five of five, and I would consider five of five, and I would consider five repetitions low repetition range, repetitions low repetition range, repetitions low repetition range, heavier weight. heavier weight. heavier weight. And if you're going to train with higher And if you're going to train with higher And if you're going to train with higher repetitions, you can do fewer sets. That repetitions, you can do fewer sets. That repetitions, you can do fewer sets. That certainly works for me. certainly works for me. certainly works for me. I generally follow a program where for I generally follow a program where for I generally follow a program where for about a month, so three to four weeks, I about a month, so three to four weeks, I about a month, so three to four weeks, I will do all my resistance training in will do all my resistance training in will do all my resistance training in the repetition range of about four to the repetition range of about four to the repetition range of about four to eight repetitions, so that's rather eight repetitions, so that's rather eight repetitions, so that's rather heavy. A few more sets, so it might be anywhere A few more sets, so it might be anywhere A few more sets, so it might be anywhere from three to four sets from three to four sets from three to four sets per exercise, again still just two per exercise, again still just two per exercise, again still just two exercises, and longer rest between sets, exercises, and longer rest between sets, exercises, and longer rest between sets, anywhere from two minutes to maybe even anywhere from two minutes to maybe even anywhere from two minutes to maybe even four minutes if it's really heavy leg four minutes if it's really heavy leg four minutes if it's really heavy leg work. And then for the next month, switch to And then for the next month, switch to And then for the next month, switch to repetition range that's closer to eight repetition range that's closer to eight repetition range that's closer to eight to 12, maybe even 15 repetitions per to 12, maybe even 15 repetitions per to 12, maybe even 15 repetitions per set, but do fewer sets overall, so maybe set, but do fewer sets overall, so maybe set, but do fewer sets overall, so maybe just two to three sets per exercise, just two to three sets per exercise, just two to three sets per exercise, again just two exercises per muscle again just two exercises per muscle again just two exercises per muscle group typically. group typically. group typically. And shorten the rest between sets, so that shorten the rest between sets, so that shorten the rest between sets, so that it's more in the 90-second, maybe even it's more in the 90-second, maybe even it's more in the 90-second, maybe even as short as 60-seconds rest between as short as 60-seconds rest between as short as 60-seconds rest between sets, but typically 90-seconds to about sets, but typically 90-seconds to about sets, but typically 90-seconds to about two minutes or two and a half minutes. two minutes or two and a half minutes. two minutes or two and a half minutes. So basically it's one month heavier, the So basically it's one month heavier, the So basically it's one month heavier, the next month slightly lighter, although I next month slightly lighter, although I next month slightly lighter, although I wouldn't say light, I would say moderate wouldn't say light, I would say moderate wouldn't say light, I would say moderate weight and moderate rep range. That weight and moderate rep range. That weight and moderate rep range. That tends to work well for me. It also tends to work well for me. It also tends to work well for me. It also adheres to a principle that came up adheres to a principle that came up adheres to a principle that came up during the discussion, again with Dr. during the discussion, again with Dr. during the discussion, again with Dr. Andy Galpin, that for hypertrophy, you Andy Galpin, that for hypertrophy, you Andy Galpin, that for hypertrophy, you really can use repetition ranges really can use repetition ranges really can use repetition ranges anywhere from five to 30 3 0 reps. anywhere from five to 30 3 0 reps. anywhere from five to 30 3 0 reps. But he emphasized changing the But he emphasized changing the But he emphasized changing the repetition ranges in order to offset repetition ranges in order to offset repetition ranges in order to offset boredom. Frankly, I like to train boredom. Frankly, I like to train boredom. Frankly, I like to train heavier. I enjoy training in the four to heavier. I enjoy training in the four to heavier. I enjoy training in the four to eight rep range. However, I noticed that eight rep range. However, I noticed that eight rep range. However, I noticed that if I do that for more than four weeks in if I do that for more than four weeks in if I do that for more than four weeks in a row and I don't switch over to a row and I don't switch over to a row and I don't switch over to training in the eight to 12, maybe in 15 training in the eight to 12, maybe in 15 training in the eight to 12, maybe in 15 repetition range for about a month, well repetition range for about a month, well repetition range for about a month, well then I can't make continuous progress. I then I can't make continuous progress. I then I can't make continuous progress. I start to actually lose ground. But by start to actually lose ground. But by start to actually lose ground. But by switching back and forth, switching back and forth, switching back and forth, I actually can make continuous progress I actually can make continuous progress I actually can make continuous progress at least across the year. So, I hope at least across the year. So, I hope at least across the year. So, I hope that principle, or I should say that principle, or I should say that principle, or I should say that protocol, um was communicated that protocol, um was communicated that protocol, um was communicated clearly. It works very well, I assure clearly. It works very well, I assure clearly. It works very well, I assure you. Does that mean that I never get 10 Does that mean that I never get 10 Does that mean that I never get 10 repetitions on a week when I'm uh repetitions on a week when I'm uh repetitions on a week when I'm uh supposed to train in the 4 to 8 supposed to train in the 4 to 8 supposed to train in the 4 to 8 repetition range? No, occasionally I'll repetition range? No, occasionally I'll repetition range? No, occasionally I'll venture up into the 10 repetition range. venture up into the 10 repetition range. venture up into the 10 repetition range. But I really try and cluster the low But I really try and cluster the low But I really try and cluster the low repetition work for about a month, again repetition work for about a month, again repetition work for about a month, again across all workouts and all exercises, across all workouts and all exercises, across all workouts and all exercises, and the slightly higher, I would even and the slightly higher, I would even and the slightly higher, I would even say moderate repetition work across to say moderate repetition work across to say moderate repetition work across to the next month. One thing that you'll the next month. One thing that you'll the next month. One thing that you'll notice, since we are talking about total notice, since we are talking about total notice, since we are talking about total fitness programming, is that during the fitness programming, is that during the fitness programming, is that during the month where you are doing moderate where you are doing moderate where you are doing moderate repetitions, you'll notice that your repetitions, you'll notice that your repetitions, you'll notice that your endurance work will actually be endurance work will actually be endurance work will actually be facilitated. And I do not think that's a facilitated. And I do not think that's a facilitated. And I do not think that's a coincidence, in fact it's not a coincidence, in fact it's not a coincidence, in fact it's not a coincidence. It's because when you are coincidence. It's because when you are coincidence. It's because when you are training very heavy, or in the heavier training very heavy, or in the heavier training very heavy, or in the heavier range, low repetitions, etc., you're range, low repetitions, etc., you're range, low repetitions, etc., you're tapping into different processes in tapping into different processes in tapping into different processes in those muscles. So, when you head out for those muscles. So, when you head out for those muscles. So, when you head out for that long Sunday hike, or as you'll soon that long Sunday hike, or as you'll soon that long Sunday hike, or as you'll soon hear, whereas on Friday you're going to hear, whereas on Friday you're going to hear, whereas on Friday you're going to do high intensity interval training, do high intensity interval training, do high intensity interval training, what you'll notice is, during certain what you'll notice is, during certain what you'll notice is, during certain months of weight training, when you're months of weight training, when you're months of weight training, when you're training more heavy, those workouts will training more heavy, those workouts will training more heavy, those workouts will feel, literally will feel different than feel, literally will feel different than feel, literally will feel different than they will during the months when you're they will during the months when you're they will during the months when you're doing moderate repetition work. doing moderate repetition work. doing moderate repetition work. Uh I am not a competitive athlete. I'm Uh I am not a competitive athlete. I'm Uh I am not a competitive athlete. I'm not running races or triathlons like not running races or triathlons like not running races or triathlons like some of my friends. I'm very impressed some of my friends. I'm very impressed some of my friends. I'm very impressed by them. I'm really just trying to get by them. I'm really just trying to get by them. I'm really just trying to get overall cardiovascular fitness, overall cardiovascular fitness, overall cardiovascular fitness, overall strength, overall hypertrophy where I strength, overall hypertrophy where I strength, overall hypertrophy where I need it, maintain muscle size, etc., in need it, maintain muscle size, etc., in need it, maintain muscle size, etc., in muscle groups where I'm just trying to muscle groups where I'm just trying to muscle groups where I'm just trying to maintain. That's really my goal. So, I'm maintain. That's really my goal. So, I'm maintain. That's really my goal. So, I'm not trying to optimize any of these not trying to optimize any of these not trying to optimize any of these workouts for any one performance workouts for any one performance workouts for any one performance feature. But in a little bit we'll talk feature. But in a little bit we'll talk feature. But in a little bit we'll talk about how you can change various aspects, that how you can change various aspects, that how you can change various aspects, that is variables of this protocols, in order is variables of this protocols, in order is variables of this protocols, in order to say, for instance, really emphasize to say, for instance, really emphasize to say, for instance, really emphasize hypertrophy or really emphasize hypertrophy or really emphasize hypertrophy or really emphasize endurance. Okay, so with what I would endurance. Okay, so with what I would endurance. Okay, so with what I would call a standard endurance workout done call a standard endurance workout done call a standard endurance workout done on Sunday. And I say standard because on Sunday. And I say standard because on Sunday. And I say standard because most people when they hear endurance, most people when they hear endurance, most people when they hear endurance, they think of the ability to endure, to they think of the ability to endure, to they think of the ability to endure, to continue uh in a repeated movement or exercise uh in a repeated movement or exercise uh in a repeated movement or exercise over some period of time. With that over some period of time. With that over some period of time. With that workout done on Sunday, and then with workout done on Sunday, and then with workout done on Sunday, and then with the leg workout done on Monday, you can the leg workout done on Monday, you can the leg workout done on Monday, you can feel really good about how you're feel really good about how you're feel really good about how you're heading into the week. However, after heading into the week. However, after heading into the week. However, after training legs on Monday, training legs on Monday, training legs on Monday, I experienced that doing cardiovascular I experienced that doing cardiovascular I experienced that doing cardiovascular workouts the next day is either workouts the next day is either workouts the next day is either inefficient or at least doesn't really inefficient or at least doesn't really inefficient or at least doesn't really allow me to completely recover from my allow me to completely recover from my allow me to completely recover from my leg workout. Now, I realize that some leg workout. Now, I realize that some leg workout. Now, I realize that some people are going to immediately scoff at people are going to immediately scoff at people are going to immediately scoff at that, and in fact, there are really that, and in fact, there are really that, and in fact, there are really beautiful papers out there talking about beautiful papers out there talking about beautiful papers out there talking about how one can actually do a fair amount of one can actually do a fair amount of one can actually do a fair amount of cardiovascular exercise without cardiovascular exercise without cardiovascular exercise without interfering with their strength and interfering with their strength and interfering with their strength and speed and hypertrophy improvements. speed and hypertrophy improvements. speed and hypertrophy improvements. And vice versa. In fact, there's a And vice versa. In fact, there's a And vice versa. In fact, there's a terrific review that was mentioned on terrific review that was mentioned on terrific review that was mentioned on the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin. This the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin. This the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin. This is a review that we'll provide a is a review that we'll provide a is a review that we'll provide a citation to um and a reference and a citation to um and a reference and a citation to um and a reference and a link to, which is the review by um link to, which is the review by um link to, which is the review by um Mirkin and Bagley, which talks about Mirkin and Bagley, which talks about Mirkin and Bagley, which talks about whether or not there's interference whether or not there's interference whether or not there's interference between strength and endurance workouts. between strength and endurance workouts. between strength and endurance workouts. Really interesting review if you want to Really interesting review if you want to Really interesting review if you want to peruse that. But, with all that said, I peruse that. But, with all that said, I peruse that. But, with all that said, I like to take Tuesday as a no endurance, like to take Tuesday as a no endurance, like to take Tuesday as a no endurance, no resistance training day. no resistance training day. no resistance training day. But, that doesn't mean that I'm not But, that doesn't mean that I'm not But, that doesn't mean that I'm not doing anything for my overall health and doing anything for my overall health and doing anything for my overall health and fitness. On Tuesdays, I do a series of heat cold On Tuesdays, I do a series of heat cold On Tuesdays, I do a series of heat cold contrast. In other words, I get really, contrast. In other words, I get really, contrast. In other words, I get really, really warm, and then I get really, really warm, and then I get really, really warm, and then I get really, really cold. I get really, really warm, really cold. I get really, really warm, really cold. I get really, really warm, and I get really, really cold and I get really, really cold and I get really, really cold repeatedly. And the way I do that is by repeatedly. And the way I do that is by repeatedly. And the way I do that is by getting into a hot sauna. So, for me, getting into a hot sauna. So, for me, getting into a hot sauna. So, for me, that's really hot, but I've built up my that's really hot, but I've built up my that's really hot, but I've built up my heat conditioning, so please don't do heat conditioning, so please don't do heat conditioning, so please don't do this unless you've built up your uh this unless you've built up your uh this unless you've built up your uh ability to withstand heat. And I'll get ability to withstand heat. And I'll get ability to withstand heat. And I'll get in for about 20 minutes, sometimes 15, in for about 20 minutes, sometimes 15, in for about 20 minutes, sometimes 15, but usually 20 minutes. Then I get out but usually 20 minutes. Then I get out but usually 20 minutes. Then I get out and then I will get into an ice bath or and then I will get into an ice bath or and then I will get into an ice bath or a cold water bath that's about 45 to 50 a cold water bath that's about 45 to 50 a cold water bath that's about 45 to 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Again, don't get degrees Fahrenheit. Again, don't get degrees Fahrenheit. Again, don't get into water that's so cold that you go into water that's so cold that you go into water that's so cold that you go into shock. I'll explain what a good into shock. I'll explain what a good into shock. I'll explain what a good cold stimulus could be for you and how to stimulus could be for you and how to stimulus could be for you and how to determine that. Or if I don't have determine that. Or if I don't have determine that. Or if I don't have access to my sauna and my ice bath, access to my sauna and my ice bath, access to my sauna and my ice bath, what I can do if I'm traveling is I will what I can do if I'm traveling is I will what I can do if I'm traveling is I will take a hot bath and then alternate with take a hot bath and then alternate with take a hot bath and then alternate with cold shower. Hot bath, cold shower. cold shower. Hot bath, cold shower. cold shower. Hot bath, cold shower. It's hard to do hot bath, ice bath It's hard to do hot bath, ice bath It's hard to do hot bath, ice bath unless you have two baths. I don't know unless you have two baths. I don't know unless you have two baths. I don't know any hotel rooms, at least I've never any hotel rooms, at least I've never any hotel rooms, at least I've never stayed in one that has two baths, stayed in one that has two baths, stayed in one that has two baths, although I'm sure they're out there. although I'm sure they're out there. although I'm sure they're out there. But for me, this is heat cold contrast. But for me, this is heat cold contrast. But for me, this is heat cold contrast. And really what this day is about is two And really what this day is about is two And really what this day is about is two things. First of all, I'm trying to things. First of all, I'm trying to things. First of all, I'm trying to accelerate recovery from the leg workout accelerate recovery from the leg workout accelerate recovery from the leg workout I did previously. Also, if you listen to I did previously. Also, if you listen to I did previously. Also, if you listen to our episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast our episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast our episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast about deliberate heat exposure or you about deliberate heat exposure or you about deliberate heat exposure or you listen to our episode of the Huberman listen to our episode of the Huberman listen to our episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast about deliberate cold Lab Podcast about deliberate cold Lab Podcast about deliberate cold exposure, I talk about some of the benefits of I talk about some of the benefits of I talk about some of the benefits of heat and cold and I get into a lot of heat and cold and I get into a lot of heat and cold and I get into a lot of details about how you can access heat. details about how you can access heat. details about how you can access heat. You can do baths, you can do saunas, you You can do baths, you can do saunas, you You can do baths, you can do saunas, you can even take hot showers. If you don't can even take hot showers. If you don't can even take hot showers. If you don't have access to any of that, you can even have access to any of that, you can even have access to any of that, you can even wrap your body from the neck down in wrap your body from the neck down in wrap your body from the neck down in garbage bag, plastic garbage bags, garbage bag, plastic garbage bags, garbage bag, plastic garbage bags, believe it not. Wrestlers used to do believe it not. Wrestlers used to do believe it not. Wrestlers used to do this. Put on some sweats and go running. this. Put on some sweats and go running. this. Put on some sweats and go running. That'll get you warm. Again, be careful That'll get you warm. Again, be careful That'll get you warm. Again, be careful not to overheat. And then you can get not to overheat. And then you can get not to overheat. And then you can get into a cold shower. So, there's a lot of into a cold shower. So, there's a lot of into a cold shower. So, there's a lot of ways depending on your budget and what ways depending on your budget and what ways depending on your budget and what you have access to. you have access to. you have access to. I don't use cryo these cryotherapy I don't use cryo these cryotherapy I don't use cryo these cryotherapy chambers. They're hard to find, they're chambers. They're hard to find, they're chambers. They're hard to find, they're expensive. Again, I use sauna and ice expensive. Again, I use sauna and ice expensive. Again, I use sauna and ice bath and I will do bath and I will do bath and I will do anywhere from three to five rounds, anywhere from three to five rounds, anywhere from three to five rounds, which is a lot. Anywhere from three to which is a lot. Anywhere from three to which is a lot. Anywhere from three to five rounds of heat for about 20 minutes five rounds of heat for about 20 minutes five rounds of heat for about 20 minutes and cold for about five minutes. and cold for about five minutes. and cold for about five minutes. How cold should the cold be? We covered How cold should the cold be? We covered How cold should the cold be? We covered this in the episode on deliberate cold this in the episode on deliberate cold this in the episode on deliberate cold exposure. Here's a general rule of exposure. Here's a general rule of exposure. Here's a general rule of thumb. It should be thumb. It should be thumb. It should be cold enough that you really want to get cold enough that you really want to get cold enough that you really want to get out, but not so cold that it's unsafe. out, but not so cold that it's unsafe. out, but not so cold that it's unsafe. And that will vary from person to And that will vary from person to And that will vary from person to person, so I cannot give you a person, so I cannot give you a person, so I cannot give you a simple prescriptive there. Same thing simple prescriptive there. Same thing simple prescriptive there. Same thing with the heat. Hot enough that you're with the heat. Hot enough that you're with the heat. Hot enough that you're sweating and that you want to get out, sweating and that you want to get out, sweating and that you want to get out, but not so hot that you're running the but not so hot that you're running the but not so hot that you're running the risk of injuring yourself or killing risk of injuring yourself or killing risk of injuring yourself or killing yourself. And again, that will vary from yourself. And again, that will vary from yourself. And again, that will vary from person to person, so you have to build person to person, so you have to build person to person, so you have to build up slowly, be careful, and build up slowly, be careful, and build up slowly, be careful, and build up empirically. I do that on Tuesdays again empirically. I do that on Tuesdays again empirically. I do that on Tuesdays again as a way to accelerate recovery and as a way to accelerate recovery and as a way to accelerate recovery and because it's very clear that there because it's very clear that there because it's very clear that there cardiovascular benefits, maybe even cardiovascular benefits, maybe even cardiovascular benefits, maybe even benefits for the brain benefits for the brain benefits for the brain related to the cardiovascular benefits, related to the cardiovascular benefits, related to the cardiovascular benefits, because of course the brain needs a lot because of course the brain needs a lot because of course the brain needs a lot of blood flow and needs a lot of um of blood flow and needs a lot of um of blood flow and needs a lot of um nutrients and other things flowing into nutrients and other things flowing into nutrients and other things flowing into and out of there, debris out and out of there, debris out and out of there, debris out and nutrients and other things into the nutrients and other things into the nutrients and other things into the brain. Heat can help accelerate that or improve Heat can help accelerate that or improve Heat can help accelerate that or improve that, and so I'm doing that to improve that, and so I'm doing that to improve that, and so I'm doing that to improve cardiovascular function, improve brain cardiovascular function, improve brain cardiovascular function, improve brain health, and then the cold contrast and then the cold contrast and then the cold contrast provides a sort of accelerator on that provides a sort of accelerator on that provides a sort of accelerator on that or an amplifier, I think is the better or an amplifier, I think is the better or an amplifier, I think is the better way to phrase it, on that process way to phrase it, on that process way to phrase it, on that process because in the cold you get because in the cold you get because in the cold you get vaso-constriction and then in the heat vaso-constriction and then in the heat vaso-constriction and then in the heat you get vaso-dilation, and so you're you get vaso-dilation, and so you're you get vaso-dilation, and so you're maximizing that process, which is maximizing that process, which is maximizing that process, which is actually a neural process. Nerves actually a neural process. Nerves actually a neural process. Nerves actually innervate the blood vessels and actually innervate the blood vessels and actually innervate the blood vessels and capillaries and even the arteries in capillaries and even the arteries in capillaries and even the arteries in order to allow that constriction and order to allow that constriction and order to allow that constriction and dilation process to occur. dilation process to occur. dilation process to occur. So, Tuesday is really about recovery, So, Tuesday is really about recovery, So, Tuesday is really about recovery, but my recovery day isn't necessarily but my recovery day isn't necessarily but my recovery day isn't necessarily about uh just laying around and not about uh just laying around and not about uh just laying around and not doing anything. I might still also take doing anything. I might still also take doing anything. I might still also take some walks that day. Remember, I want to some walks that day. Remember, I want to some walks that day. Remember, I want to try and get that 200 minutes of zone two try and get that 200 minutes of zone two try and get that 200 minutes of zone two cardio across the week, and sometimes, cardio across the week, and sometimes, cardio across the week, and sometimes, not often, but sometimes I'll get in a not often, but sometimes I'll get in a not often, but sometimes I'll get in a few um minutes or more of walking few um minutes or more of walking few um minutes or more of walking quickly that day, but generally I'm quickly that day, but generally I'm quickly that day, but generally I'm working a lot on Tuesday as I do on working a lot on Tuesday as I do on working a lot on Tuesday as I do on Monday, and I'm a little bit tired and Monday, and I'm a little bit tired and Monday, and I'm a little bit tired and maybe even a little bit sore from my leg maybe even a little bit sore from my leg maybe even a little bit sore from my leg workout the previous day, Monday, so I workout the previous day, Monday, so I workout the previous day, Monday, so I try and get that hot-cold contrast. try and get that hot-cold contrast. try and get that hot-cold contrast. There are other benefits to hot and cold There are other benefits to hot and cold There are other benefits to hot and cold contrast. We have a description of the different We have a description of the different We have a description of the different protocols for hot and for cold and their protocols for hot and for cold and their protocols for hot and for cold and their contrast at our Huberman Lab newsletter. contrast at our Huberman Lab newsletter. contrast at our Huberman Lab newsletter. You can find that by going to You can find that by going to You can find that by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the newsletter hubermanlab.com, go to the newsletter hubermanlab.com, go to the newsletter tab under the menu, and you can sign up. tab under the menu, and you can sign up. tab under the menu, and you can sign up. You can actually download those You can actually download those You can actually download those protocols very easily protocols very easily protocols very easily without even signing up if you just want without even signing up if you just want without even signing up if you just want to access them straight off. So, to access them straight off. So, to access them straight off. So, Tuesday's really about recovering and Tuesday's really about recovering and Tuesday's really about recovering and about getting some additional about getting some additional about getting some additional cardiovascular benefits from heat cold cardiovascular benefits from heat cold cardiovascular benefits from heat cold contrast. One other thing that's built contrast. One other thing that's built contrast. One other thing that's built into the rationale for doing a lot of into the rationale for doing a lot of into the rationale for doing a lot of heat and cold on one day as opposed to heat and cold on one day as opposed to heat and cold on one day as opposed to doing it every day. Well, in addition to doing it every day. Well, in addition to doing it every day. Well, in addition to it being a little bit more convenient it being a little bit more convenient it being a little bit more convenient because certainly some people don't have because certainly some people don't have because certainly some people don't have access to heat and cold sauna and cold access to heat and cold sauna and cold access to heat and cold sauna and cold dunks, etc. every day. So, maybe getting dunks, etc. every day. So, maybe getting dunks, etc. every day. So, maybe getting to a day that one day is more accessible to a day that one day is more accessible to a day that one day is more accessible or feasible. But, in addition to that, or feasible. But, in addition to that, or feasible. But, in addition to that, it's very clear that while there are it's very clear that while there are it's very clear that while there are benefits to doing sauna often, and we benefits to doing sauna often, and we benefits to doing sauna often, and we talked about this in the deliberate heat talked about this in the deliberate heat talked about this in the deliberate heat episode and the episode with Dr. Rhonda episode and the episode with Dr. Rhonda episode and the episode with Dr. Rhonda Patrick when she was a guest on this Patrick when she was a guest on this Patrick when she was a guest on this podcast, it's also clear that if you do sauna it's also clear that if you do sauna it's also clear that if you do sauna seldom, that is once a week, but you do seldom, that is once a week, but you do seldom, that is once a week, but you do a lot of it on one day, so in this case a lot of it on one day, so in this case a lot of it on one day, so in this case it's an hour, if it's remember it's or it's an hour, if it's remember it's or it's an hour, if it's remember it's or more, it's three to five rounds of 20 more, it's three to five rounds of 20 more, it's three to five rounds of 20 minutes of sauna followed by about five minutes of sauna followed by about five minutes of sauna followed by about five minutes of cold or so, minutes of cold or so, minutes of cold or so, by doing that all on one day, by doing that all on one day, by doing that all on one day, the peer-reviewed research that's the peer-reviewed research that's the peer-reviewed research that's covered in the episode on deliberate covered in the episode on deliberate covered in the episode on deliberate heat, this is a study out of Finland, showed this is a study out of Finland, showed this is a study out of Finland, showed that you get massive, even 16-fold that you get massive, even 16-fold that you get massive, even 16-fold increases in growth hormone, which are increases in growth hormone, which are increases in growth hormone, which are extremely beneficial for metabolism and extremely beneficial for metabolism and extremely beneficial for metabolism and for recovery. So, these massive for recovery. So, these massive for recovery. So, these massive increases in growth hormone are seen increases in growth hormone are seen increases in growth hormone are seen when you are doing these sessions of when you are doing these sessions of when you are doing these sessions of sauna that are repeated on the same day sauna that are repeated on the same day sauna that are repeated on the same day and you're only doing that about once a and you're only doing that about once a and you're only doing that about once a week, whereas if you do sauna more week, whereas if you do sauna more week, whereas if you do sauna more often, there are certainly benefits to often, there are certainly benefits to often, there are certainly benefits to that, but it's time-consuming and you that, but it's time-consuming and you that, but it's time-consuming and you need access to sauna more often than one need access to sauna more often than one need access to sauna more often than one day a week if you're doing it more than day a week if you're doing it more than day a week if you're doing it more than one day a week. But, if you do it one day a week. But, if you do it one day a week. But, if you do it one day a week and you're doing a lot of day a week and you're doing a lot of day a week and you're doing a lot of sessions within that day, sessions within that day, sessions within that day, as I've detailed here, you see these as I've detailed here, you see these as I've detailed here, you see these massive increases in growth hormone that massive increases in growth hormone that massive increases in growth hormone that are not observed if you're doing sauna are not observed if you're doing sauna are not observed if you're doing sauna more often for the other benefits of more often for the other benefits of more often for the other benefits of sauna. Now, the effects of cold are sauna. Now, the effects of cold are sauna. Now, the effects of cold are many, it's not just vasoconstriction, many, it's not just vasoconstriction, many, it's not just vasoconstriction, but the effects of cold are also but the effects of cold are also but the effects of cold are also counterbalanced by some of the problems counterbalanced by some of the problems counterbalanced by some of the problems with deliberate cold exposure that maybe with deliberate cold exposure that maybe with deliberate cold exposure that maybe you've heard about on this podcast and a you've heard about on this podcast and a you've heard about on this podcast and a lot of other podcasts and seem to be a lot of other podcasts and seem to be a lot of other podcasts and seem to be a kind of a kind of a kind of a buzz theme on Twitter and elsewhere. And buzz theme on Twitter and elsewhere. And buzz theme on Twitter and elsewhere. And the point is this, there are a number of the point is this, there are a number of the point is this, there are a number of quality studies showing that if you do quality studies showing that if you do quality studies showing that if you do deliberate cold exposure, in particular deliberate cold exposure, in particular deliberate cold exposure, in particular ice baths or getting into very cold ice baths or getting into very cold ice baths or getting into very cold water immediately after an endurance training immediately after an endurance training immediately after an endurance training session or a strength and hypertrophy session or a strength and hypertrophy session or a strength and hypertrophy session, it can indeed, yes, it can it can indeed, yes, it can it can indeed, yes, it can disrupt or prevent some of the disrupt or prevent some of the disrupt or prevent some of the adaptations that you are seeking with adaptations that you are seeking with adaptations that you are seeking with strength and hypertrophy and endurance strength and hypertrophy and endurance strength and hypertrophy and endurance workouts. Okay, so you heard that right and I Okay, so you heard that right and I Okay, so you heard that right and I believe that to be true based on now believe that to be true based on now believe that to be true based on now several quality peer-reviewed studies. several quality peer-reviewed studies. several quality peer-reviewed studies. So by doing your deliberate cold So by doing your deliberate cold So by doing your deliberate cold exposure on Tuesday, you're not going to exposure on Tuesday, you're not going to exposure on Tuesday, you're not going to get those effects, get those effects, get those effects, that is the blocking of hypertrophy or that is the blocking of hypertrophy or that is the blocking of hypertrophy or the blocking of strength improvement or the blocking of strength improvement or the blocking of strength improvement or the blocking or prevention of the blocking or prevention of the blocking or prevention of improvements in endurance that would improvements in endurance that would improvements in endurance that would occur if you immediately got into the occur if you immediately got into the occur if you immediately got into the ice bath after a hypertrophy, strength ice bath after a hypertrophy, strength ice bath after a hypertrophy, strength or endurance workout. Now the caveat to or endurance workout. Now the caveat to or endurance workout. Now the caveat to that is if you are somebody who likes to that is if you are somebody who likes to that is if you are somebody who likes to do cold showers, I am not aware of any do cold showers, I am not aware of any do cold showers, I am not aware of any data that says that cold showers cannot data that says that cold showers cannot data that says that cold showers cannot be performed after a strength, be performed after a strength, be performed after a strength, hypertrophy or endurance workout. hypertrophy or endurance workout. hypertrophy or endurance workout. Cold showers are different than Cold showers are different than Cold showers are different than submersion up to the neck in an ice bath submersion up to the neck in an ice bath submersion up to the neck in an ice bath or another cold body of water for a or another cold body of water for a or another cold body of water for a number of different reasons. In fact, number of different reasons. In fact, number of different reasons. In fact, they tap into different aspects of the tap into different aspects of the tap into different aspects of the nervous system entirely. We don't have nervous system entirely. We don't have nervous system entirely. We don't have time to go into that now. It's covered time to go into that now. It's covered time to go into that now. It's covered in the episode on deliberate cold in the episode on deliberate cold in the episode on deliberate cold exposure, but exposure, but exposure, but the simple point is by doing your heat the simple point is by doing your heat the simple point is by doing your heat and cold contrast or hey, listen, if and cold contrast or hey, listen, if and cold contrast or hey, listen, if you're somebody who doesn't have access you're somebody who doesn't have access you're somebody who doesn't have access to sauna or you don't like hot baths and to sauna or you don't like hot baths and to sauna or you don't like hot baths and you just do some deliberate cold you just do some deliberate cold you just do some deliberate cold exposure on Tuesday, you are doing that exposure on Tuesday, you are doing that exposure on Tuesday, you are doing that separate from your strength and separate from your strength and separate from your strength and hypertrophy and endurance workouts such hypertrophy and endurance workouts such hypertrophy and endurance workouts such that it will not impede the benefits of that it will not impede the benefits of that it will not impede the benefits of those workouts. Okay, so long endurance those workouts. Okay, so long endurance those workouts. Okay, so long endurance on Sunday, leg resistance training on Sunday, leg resistance training on Sunday, leg resistance training on Monday and on Tuesday, heat cold Monday and on Tuesday, heat cold Monday and on Tuesday, heat cold contrast. That brings us to Wednesday, and on That brings us to Wednesday, and on That brings us to Wednesday, and on Wednesday, we get back to a resistance Wednesday, we get back to a resistance Wednesday, we get back to a resistance training workout. And the resistance training workout. And the resistance training workout. And the resistance training workout that I emphasize on training workout that I emphasize on training workout that I emphasize on Wednesday is one in which you train your Wednesday is one in which you train your Wednesday is one in which you train your torso. Yes, literally your torso. I know torso. Yes, literally your torso. I know torso. Yes, literally your torso. I know this is counter to the so-called bro this is counter to the so-called bro this is counter to the so-called bro science of bro splits. I don't know who science of bro splits. I don't know who science of bro splits. I don't know who originated that term. It's a terrible originated that term. It's a terrible originated that term. It's a terrible term. It essentially term. It essentially term. It essentially alienates anyone who's not a bro or alienates anyone who's not a bro or alienates anyone who's not a bro or considers themselves a bro. But in any considers themselves a bro. But in any considers themselves a bro. But in any case, this is not about training chest or back this is not about training chest or back this is not about training chest or back or shoulders. In fact, or shoulders. In fact, or shoulders. In fact, it's really about strengthening the it's really about strengthening the it's really about strengthening the muscles of the torso, and of course muscles of the torso, and of course muscles of the torso, and of course includes the chest and the shoulders and includes the chest and the shoulders and includes the chest and the shoulders and the back. And I'm sure as I say this, a the back. And I'm sure as I say this, a the back. And I'm sure as I say this, a number of people out there who are number of people out there who are number of people out there who are obsessed with hypertrophy and muscle obsessed with hypertrophy and muscle obsessed with hypertrophy and muscle growth and filling out their shirts or growth and filling out their shirts or growth and filling out their shirts or whatever it may be, are thinking, "Oh, whatever it may be, are thinking, "Oh, whatever it may be, are thinking, "Oh, no, you know, this is just kind of all no, you know, this is just kind of all no, you know, this is just kind of all around fitness." But no, the point is, around fitness." But no, the point is, around fitness." But no, the point is, on Wednesday, you train your torso, on Wednesday, you train your torso, on Wednesday, you train your torso, and that's going to involve some and that's going to involve some and that's going to involve some pushing, so that's good. For you, that pushing, so that's good. For you, that pushing, so that's good. For you, that might include some training of things might include some training of things might include some training of things like bench presses or incline presses, like bench presses or incline presses, like bench presses or incline presses, as well as shoulder presses or lateral as well as shoulder presses or lateral as well as shoulder presses or lateral raises, things for the shoulders, as raises, things for the shoulders, as raises, things for the shoulders, as well as for the back, some pulling well as for the back, some pulling well as for the back, some pulling exercises. These could be bent-over rows exercises. These could be bent-over rows exercises. These could be bent-over rows or chin-ups or pull-ups. Again, there or chin-ups or pull-ups. Again, there or chin-ups or pull-ups. Again, there are enormous number of exercises for are enormous number of exercises for are enormous number of exercises for each and every one of these muscle each and every one of these muscle each and every one of these muscle groups. Now, I believe there's a clear groups. Now, I believe there's a clear groups. Now, I believe there's a clear benefit to training all these muscle benefit to training all these muscle benefit to training all these muscle groups together on the same day. groups together on the same day. groups together on the same day. Because much in the same way that Because much in the same way that Because much in the same way that training legs all on one day can lead to training legs all on one day can lead to training legs all on one day can lead to these systemic effects because they're these systemic effects because they're these systemic effects because they're large muscle groups, working both the large muscle groups, working both the large muscle groups, working both the pushing muscles and the pulling muscles pushing muscles and the pulling muscles pushing muscles and the pulling muscles of the torso on one day, at least in the of the torso on one day, at least in the of the torso on one day, at least in the context of this program, is very time context of this program, is very time context of this program, is very time efficient, and efficient, and efficient, and tends to wick out into a number of tends to wick out into a number of tends to wick out into a number of different dimensions of health that at different dimensions of health that at different dimensions of health that at least I'm interested in, and I think a least I'm interested in, and I think a least I'm interested in, and I think a lot of other people are interested in. lot of other people are interested in. lot of other people are interested in. What are those? Well, let's think again. What are those? Well, let's think again. What are those? Well, let's think again. I want to be strong in not just my legs, I want to be strong in not just my legs, I want to be strong in not just my legs, but my upper body. I also may want may but my upper body. I also may want may but my upper body. I also may want may want to want to want to engage some hypertrophy, to grow certain engage some hypertrophy, to grow certain engage some hypertrophy, to grow certain muscle groups in to create a sense of muscle groups in to create a sense of muscle groups in to create a sense of balance. That could be for aesthetic balance. That could be for aesthetic balance. That could be for aesthetic reasons, but also for balancing strength reasons, but also for balancing strength reasons, but also for balancing strength and for health of the and the integrity and for health of the and the integrity and for health of the and the integrity of the joints, etc. And in addition to of the joints, etc. And in addition to of the joints, etc. And in addition to that, by training a bunch of different that, by training a bunch of different that, by training a bunch of different muscle groups together, muscle groups together, muscle groups together, you have the opportunity to get the more you have the opportunity to get the more you have the opportunity to get the more systemic hormonal effects and metabolic systemic hormonal effects and metabolic systemic hormonal effects and metabolic effects that occur when you're not just effects that occur when you're not just effects that occur when you're not just training one muscle group and isolating training one muscle group and isolating training one muscle group and isolating that one muscle group, but rather that one muscle group, but rather that one muscle group, but rather training a bunch of muscle groups training a bunch of muscle groups training a bunch of muscle groups together. So, Wednesday I train torso and I do So, Wednesday I train torso and I do So, Wednesday I train torso and I do that in push-pull fashion just for um that in push-pull fashion just for um that in push-pull fashion just for um kind of time efficiency. kind of time efficiency. kind of time efficiency. Sometimes that means doing a pushing Sometimes that means doing a pushing Sometimes that means doing a pushing exercise and then a pulling exercise. exercise and then a pulling exercise. exercise and then a pulling exercise. Sometimes it might even mean doing a set Sometimes it might even mean doing a set Sometimes it might even mean doing a set of pushing and then a set of pulling and of pushing and then a set of pulling and of pushing and then a set of pulling and going back and forth. However, if you're going back and forth. However, if you're going back and forth. However, if you're in a gym in a particular crowded gym, in a gym in a particular crowded gym, in a gym in a particular crowded gym, please don't be one of those people that please don't be one of those people that please don't be one of those people that colonizes multiple pieces of equipment colonizes multiple pieces of equipment colonizes multiple pieces of equipment and says, "I'm working there. I'm and says, "I'm working there. I'm and says, "I'm working there. I'm working there." And you know, that can working there." And you know, that can working there." And you know, that can be quite a dance and it can be hard to be quite a dance and it can be hard to be quite a dance and it can be hard to orchestrate a workout like that. So, to orchestrate a workout like that. So, to orchestrate a workout like that. So, sometimes it will be, you know, starting sometimes it will be, you know, starting sometimes it will be, you know, starting off with a set of shoulder presses and off with a set of shoulder presses and off with a set of shoulder presses and then doing all, you know, all your sets then doing all, you know, all your sets then doing all, you know, all your sets of those and then moving to your of those and then moving to your of those and then moving to your chin-ups and then moving perhaps back to chin-ups and then moving perhaps back to chin-ups and then moving perhaps back to shoulders and realizing, "Ah, shoulders and realizing, "Ah, shoulders and realizing, "Ah, oh, someone's on the machine that I oh, someone's on the machine that I oh, someone's on the machine that I wanted or using the equipment that I wanted or using the equipment that I wanted or using the equipment that I wanted." So, I'll just finish up the wanted." So, I'll just finish up the wanted." So, I'll just finish up the pulling. I'll finish up the back work pulling. I'll finish up the back work pulling. I'll finish up the back work and then going to the push. I don't and then going to the push. I don't and then going to the push. I don't obsess over the alternation in any kind obsess over the alternation in any kind obsess over the alternation in any kind of strict way. I really just try and get of strict way. I really just try and get of strict way. I really just try and get the muscles of the torso trained. And the muscles of the torso trained. And the muscles of the torso trained. And again, it's two exercises per muscle again, it's two exercises per muscle again, it's two exercises per muscle group and one of those exercises is group and one of those exercises is group and one of those exercises is going to be something where there's going to be something where there's going to be something where there's I realize this isn't physiologically I realize this isn't physiologically I realize this isn't physiologically accurate, but a shortening of the muscle accurate, but a shortening of the muscle accurate, but a shortening of the muscle or where they at the end of the or where they at the end of the or where they at the end of the movement, the muscle is under maximal movement, the muscle is under maximal movement, the muscle is under maximal contraction. I could throw out some names of I could throw out some names of I could throw out some names of exercises just for purpose of exercises just for purpose of exercises just for purpose of understanding. So, this would be, you understanding. So, this would be, you understanding. So, this would be, you know, um know, um know, um like cable crossovers for the chest. The like cable crossovers for the chest. The like cable crossovers for the chest. The the uh the peak contraction is at the uh the peak contraction is at the uh the peak contraction is at the end, whereas uh something like an end, whereas uh something like an end, whereas uh something like an incline press, there's more of a stretch incline press, there's more of a stretch incline press, there's more of a stretch provided it's done over a full range of provided it's done over a full range of provided it's done over a full range of motion at the beginning of the movement. motion at the beginning of the movement. motion at the beginning of the movement. So, again, something where there's a So, again, something where there's a So, again, something where there's a stretch and something where there's a stretch and something where there's a stretch and something where there's a peak contraction. For the shoulders, peak contraction. For the shoulders, peak contraction. For the shoulders, it's a little bit harder to do, although it's a little bit harder to do, although it's a little bit harder to do, although there are ways to do that. And Jeff there are ways to do that. And Jeff there are ways to do that. And Jeff Cavaliere has excellent workouts Cavaliere has excellent workouts Cavaliere has excellent workouts available zero cost on YouTube. He also available zero cost on YouTube. He also available zero cost on YouTube. He also has excellent programs on his has excellent programs on his has excellent programs on his athleanx.com site, but certainly has a athleanx.com site, but certainly has a athleanx.com site, but certainly has a lot of excellent protocols on his lot of excellent protocols on his lot of excellent protocols on his YouTube and Instagram, but on YouTube and Instagram, but on YouTube and Instagram, but on YouTube you can put in you can put in you can put in his name and any muscle group that you his name and any muscle group that you his name and any muscle group that you want to train and has some terrific want to train and has some terrific want to train and has some terrific videos describing exercise choice and videos describing exercise choice and videos describing exercise choice and other features of exercise parameters. other features of exercise parameters. other features of exercise parameters. Again, a peak contraction or shortening Again, a peak contraction or shortening Again, a peak contraction or shortening of the muscle peak contraction exercise of the muscle peak contraction exercise of the muscle peak contraction exercise and a stretching exercise. And so for and a stretching exercise. And so for and a stretching exercise. And so for the back might say okay, a seated row or the back might say okay, a seated row or the back might say okay, a seated row or a bent-over row or a dumbbell row where a bent-over row or a dumbbell row where a bent-over row or a dumbbell row where the elbow is brought behind the torso the elbow is brought behind the torso the elbow is brought behind the torso for a peak contraction movement and then for a peak contraction movement and then for a peak contraction movement and then for more of a stretching movement might for more of a stretching movement might for more of a stretching movement might be something like a be something like a be something like a chin-up or a pull-up. And as I say a chin-up or a pull-up. And as I say a chin-up or a pull-up. And as I say this, I understand that stretching and this, I understand that stretching and this, I understand that stretching and peak contraction aren't the exact terms peak contraction aren't the exact terms peak contraction aren't the exact terms that one would use if they were a that one would use if they were a that one would use if they were a physiotherapist or a strength and physiotherapist or a strength and physiotherapist or a strength and conditioning coach, but I think for the conditioning coach, but I think for the conditioning coach, but I think for the typical person who's trying to generate typical person who's trying to generate typical person who's trying to generate strength and hypertrophy in those strength and hypertrophy in those strength and hypertrophy in those muscles or maintain strength and muscles or maintain strength and muscles or maintain strength and hypertrophy in those muscles, this kind hypertrophy in those muscles, this kind hypertrophy in those muscles, this kind of nomenclature way of describing it at of nomenclature way of describing it at of nomenclature way of describing it at least should be least should be least should be clear and even efficient. And just clear and even efficient. And just clear and even efficient. And just to remind you, as with the leg workout, to remind you, as with the leg workout, to remind you, as with the leg workout, the total duration of the torso workout the total duration of the torso workout the total duration of the torso workout is going to be 50 to 60 minutes after a is going to be 50 to 60 minutes after a is going to be 50 to 60 minutes after a brief warm-up. The sets and repetitions brief warm-up. The sets and repetitions brief warm-up. The sets and repetitions are going to be dictated in the same way are going to be dictated in the same way are going to be dictated in the same way that I described earlier. So for about a that I described earlier. So for about a that I described earlier. So for about a month, it's going to be month, it's going to be month, it's going to be more sets, so anywhere from three to more sets, so anywhere from three to more sets, so anywhere from three to five sets in the lower repetition range, five sets in the lower repetition range, five sets in the lower repetition range, so four to eight rep repetitions. So so four to eight rep repetitions. So so four to eight rep repetitions. So that's going to be heavier weights and that's going to be heavier weights and that's going to be heavier weights and longer rest as I described earlier, the longer rest as I described earlier, the longer rest as I described earlier, the rest intervals. And then for the next rest intervals. And then for the next rest intervals. And then for the next month, it's going to be moderate month, it's going to be moderate month, it's going to be moderate repetitions, fewer sets, the same way I repetitions, fewer sets, the same way I repetitions, fewer sets, the same way I described earlier. And if you want more described earlier. And if you want more described earlier. And if you want more details on all of that, you can find details on all of that, you can find details on all of that, you can find that in the newsletter related to the that in the newsletter related to the that in the newsletter related to the optimal or foundational fitness protocol optimal or foundational fitness protocol optimal or foundational fitness protocol that you can access at hubermanlab.com. that you can access at hubermanlab.com. that you can access at hubermanlab.com. One thing I should note about the One thing I should note about the One thing I should note about the Wednesday torso workout is that I am a Wednesday torso workout is that I am a Wednesday torso workout is that I am a big believer in training the what I big believer in training the what I big believer in training the what I believe is the highly uh believe is the highly uh believe is the highly uh avoided or at least overlooked but avoided or at least overlooked but avoided or at least overlooked but vitally important aspect of total body vitally important aspect of total body vitally important aspect of total body stability, strength, and safety really, stability, strength, and safety really, stability, strength, and safety really, safety, which is the neck. I realize a safety, which is the neck. I realize a safety, which is the neck. I realize a lot of people don't want a large neck lot of people don't want a large neck lot of people don't want a large neck and I totally understand for aesthetic and I totally understand for aesthetic and I totally understand for aesthetic reasons why they don't want that. It's reasons why they don't want that. It's reasons why they don't want that. It's kind of interesting actually if you kind of interesting actually if you kind of interesting actually if you think about it that people have a large think about it that people have a large think about it that people have a large neck are often told they have no neck. neck are often told they have no neck. neck are often told they have no neck. People say that guy has no neck. Or they People say that guy has no neck. Or they People say that guy has no neck. Or they have no neck when in fact they're have no neck when in fact they're have no neck when in fact they're referring to the fact that they have a referring to the fact that they have a referring to the fact that they have a very large neck. I don't know how that very large neck. I don't know how that very large neck. I don't know how that came to be. Somebody put in the comments came to be. Somebody put in the comments came to be. Somebody put in the comments why that is. How come when people have a why that is. How come when people have a why that is. How come when people have a big neck they refer to it as no neck? So big neck they refer to it as no neck? So big neck they refer to it as no neck? So why do I train the neck? I train the why do I train the neck? I train the why do I train the neck? I train the neck for a couple of reasons. One is neck for a couple of reasons. One is neck for a couple of reasons. One is years ago I had an accident where I years ago I had an accident where I years ago I had an accident where I actually fell off a roof and I'd been actually fell off a roof and I'd been actually fell off a roof and I'd been training my neck at that time training my neck at that time training my neck at that time uh for a sport that I was involved in and I for a sport that I was involved in and I for a sport that I was involved in and I walked away from it with a sore neck but walked away from it with a sore neck but walked away from it with a sore neck but not a broken neck and I thought, "Wow, not a broken neck and I thought, "Wow, not a broken neck and I thought, "Wow, it's really great that I have um it's really great that I have um it's really great that I have um uh been training my neck." In addition uh been training my neck." In addition uh been training my neck." In addition to that, I was once in a car accident to that, I was once in a car accident to that, I was once in a car accident where I was where I was where I was parked just bought the car. It's my parked just bought the car. It's my parked just bought the car. It's my first new car purchase. Parked in that first new car purchase. Parked in that first new car purchase. Parked in that car with my mother and my grandfather in the with my mother and my grandfather in the with my mother and my grandfather in the back seat back seat back seat at the red light and someone rammed into at the red light and someone rammed into at the red light and someone rammed into us at full speed. Now fortunately none us at full speed. Now fortunately none us at full speed. Now fortunately none of us were hurt. We were all um rattled of us were hurt. We were all um rattled of us were hurt. We were all um rattled um and once again I was very sore in my and once again I was very sore in my and once again I was very sore in my back and in my neck but I think one of back and in my neck but I think one of back and in my neck but I think one of the reasons why the reasons why the reasons why I was able to essentially walk away from I was able to essentially walk away from I was able to essentially walk away from that, I didn't have any um sustained that, I didn't have any um sustained that, I didn't have any um sustained damage was because I trained my neck. damage was because I trained my neck. damage was because I trained my neck. But I started training my neck for sport But I started training my neck for sport But I started training my neck for sport and I continue to train my neck because and I continue to train my neck because and I continue to train my neck because I noticed when I don't train my neck I noticed when I don't train my neck I noticed when I don't train my neck I start getting shoulder issues. And if start getting shoulder issues. And if start getting shoulder issues. And if you talk to an excellent physiologist you talk to an excellent physiologist you talk to an excellent physiologist like Dr. Kelly Starrett of The Ready like Dr. Kelly Starrett of The Ready like Dr. Kelly Starrett of The Ready State. He has an excellent channel. You State. He has an excellent channel. You State. He has an excellent channel. You can find him on all the social media and can find him on all the social media and can find him on all the social media and standard channels or you talk to standard channels or you talk to standard channels or you talk to uh anyone out there who really understands anyone out there who really understands anyone out there who really understands the strength of the torso and the upper the strength of the torso and the upper the strength of the torso and the upper body and even the back, what you learn body and even the back, what you learn body and even the back, what you learn is that is that is that of course being the upper portion of the of course being the upper portion of the of course being the upper portion of the spine, stabilizing your neck is very spine, stabilizing your neck is very spine, stabilizing your neck is very important. Now training the neck can be important. Now training the neck can be important. Now training the neck can be a little bit detailed and specific and a little bit detailed and specific and a little bit detailed and specific and even dangerous if you do it wrong. even dangerous if you do it wrong. even dangerous if you do it wrong. Again, Jeff Cavalier has a terrific set Again, Jeff Cavalier has a terrific set Again, Jeff Cavalier has a terrific set of videos on training the neck properly. of videos on training the neck properly. of videos on training the neck properly. I know a lot of people out there might I know a lot of people out there might I know a lot of people out there might think neck bridges, and I used to do think neck bridges, and I used to do think neck bridges, and I used to do neck bridges. I neck bridges. I neck bridges. I occasionally still sneak in a neck occasionally still sneak in a neck occasionally still sneak in a neck bridge here or there, although I don't bridge here or there, although I don't bridge here or there, although I don't recommend it because in discussions with recommend it because in discussions with recommend it because in discussions with Jeff, he will tell you, and it's true, that he will tell you, and it's true, that he will tell you, and it's true, that the discs eventually go, and you can run the discs eventually go, and you can run the discs eventually go, and you can run into serious issues from doing bridges. into serious issues from doing bridges. into serious issues from doing bridges. And it doesn't happen gradually, so you And it doesn't happen gradually, so you And it doesn't happen gradually, so you can't notice it happening. It just can't notice it happening. It just can't notice it happening. It just happens suddenly. So, I might happens suddenly. So, I might happens suddenly. So, I might occasionally do a neck bridge, but in occasionally do a neck bridge, but in occasionally do a neck bridge, but in general, I'll train neck by wrapping a general, I'll train neck by wrapping a general, I'll train neck by wrapping a plate in a towel so that I don't end up plate in a towel so that I don't end up plate in a towel so that I don't end up with an imprint of the weight value with an imprint of the weight value with an imprint of the weight value on my head or face, and then moving the on my head or face, and then moving the on my head or face, and then moving the neck from side to side or front or back. neck from side to side or front or back. neck from side to side or front or back. And again, I will provide a link to And again, I will provide a link to And again, I will provide a link to those videos. It's a terrific set of those videos. It's a terrific set of those videos. It's a terrific set of videos that describe how to train your videos that describe how to train your videos that describe how to train your neck properly and safely. So, even if neck properly and safely. So, even if neck properly and safely. So, even if you're not trying to grow your neck, you you're not trying to grow your neck, you you're not trying to grow your neck, you definitely want to make sure that use definitely want to make sure that use definitely want to make sure that use some light weights to make sure that some light weights to make sure that some light weights to make sure that your neck is stable and upright. I say your neck is stable and upright. I say your neck is stable and upright. I say stable and upright because it's very stable and upright because it's very stable and upright because it's very clear that clear that clear that reasons related to texting and staring reasons related to texting and staring reasons related to texting and staring down at computers and related to weak down at computers and related to weak down at computers and related to weak neck relative to the rest of the muscles neck relative to the rest of the muscles neck relative to the rest of the muscles that stabilize the spine, a lot of that stabilize the spine, a lot of that stabilize the spine, a lot of people their default stance or their default their default stance or their default their default stance or their default posture is with chin forward, and that's posture is with chin forward, and that's posture is with chin forward, and that's not good. Not only is it aesthetically not good. Not only is it aesthetically not good. Not only is it aesthetically not good, not good, not good, but it also can create all sorts of but it also can create all sorts of but it also can create all sorts of issues related to back pain and issues related to back pain and issues related to back pain and headaches and things of that sort. This headaches and things of that sort. This headaches and things of that sort. This is a real thing. Training your neck is a real thing. Training your neck is a real thing. Training your neck allows you to stand upright, sit allows you to stand upright, sit allows you to stand upright, sit upright. I even believe that it allows upright. I even believe that it allows upright. I even believe that it allows you to do things like public speaking or you to do things like public speaking or you to do things like public speaking or have conversations with people on the have conversations with people on the have conversations with people on the street in a way where you are front street in a way where you are front street in a way where you are front facing as opposed to looking down. So, facing as opposed to looking down. So, facing as opposed to looking down. So, Wednesday is torso and neck, Wednesday is torso and neck, Wednesday is torso and neck, and then comes Thursday, and that means and then comes Thursday, and that means and then comes Thursday, and that means another cardiovascular another cardiovascular another cardiovascular exercise session. exercise session. exercise session. Although, it's a brief one. Unlike the Although, it's a brief one. Unlike the Although, it's a brief one. Unlike the endurance training on Sunday, the endurance training on Sunday, the endurance training on Sunday, the cardiovascular session on Thursday, cardiovascular session on Thursday, cardiovascular session on Thursday, and again, for me, it falls on Thursday, and again, for me, it falls on Thursday, and again, for me, it falls on Thursday, but for you, it could fall on a but for you, it could fall on a but for you, it could fall on a different day depending on when you different day depending on when you different day depending on when you started this protocol started this protocol started this protocol is going to be about again about 35 is going to be about again about 35 is going to be about again about 35 minutes of for me running although it could be of for me running although it could be of for me running although it could be rowing or it could be cycling it could rowing or it could be cycling it could rowing or it could be cycling it could be something of that sort. be something of that sort. be something of that sort. The goal of this workout is what's The goal of this workout is what's The goal of this workout is what's important. The goal of this workout is important. The goal of this workout is important. The goal of this workout is to tap into Remember that long list that to tap into Remember that long list that to tap into Remember that long list that we talked about earlier where we've got we talked about earlier where we've got we talked about earlier where we've got skill and speed and power and strength skill and speed and power and strength skill and speed and power and strength and hypertrophy etc. different forms of and hypertrophy etc. different forms of and hypertrophy etc. different forms of endurance is to get into that range of endurance is to get into that range of endurance is to get into that range of endurance where your heart rate is elevated quite where your heart rate is elevated quite where your heart rate is elevated quite a bit more than zone two a bit more than zone two a bit more than zone two but that you're not really going all out but that you're not really going all out but that you're not really going all out sprint. So what that means for me is sprint. So what that means for me is sprint. So what that means for me is warming up for about 5 to 10 minutes warming up for about 5 to 10 minutes warming up for about 5 to 10 minutes that could be jogging a little bit of that could be jogging a little bit of that could be jogging a little bit of light calisthenics might even be hopping light calisthenics might even be hopping light calisthenics might even be hopping on a stationary bike although to be on a stationary bike although to be on a stationary bike although to be honest I loathe the stationary bike and honest I loathe the stationary bike and honest I loathe the stationary bike and then setting a timer and doing about 30 then setting a timer and doing about 30 then setting a timer and doing about 30 but ideally 35 minutes of what I call but ideally 35 minutes of what I call but ideally 35 minutes of what I call 75% of all out. Okay now I realize this of all out. Okay now I realize this of all out. Okay now I realize this spits in the face of all you heart rate spits in the face of all you heart rate spits in the face of all you heart rate monitor wearing monitor wearing monitor wearing super techy exercise types but when I super techy exercise types but when I super techy exercise types but when I think of all out sprint think of all out sprint think of all out sprint I think of 100% and what is that? In my I think of 100% and what is that? In my I think of 100% and what is that? In my mind that's somebody is chasing me with mind that's somebody is chasing me with mind that's somebody is chasing me with a needle full of poison and I am sprinting needle full of poison and I am sprinting needle full of poison and I am sprinting away at maximal speed. That for me is away at maximal speed. That for me is away at maximal speed. That for me is 100%. So after a brief warm up what I'm 100%. So after a brief warm up what I'm 100%. So after a brief warm up what I'm going to do is go out typically outside going to do is go out typically outside going to do is go out typically outside although sometimes it has to be on a although sometimes it has to be on a although sometimes it has to be on a treadmill if I'm traveling and treadmill if I'm traveling and treadmill if I'm traveling and move run for about 30 to 35 minutes at move run for about 30 to 35 minutes at move run for about 30 to 35 minutes at about 75 or 80% of that all out. about 75 or 80% of that all out. about 75 or 80% of that all out. What that means is that I'm striving to What that means is that I'm striving to What that means is that I'm striving to keep a steady pace but in reality I keep a steady pace but in reality I keep a steady pace but in reality I don't. I sometimes have to stop at a stoplight. I sometimes have to stop at a stoplight. I sometimes have to stop at a stoplight. There are cars. Please don't run into There are cars. Please don't run into There are cars. Please don't run into traffic just to maintain that speed and traffic just to maintain that speed and traffic just to maintain that speed and that timing. That would be that timing. That would be that timing. That would be terribly antagonistic to fitness and terribly antagonistic to fitness and terribly antagonistic to fitness and particular lifespan. particular lifespan. particular lifespan. That running tends to be running in That running tends to be running in That running tends to be running in which I'm breathing hard so I'm not able which I'm breathing hard so I'm not able which I'm breathing hard so I'm not able to restrict myself to purely nasal to restrict myself to purely nasal to restrict myself to purely nasal breathing, and I should have mentioned breathing, and I should have mentioned breathing, and I should have mentioned earlier, on the Sunday earlier, on the Sunday earlier, on the Sunday long rock or weighted hike or jog, if long rock or weighted hike or jog, if long rock or weighted hike or jog, if I'm alone, I try and do pure nasal I'm alone, I try and do pure nasal I'm alone, I try and do pure nasal breathing. If I'm with other people or breathing. If I'm with other people or breathing. If I'm with other people or I'm talking, obviously, I'm not going to I'm talking, obviously, I'm not going to I'm talking, obviously, I'm not going to do pure nasal breathing because I'm do pure nasal breathing because I'm do pure nasal breathing because I'm talking, although I talking, although I talking, although I I'm sure that sometimes they wish I was I'm sure that sometimes they wish I was I'm sure that sometimes they wish I was doing pure nasal breathing. That doing pure nasal breathing. That doing pure nasal breathing. That Thursday workout accomplishes a number Thursday workout accomplishes a number Thursday workout accomplishes a number of things. First of all, it really gets of things. First of all, it really gets of things. First of all, it really gets my heart rate up, and it improves my heart rate up, and it improves my heart rate up, and it improves multiple aspects of endurance because as multiple aspects of endurance because as multiple aspects of endurance because as you recall earlier, the different bins you recall earlier, the different bins you recall earlier, the different bins of endurance that include muscular of endurance that include muscular of endurance that include muscular endurance, anaerobic, that 3 to endurance, anaerobic, that 3 to endurance, anaerobic, that 3 to 12-minute range, and then 30 minutes or 12-minute range, and then 30 minutes or 12-minute range, and then 30 minutes or longer, none of them really precisely longer, none of them really precisely longer, none of them really precisely match what's accomplished in this match what's accomplished in this match what's accomplished in this 35-minute or so cardiovascular session where I'm or so cardiovascular session where I'm or so cardiovascular session where I'm pushing hard but not all out. pushing hard but not all out. pushing hard but not all out. But that's exactly the reason to do it, But that's exactly the reason to do it, But that's exactly the reason to do it, which is that it taps into multiple fuel which is that it taps into multiple fuel which is that it taps into multiple fuel systems for the muscle and multiple systems for the muscle and multiple systems for the muscle and multiple aspects of the heart and capillaries and aspects of the heart and capillaries and aspects of the heart and capillaries and arteries and veins that are involved in arteries and veins that are involved in arteries and veins that are involved in generating that movement. So, it really generating that movement. So, it really generating that movement. So, it really cuts a broad swath into multiple cuts a broad swath into multiple cuts a broad swath into multiple categories of endurance. And also just categories of endurance. And also just categories of endurance. And also just keep in mind what this foundational or keep in mind what this foundational or keep in mind what this foundational or optimal fitness protocol is really optimal fitness protocol is really optimal fitness protocol is really designed to do. designed to do. designed to do. In my mind, a foundational fitness In my mind, a foundational fitness In my mind, a foundational fitness protocol is one that leaves you or has protocol is one that leaves you or has protocol is one that leaves you or has you in a state where if you need to walk you in a state where if you need to walk you in a state where if you need to walk really far and carry a bunch of weight, really far and carry a bunch of weight, really far and carry a bunch of weight, you can do it. If you need to lift a you can do it. If you need to lift a you can do it. If you need to lift a heavy object with your legs, you can do heavy object with your legs, you can do heavy object with your legs, you can do it. If you need to run really fast for 2 it. If you need to run really fast for 2 it. If you need to run really fast for 2 minutes, you can do it. And if you need minutes, you can do it. And if you need minutes, you can do it. And if you need to run a little bit further, like maybe run a little bit further, like maybe run a little bit further, like maybe even 10 minutes, for whatever reason, even 10 minutes, for whatever reason, even 10 minutes, for whatever reason, you can do that. So, it's a really kind you can do that. So, it's a really kind you can do that. So, it's a really kind of all-around fitness program, and that of all-around fitness program, and that of all-around fitness program, and that 35-minute run, again, could be swapped 35-minute run, again, could be swapped 35-minute run, again, could be swapped with a 35-minute erg row, or sometimes with a 35-minute erg row, or sometimes with a 35-minute erg row, or sometimes if you only have access to a stationary if you only have access to a stationary if you only have access to a stationary bike, you could do that. I suppose if bike, you could do that. I suppose if bike, you could do that. I suppose if you didn't have access to any equipment you didn't have access to any equipment you didn't have access to any equipment and running is not your thing, and running is not your thing, and running is not your thing, one thing that I have done, especially one thing that I have done, especially one thing that I have done, especially if I've been stuck in a hotel cuz I if I've been stuck in a hotel cuz I if I've been stuck in a hotel cuz I arrived late someplace and I really want arrived late someplace and I really want arrived late someplace and I really want to get this workout to get this workout to get this workout You could do the dreaded burpee. I know You could do the dreaded burpee. I know You could do the dreaded burpee. I know there are a lot of opinions out there. there are a lot of opinions out there. there are a lot of opinions out there. Some people think burpees are downright Some people think burpees are downright Some people think burpees are downright dangerous. Other people love burpees. dangerous. Other people love burpees. dangerous. Other people love burpees. You could do that. You could do that. You could do that. Or you could do really fast but full Or you could do really fast but full Or you could do really fast but full jumping jacks. I know that's a little jumping jacks. I know that's a little jumping jacks. I know that's a little PE class, right? Physical education PE class, right? Physical education PE class, right? Physical education class-ish. But sometimes if I need to class-ish. But sometimes if I need to class-ish. But sometimes if I need to get the workout in, what I'll do in a get the workout in, what I'll do in a get the workout in, what I'll do in a hotel if I've arrived late particular hotel if I've arrived late particular hotel if I've arrived late particular day of travel, is I will find the day of travel, is I will find the day of travel, is I will find the stairwell, the fire stairwell. I'll make stairwell, the fire stairwell. I'll make stairwell, the fire stairwell. I'll make sure by the way that I can get back into sure by the way that I can get back into sure by the way that I can get back into the building because I've been locked in the building because I've been locked in the building because I've been locked in those stairwells before. And I will those stairwells before. And I will those stairwells before. And I will simply walk really fast up the stairwell simply walk really fast up the stairwell simply walk really fast up the stairwell as many flights of stairs as there are, as many flights of stairs as there are, as many flights of stairs as there are, or maybe even jog it. Not quite sprint, or maybe even jog it. Not quite sprint, or maybe even jog it. Not quite sprint, but maybe run up those stairs over and but maybe run up those stairs over and but maybe run up those stairs over and over and over again in order to get that over and over again in order to get that over and over again in order to get that 35 minutes of 75 to 80% of max output 35 minutes of 75 to 80% of max output 35 minutes of 75 to 80% of max output cardiovascular work done. And if I'm cardiovascular work done. And if I'm cardiovascular work done. And if I'm really just restricted to my hotel room, really just restricted to my hotel room, really just restricted to my hotel room, I'll just do jumping jacks for 30-35 I'll just do jumping jacks for 30-35 I'll just do jumping jacks for 30-35 minutes, sometimes while watching minutes, sometimes while watching minutes, sometimes while watching something on TV. And believe me, if something on TV. And believe me, if something on TV. And believe me, if you're doing full jumping jacks, like you're doing full jumping jacks, like you're doing full jumping jacks, like really extending your legs, really extending your legs, really extending your legs, really getting arms overhead and really doing getting arms overhead and really doing getting arms overhead and really doing the full movement, the full movement, the full movement, by the time you hit five or six minutes, by the time you hit five or six minutes, by the time you hit five or six minutes, you are going to be sweating and you are you are going to be sweating and you are you are going to be sweating and you are your heart rate is really going to be your heart rate is really going to be your heart rate is really going to be up. I also sometimes will travel with a up. I also sometimes will travel with a up. I also sometimes will travel with a jump rope. I always try and travel with jump rope. I always try and travel with jump rope. I always try and travel with a jump rope and skip rope, um much to a jump rope and skip rope, um much to a jump rope and skip rope, um much to the dismay of the people who are housed the dismay of the people who are housed the dismay of the people who are housed below me in the hotel room. Skipping below me in the hotel room. Skipping below me in the hotel room. Skipping rope, I should mention, can be a very rope, I should mention, can be a very rope, I should mention, can be a very effective way of getting cardiovascular effective way of getting cardiovascular effective way of getting cardiovascular training while you're on the road. But training while you're on the road. But training while you're on the road. But in all seriousness, if you're in a hotel in all seriousness, if you're in a hotel in all seriousness, if you're in a hotel room or an apartment and you can't room or an apartment and you can't room or an apartment and you can't really jump high and you're very good at really jump high and you're very good at really jump high and you're very good at jumping rope, what you'll find is it's jumping rope, what you'll find is it's jumping rope, what you'll find is it's not going to get you into that higher not going to get you into that higher not going to get you into that higher elevated heart rate zone. Okay, it can elevated heart rate zone. Okay, it can elevated heart rate zone. Okay, it can be great for zone two type training, but be great for zone two type training, but be great for zone two type training, but if you're really good at skipping rope, if you're really good at skipping rope, if you're really good at skipping rope, and I wouldn't say I'm really good at and I wouldn't say I'm really good at and I wouldn't say I'm really good at it, but I've done enough skipping rope it, but I've done enough skipping rope it, but I've done enough skipping rope that I can just kind of cruise and talk that I can just kind of cruise and talk that I can just kind of cruise and talk and it it's more zone two-ish. It even and it it's more zone two-ish. It even and it it's more zone two-ish. It even feels like walking at times. Now, you feels like walking at times. Now, you feels like walking at times. Now, you can do double unders where you're, you can do double unders where you're, you can do double unders where you're, you know, really jumping and putting the know, really jumping and putting the know, really jumping and putting the rope under you twice each time, or rope under you twice each time, or rope under you twice each time, or crossovers, etc., depending on your crossovers, etc., depending on your crossovers, etc., depending on your skill level. skill level. skill level. But again, if you're in an apartment or But again, if you're in an apartment or But again, if you're in an apartment or you're in a hotel, that's going to be you're in a hotel, that's going to be you're in a hotel, that's going to be harder to do. And because of there's harder to do. And because of there's harder to do. And because of there's some skill involved, sometimes you're some skill involved, sometimes you're some skill involved, sometimes you're stopping more often than you're stopping more often than you're stopping more often than you're continuing. Uh by the way, and I just continuing. Uh by the way, and I just continuing. Uh by the way, and I just have to mention this, a really terrific have to mention this, a really terrific have to mention this, a really terrific Instagram channel is Anna Skips. This is Instagram channel is Anna Skips. This is Instagram channel is Anna Skips. This is a teacher, a science teacher, or I a teacher, a science teacher, or I a teacher, a science teacher, or I believe it's a math maths, as they say believe it's a math maths, as they say believe it's a math maths, as they say in the UK, because she's in the UK, in the UK, because she's in the UK, in the UK, because she's in the UK, maths teacher. I don't know Anna, but I maths teacher. I don't know Anna, but I maths teacher. I don't know Anna, but I know she skips because she has this know she skips because she has this know she skips because she has this amazing Instagram channel called Anna amazing Instagram channel called Anna amazing Instagram channel called Anna Skips. And what's really cool about her Skips. And what's really cool about her Skips. And what's really cool about her Instagram is she shows you her Instagram is she shows you her Instagram is she shows you her progression from not being able to skip progression from not being able to skip progression from not being able to skip rope at all to the absolute incredible rope at all to the absolute incredible rope at all to the absolute incredible types of um rope skipping that she's types of um rope skipping that she's types of um rope skipping that she's doing each morning while getting doing each morning while getting doing each morning while getting sunlight, which of course is a essential sunlight, which of course is a essential sunlight, which of course is a essential health protocol. health protocol. health protocol. So, check out Anna Skips on Instagram. So, check out Anna Skips on Instagram. So, check out Anna Skips on Instagram. Really inspiring and uh made me want to Really inspiring and uh made me want to Really inspiring and uh made me want to get better at skipping rope. I'm still get better at skipping rope. I'm still get better at skipping rope. I'm still working at it. Okay, so with that working at it. Okay, so with that working at it. Okay, so with that Thursday cardiovascular, let's call it Thursday cardiovascular, let's call it Thursday cardiovascular, let's call it endurance, but cardiovascular training endurance, but cardiovascular training endurance, but cardiovascular training workout done, workout done, workout done, around rolls Friday. And on Friday, I'm around rolls Friday. And on Friday, I'm around rolls Friday. And on Friday, I'm going to do another cardiovascular going to do another cardiovascular going to do another cardiovascular training session. And I alluded to this training session. And I alluded to this training session. And I alluded to this earlier, but this cardiovascular earlier, but this cardiovascular earlier, but this cardiovascular training session is also designed training session is also designed training session is also designed to tap into some of the ability of hard to tap into some of the ability of hard to tap into some of the ability of hard I should say high-intensity interval I should say high-intensity interval I should say high-intensity interval training to tap into strength and hypertrophy to tap into strength and hypertrophy to tap into strength and hypertrophy increases for the legs, cuz remember, we increases for the legs, cuz remember, we increases for the legs, cuz remember, we train legs on Monday. train legs on Monday. train legs on Monday. And what the science tells us is that what the science tells us is that what the science tells us is that protein synthesis in a muscle group can protein synthesis in a muscle group can protein synthesis in a muscle group can be stimulated about every 42 to 72 be stimulated about every 42 to 72 be stimulated about every 42 to 72 hours. And so, we've had Tuesday off, hours. And so, we've had Tuesday off, hours. And so, we've had Tuesday off, Wednesday off, and Thursday off. And Wednesday off, and Thursday off. And Wednesday off, and Thursday off. And you don't want to lose progress that you don't want to lose progress that you don't want to lose progress that you made from that terrific Monday leg made from that terrific Monday leg made from that terrific Monday leg workout. But, in order to make sure that you can do in order to make sure that you can do in order to make sure that you can do the other things that follow in this the other things that follow in this the other things that follow in this program and pick back up on Monday with program and pick back up on Monday with program and pick back up on Monday with another leg workout, at least for me another leg workout, at least for me another leg workout, at least for me with my recovery abilities and my work with my recovery abilities and my work with my recovery abilities and my work schedule, I'm not going to do an entire schedule, I'm not going to do an entire schedule, I'm not going to do an entire other leg workout because it's going to other leg workout because it's going to other leg workout because it's going to set the whole thing out of whack. That set the whole thing out of whack. That set the whole thing out of whack. That is, I won't be able to consistently do is, I won't be able to consistently do is, I won't be able to consistently do the same workouts on the same days of the same workouts on the same days of the same workouts on the same days of each week. Now, with that said, a little each week. Now, with that said, a little each week. Now, with that said, a little bit later I'll explain what happens if bit later I'll explain what happens if bit later I'll explain what happens if you have to miss a workout and how you have to miss a workout and how you have to miss a workout and how you can combine days, etc. But, I really can combine days, etc. But, I really can combine days, etc. But, I really strive to get certain workouts done on certain to get certain workouts done on certain to get certain workouts done on certain days consistently, at least as best I days consistently, at least as best I days consistently, at least as best I can. So, Friday is high-intensity can. So, Friday is high-intensity can. So, Friday is high-intensity interval training. interval training. interval training. And that can take a variety of different And that can take a variety of different And that can take a variety of different forms. For me, the ideal thing to do for me, For me, the ideal thing to do for me, For me, the ideal thing to do for me, again, you could do something completely again, you could do something completely again, you could do something completely different. Exercise choice, again, different. Exercise choice, again, different. Exercise choice, again, should be governed by what you can do should be governed by what you can do should be governed by what you can do safely so you don't injure yourself safely so you don't injure yourself safely so you don't injure yourself and that you can perform effectively and that you can perform effectively and that you can perform effectively and that gets you or provides you the that gets you or provides you the that gets you or provides you the stimulus that you want. And what I'm stimulus that you want. And what I'm stimulus that you want. And what I'm trying to do on Friday is get my heart trying to do on Friday is get my heart trying to do on Friday is get my heart rate way, way up. Talked about this in rate way, way up. Talked about this in rate way, way up. Talked about this in the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. In the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. In the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. In addition to the benefits of getting 180 to 200 to the benefits of getting 180 to 200 to the benefits of getting 180 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week, minutes of zone two cardio per week, minutes of zone two cardio per week, minimum, it's a really good idea to get up to it's a really good idea to get up to it's a really good idea to get up to that max or near max heart rate at least that max or near max heart rate at least that max or near max heart rate at least once a week. And you're not going to do once a week. And you're not going to do once a week. And you're not going to do that for very long periods of time. that for very long periods of time. that for very long periods of time. You're not going to do that for 30 You're not going to do that for 30 You're not going to do that for 30 minutes. You can't sprint all out for 30 minutes. You can't sprint all out for 30 minutes. You can't sprint all out for 30 minutes unless you're Steve Prefontaine. minutes unless you're Steve Prefontaine. minutes unless you're Steve Prefontaine. If you haven't seen the movies Without If you haven't seen the movies Without If you haven't seen the movies Without Limits or Prefontaine, you should Limits or Prefontaine, you should Limits or Prefontaine, you should absolutely see those. He was able to, absolutely see those. He was able to, absolutely see those. He was able to, you know, go out and run 12 laps what you know, go out and run 12 laps what you know, go out and run 12 laps what seemed to be an all-out sprint or close seemed to be an all-out sprint or close seemed to be an all-out sprint or close to it. Incredible. But, most people are to it. Incredible. But, most people are to it. Incredible. But, most people are not going to do that um or are going to not going to do that um or are going to not going to do that um or are going to be carried away on a stretcher if they be carried away on a stretcher if they be carried away on a stretcher if they try. These high-intensity interval training, These high-intensity interval training, These high-intensity interval training, for me, ideally would be on so-called for me, ideally would be on so-called for me, ideally would be on so-called assault bike or Airdyne bike. So, these assault bike or Airdyne bike. So, these assault bike or Airdyne bike. So, these are bikes that have the fan, which um are bikes that have the fan, which um are bikes that have the fan, which um might seem like, "Oh, you know, it just might seem like, "Oh, you know, it just might seem like, "Oh, you know, it just cools you off." But, actually there's a cools you off." But, actually there's a cools you off." But, actually there's a lot of resistance there. So, what I'll I lot of resistance there. So, what I'll I lot of resistance there. So, what I'll I will do is a 20 to 30-second all-out will do is a 20 to 30-second all-out will do is a 20 to 30-second all-out sprint using arms and legs sprint using arms and legs sprint using arms and legs and then 10 seconds rest and then 10 seconds rest and then 10 seconds rest and then repeat. and then repeat. and then repeat. All-out sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, 10 All-out sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, 10 All-out sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, 10 seconds rest, repeat. And I'll do that seconds rest, repeat. And I'll do that seconds rest, repeat. And I'll do that for anywhere from eight for anywhere from eight for anywhere from eight to 12 rounds, which to 12 rounds, which to 12 rounds, which trust me, even if you start out a little trust me, even if you start out a little trust me, even if you start out a little bit less or I should say not all-out less or I should say not all-out less or I should say not all-out intensity or effort, by time you hit the intensity or effort, by time you hit the intensity or effort, by time you hit the fifth or sixth one, you will be fifth or sixth one, you will be fifth or sixth one, you will be certainly headed into, if not at, near certainly headed into, if not at, near certainly headed into, if not at, near your maximum heart rate. Now, what is your maximum heart rate. Now, what is your maximum heart rate. Now, what is your maximum heart rate? Do you need a your maximum heart rate? Do you need a your maximum heart rate? Do you need a heart rate monitor? No. If you'd like heart rate monitor? No. If you'd like heart rate monitor? No. If you'd like using that sort of thing, great. But, using that sort of thing, great. But, using that sort of thing, great. But, again, Andy Galpin beautifully supplied again, Andy Galpin beautifully supplied again, Andy Galpin beautifully supplied us with the information. He said, "If us with the information. He said, "If us with the information. He said, "If you take the number 220 and you subtract you take the number 220 and you subtract you take the number 220 and you subtract your age, your age, your age, that for most people, most, is going to that for most people, most, is going to that for most people, most, is going to be your maximum heart rate. Although, be your maximum heart rate. Although, be your maximum heart rate. Although, for certain people who are very fit or for certain people who are very fit or for certain people who are very fit or certain ages, that's not going to apply. certain ages, that's not going to apply. certain ages, that's not going to apply. So, it's a little bit too crude a So, it's a little bit too crude a So, it's a little bit too crude a measure, but it's a good starting place measure, but it's a good starting place measure, but it's a good starting place and you can look up other information or and you can look up other information or and you can look up other information or see that podcast episode. We provide a see that podcast episode. We provide a see that podcast episode. We provide a link to it in the show note captions if link to it in the show note captions if link to it in the show note captions if you want to get more details on that. you want to get more details on that. you want to get more details on that. I don't use a heart rate monitor. What I don't use a heart rate monitor. What I don't use a heart rate monitor. What I'm trying to do is get to that point I'm trying to do is get to that point I'm trying to do is get to that point where I, quote unquote, feel like I want where I, quote unquote, feel like I want where I, quote unquote, feel like I want to die. Now, I don't want to die and to die. Now, I don't want to die and to die. Now, I don't want to die and please don't die, right? If you're not please don't die, right? If you're not please don't die, right? If you're not in good cardiovascular health, do not in good cardiovascular health, do not in good cardiovascular health, do not just jump right into this fitness just jump right into this fitness just jump right into this fitness protocol. But, I want to get to the protocol. But, I want to get to the protocol. But, I want to get to the point where I really feel like I could point where I really feel like I could point where I really feel like I could not pedal any faster not pedal any faster not pedal any faster or pull any faster on the or pull any faster on the or pull any faster on the on the assault bike, the Airdyne bike, on the assault bike, the Airdyne bike, on the assault bike, the Airdyne bike, or if I'm doing this workout in a place or if I'm doing this workout in a place or if I'm doing this workout in a place or at a time or because I choose to not or at a time or because I choose to not or at a time or because I choose to not use a bike or a rower, use a bike or a rower, use a bike or a rower, cuz you could also use a rower, I will cuz you could also use a rower, I will cuz you could also use a rower, I will simply do sprint jog intervals. I will simply do sprint jog intervals. I will simply do sprint jog intervals. I will sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, then jog sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, then jog sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, then jog for 10 seconds. Sprint for 20 or 30 for 10 seconds. Sprint for 20 or 30 for 10 seconds. Sprint for 20 or 30 seconds and then jog for 10 seconds and then jog for 10 seconds and then jog for 10 seconds and just repeat. I used to have a big and just repeat. I used to have a big and just repeat. I used to have a big field next to my laboratory, field next to my laboratory, field next to my laboratory, my old laboratory, and I used to bring my old laboratory, and I used to bring my old laboratory, and I used to bring my bulldog Costello out there. He was my bulldog Costello out there. He was my bulldog Costello out there. He was really good at the first sprint part and really good at the first sprint part and really good at the first sprint part and then he would just lie down and watch. then he would just lie down and watch. then he would just lie down and watch. He didn't even do the jog part. I would He didn't even do the jog part. I would He didn't even do the jog part. I would just go back and forth back and forth just go back and forth back and forth just go back and forth back and forth back and forth panting like a bulldog back and forth panting like a bulldog back and forth panting like a bulldog non-stop, barely able to recover before non-stop, barely able to recover before non-stop, barely able to recover before sprinting again. And the basis of this sprinting again. And the basis of this sprinting again. And the basis of this workout, again, is severalfold. First of workout, again, is severalfold. First of workout, again, is severalfold. First of all, it's to get the heart rate really all, it's to get the heart rate really all, it's to get the heart rate really high, up towards maximum heart rate, high, up towards maximum heart rate, high, up towards maximum heart rate, at least once a week, so you accomplish at least once a week, so you accomplish at least once a week, so you accomplish that this Friday. Also, if you are that this Friday. Also, if you are that this Friday. Also, if you are sprinting and then jogging or you are really and then jogging or you are really and then jogging or you are really pushing hard on an assault bike or an pushing hard on an assault bike or an pushing hard on an assault bike or an Airdyne bike or you're using a, for Airdyne bike or you're using a, for Airdyne bike or you're using a, for instance, a skier or the skier machine instance, a skier or the skier machine instance, a skier or the skier machine or any number of different or any number of different or any number of different cardiovascular um training tools, training tools, training tools, you are going to get activation of the you are going to get activation of the you are going to get activation of the legs. Of course, not to the same degree as you Of course, not to the same degree as you Of course, not to the same degree as you would with squats or deadlifts or leg would with squats or deadlifts or leg would with squats or deadlifts or leg extensions and leg curls. That's simply extensions and leg curls. That's simply extensions and leg curls. That's simply not the case. But, you're going to not the case. But, you're going to not the case. But, you're going to trigger strength and hypertrophy and trigger strength and hypertrophy and trigger strength and hypertrophy and other types of adaptations in those other types of adaptations in those other types of adaptations in those muscle groups. So, this for me also muscle groups. So, this for me also muscle groups. So, this for me also represents the second leg workout of the represents the second leg workout of the represents the second leg workout of the week where I'm not touching any weights. week where I'm not touching any weights. week where I'm not touching any weights. One important point that I don't think One important point that I don't think One important point that I don't think I've heard mentioned anywhere else, but I've heard mentioned anywhere else, but I've heard mentioned anywhere else, but that I hope to have Dr. Kelly Starrett that I hope to have Dr. Kelly Starrett that I hope to have Dr. Kelly Starrett on the podcast to discuss and that I've on the podcast to discuss and that I've on the podcast to discuss and that I've discussed with him one-on-one, which is discussed with him one-on-one, which is discussed with him one-on-one, which is be careful with all-out sprints or be careful with all-out sprints or be careful with all-out sprints or all-out anything cardiovascular all-out anything cardiovascular all-out anything cardiovascular exercise. You can get injured doing exercise. You can get injured doing exercise. You can get injured doing those. So, for instance, if you go out those. So, for instance, if you go out those. So, for instance, if you go out and you just sprint across a field and you just sprint across a field and you just sprint across a field all-out 20 or 30 seconds and then walk all-out 20 or 30 seconds and then walk all-out 20 or 30 seconds and then walk back and can do it again and again, back and can do it again and again, back and can do it again and again, don't be surprised if the next day you don't be surprised if the next day you don't be surprised if the next day you have some sciatica or even some pelvic have some sciatica or even some pelvic have some sciatica or even some pelvic floor pain. I don't recommend going floor pain. I don't recommend going floor pain. I don't recommend going all-out on any movement that you can't all-out on any movement that you can't all-out on any movement that you can't perform with perfect form, okay? So, for perform with perfect form, okay? So, for perform with perfect form, okay? So, for me, I really try and stay away from me, I really try and stay away from me, I really try and stay away from all-out sprints. I'll sprint at about all-out sprints. I'll sprint at about all-out sprints. I'll sprint at about 95% of what I can do because I find if I 95% of what I can do because I find if I 95% of what I can do because I find if I go all-out sprint, I don't know what the go all-out sprint, I don't know what the go all-out sprint, I don't know what the reason is, but it might be an reason is, but it might be an reason is, but it might be an overextension of a limb or something overextension of a limb or something overextension of a limb or something like that. I'm not a sprinter. I'm not a like that. I'm not a sprinter. I'm not a like that. I'm not a sprinter. I'm not a sprinting coach. I do hope to get Stu sprinting coach. I do hope to get Stu sprinting coach. I do hope to get Stu McMillan on here McMillan on here McMillan on here or um Dan Pfaff. They're excellent um Dan Pfaff. They're excellent um Dan Pfaff. They're excellent sprinting coaches at some point. They're sprinting coaches at some point. They're sprinting coaches at some point. They're world-class sprinting coaches. But, world-class sprinting coaches. But, world-class sprinting coaches. But, I'm not a pro sprinter. I'm not even an I'm not a pro sprinter. I'm not even an I'm not a pro sprinter. I'm not even an amateur sprinter. I'm a fitness amateur sprinter. I'm a fitness amateur sprinter. I'm a fitness sprinter. So, the Airdyne Assault Bike sprinter. So, the Airdyne Assault Bike sprinter. So, the Airdyne Assault Bike or the rower is really a safer option or the rower is really a safer option or the rower is really a safer option for me. And if I'm running or I'm doing for me. And if I'm running or I'm doing for me. And if I'm running or I'm doing some sort of movement where I'm some sort of movement where I'm some sort of movement where I'm unconstrained really in terms of how far unconstrained really in terms of how far unconstrained really in terms of how far my stride is. I mean, I'm obviously my stride is. I mean, I'm obviously my stride is. I mean, I'm obviously constrained by the musculature. I'm constrained by the musculature. I'm constrained by the musculature. I'm really careful to not overextend or do really careful to not overextend or do really careful to not overextend or do something like that. And the only way to something like that. And the only way to something like that. And the only way to do that is to not go all-out. So, again, do that is to not go all-out. So, again, do that is to not go all-out. So, again, the goal for this Friday workout is to the goal for this Friday workout is to the goal for this Friday workout is to really get heart rate high, do really get heart rate high, do really get heart rate high, do high-intensity interval training. high-intensity interval training. high-intensity interval training. There are a number of different ways you There are a number of different ways you There are a number of different ways you could do that. You can look up HIIT hit could do that. You can look up HIIT hit could do that. You can look up HIIT hit workouts online, find the one that's workouts online, find the one that's workouts online, find the one that's best for you, and really pick something best for you, and really pick something best for you, and really pick something that's safe that you can do that's safe that you can do that's safe that you can do consistently. And I believe that ideally consistently. And I believe that ideally consistently. And I believe that ideally will also trigger a bit of either will also trigger a bit of either will also trigger a bit of either strength and hypertrophy and speed power strength and hypertrophy and speed power strength and hypertrophy and speed power maintenance or even give you a little maintenance or even give you a little maintenance or even give you a little bit of a stimulus so that by time you bit of a stimulus so that by time you bit of a stimulus so that by time you roll around to that leg workout on again roll around to that leg workout on again roll around to that leg workout on again on Monday, you've got a little bit of an on Monday, you've got a little bit of an on Monday, you've got a little bit of an additional boost to your leg strength, additional boost to your leg strength, additional boost to your leg strength, hypertrophy, speed, and power. So, we've hypertrophy, speed, and power. So, we've hypertrophy, speed, and power. So, we've covered Sunday through Friday. covered Sunday through Friday. covered Sunday through Friday. And then Saturday rolls around. And then Saturday rolls around. And then Saturday rolls around. And Saturday is when And Saturday is when And Saturday is when you train arms, calves, and neck. So, you train arms, calves, and neck. So, you train arms, calves, and neck. So, this may sound as if you're training a this may sound as if you're training a this may sound as if you're training a bunch of small muscle groups, biceps, bunch of small muscle groups, biceps, bunch of small muscle groups, biceps, triceps, neck, and calves. And that's triceps, neck, and calves. And that's triceps, neck, and calves. And that's true, but I should mention that you are true, but I should mention that you are true, but I should mention that you are also training your torso a second time, also training your torso a second time, also training your torso a second time, and you're doing it indirectly. and you're doing it indirectly. and you're doing it indirectly. Or sometimes not it indirectly. Why do I Or sometimes not it indirectly. Why do I Or sometimes not it indirectly. Why do I say this? Well, keep in mind again that say this? Well, keep in mind again that say this? Well, keep in mind again that for strength and hypertrophy, you're for strength and hypertrophy, you're for strength and hypertrophy, you're going for that once about every 48 to 72 going for that once about every 48 to 72 going for that once about every 48 to 72 hours. You want to stimulate that hours. You want to stimulate that hours. You want to stimulate that on Wednesday is when you trained your on Wednesday is when you trained your on Wednesday is when you trained your torso, right? Chest, shoulders, back, torso, right? Chest, shoulders, back, torso, right? Chest, shoulders, back, and neck. and neck. and neck. You've had Thursday to rest, Friday to You've had Thursday to rest, Friday to You've had Thursday to rest, Friday to rest. I know a lot of people are going to want I know a lot of people are going to want I know a lot of people are going to want to emphasize those body parts. They're to emphasize those body parts. They're to emphasize those body parts. They're going to think, "Oh, you have to train going to think, "Oh, you have to train going to think, "Oh, you have to train it twice a week." But it twice a week." But it twice a week." But if you have modest recovery ability if you have modest recovery ability if you have modest recovery ability or low recovery ability or low recovery ability or low recovery ability such as I do, and you're doing these such as I do, and you're doing these such as I do, and you're doing these other cardiovascular training sessions, other cardiovascular training sessions, other cardiovascular training sessions, et cetera, well, then on Saturday is et cetera, well, then on Saturday is et cetera, well, then on Saturday is when you will train arms, calves, and when you will train arms, calves, and when you will train arms, calves, and neck directly, but included in that, neck directly, but included in that, neck directly, but included in that, remember two exercises per muscle group, remember two exercises per muscle group, remember two exercises per muscle group, one with a peak contraction, one with one with a peak contraction, one with one with a peak contraction, one with somewhat of a stretch in there, included somewhat of a stretch in there, included somewhat of a stretch in there, included in that, in that, in that, I suggest doing some sort of dip I suggest doing some sort of dip I suggest doing some sort of dip movement, which I think it was Pavel Tsatsouline which I think it was Pavel Tsatsouline which I think it was Pavel Tsatsouline said the dip is said the dip is said the dip is synonymous with or at least similar to synonymous with or at least similar to synonymous with or at least similar to an upper body squat. Um excuse me, an upper body squat. Um excuse me, an upper body squat. Um excuse me, Pavel, if I got that wrong. Maybe it Pavel, if I got that wrong. Maybe it Pavel, if I got that wrong. Maybe it wasn't you that said that, but um big wasn't you that said that, but um big wasn't you that said that, but um big admirer of his work. admirer of his work. admirer of his work. And certainly the dip is a great And certainly the dip is a great And certainly the dip is a great exercise to hit multiple muscle groups. exercise to hit multiple muscle groups. exercise to hit multiple muscle groups. It chest, shoulders, and triceps. It chest, shoulders, and triceps. It chest, shoulders, and triceps. Maybe even some back to some extent Maybe even some back to some extent Maybe even some back to some extent depending on how you do it. So, doing depending on how you do it. So, doing depending on how you do it. So, doing some dipping movement will indirectly some dipping movement will indirectly some dipping movement will indirectly stimulate strength hypertrophy etc. in stimulate strength hypertrophy etc. in stimulate strength hypertrophy etc. in the chest and shoulders and including the chest and shoulders and including the chest and shoulders and including some sort of pulling movement for the some sort of pulling movement for the some sort of pulling movement for the bicep like a chin up or palms facing bicep like a chin up or palms facing bicep like a chin up or palms facing movement pulling up from to the bar. movement pulling up from to the bar. movement pulling up from to the bar. Especially if it's a close grip type Especially if it's a close grip type Especially if it's a close grip type movement, but even if it's a wide grip movement, but even if it's a wide grip movement, but even if it's a wide grip type movement will of course type movement will of course type movement will of course trigger strength and hypertrophy trigger strength and hypertrophy trigger strength and hypertrophy maintenance or improvements in the maintenance or improvements in the maintenance or improvements in the biceps, but will also biceps, but will also biceps, but will also trigger strength hypertrophy in the lats trigger strength hypertrophy in the lats trigger strength hypertrophy in the lats in the back. Okay, so Saturday is this in the back. Okay, so Saturday is this in the back. Okay, so Saturday is this arm workout. With that, I'll just give arm workout. With that, I'll just give arm workout. With that, I'll just give an example of a potential workout where an example of a potential workout where an example of a potential workout where you might do a few more exercises and you might do a few more exercises and you might do a few more exercises and maybe not just two, but maybe three to maybe not just two, but maybe three to maybe not just two, but maybe three to make sure you get the torso indirect make sure you get the torso indirect make sure you get the torso indirect stimulation. So, what would this look stimulation. So, what would this look stimulation. So, what would this look like? Well, this might be your sort of like? Well, this might be your sort of like? Well, this might be your sort of classic dumbbell curls for the bicep classic dumbbell curls for the bicep classic dumbbell curls for the bicep and maybe incline curl for the bicep and maybe incline curl for the bicep and maybe incline curl for the bicep because it has more of a stretch so on because it has more of a stretch so on because it has more of a stretch so on an incline bench. And then you might an incline bench. And then you might an incline bench. And then you might finish with two sets of chin-ups. So, finish with two sets of chin-ups. So, finish with two sets of chin-ups. So, palms facing you chin-ups or three sets palms facing you chin-ups or three sets palms facing you chin-ups or three sets of chin-ups depending on whether or not of chin-ups depending on whether or not of chin-ups depending on whether or not you're in a heavier load month or a or a you're in a heavier load month or a or a you're in a heavier load month or a or a more moderate weight month. more moderate weight month. more moderate weight month. Again, activating the biceps muscles cuz Again, activating the biceps muscles cuz Again, activating the biceps muscles cuz arm stay, but also arm stay, but also arm stay, but also activating strength and hypertrophy in activating strength and hypertrophy in activating strength and hypertrophy in the lats or at least maintaining it so the lats or at least maintaining it so the lats or at least maintaining it so that because you're not training those that because you're not training those that because you're not training those torso muscles again until Wednesday, torso muscles again until Wednesday, torso muscles again until Wednesday, you're not allowing the hypertrophy and you're not allowing the hypertrophy and you're not allowing the hypertrophy and strength gains that you strength gains that you strength gains that you generated on Wednesday to atrophy, to generated on Wednesday to atrophy, to generated on Wednesday to atrophy, to disappear. Then, thinking about triceps, thinking about triceps, thinking about triceps, it might be some sort of triceps it might be some sort of triceps it might be some sort of triceps isolation or peak contraction movement. isolation or peak contraction movement. isolation or peak contraction movement. So, that could be triceps kickback or So, that could be triceps kickback or So, that could be triceps kickback or it's some overhead extension would be it's some overhead extension would be it's some overhead extension would be more of a stretch type movement than a more of a stretch type movement than a more of a stretch type movement than a kickback, but then also doing regular kickback, but then also doing regular kickback, but then also doing regular old dips. You might even start with old dips. You might even start with old dips. You might even start with dips, which again are going to activate dips, which again are going to activate dips, which again are going to activate those torso muscles and the triceps. those torso muscles and the triceps. those torso muscles and the triceps. And then calf work in the same way that And then calf work in the same way that And then calf work in the same way that you did on Monday. And neck work again, you did on Monday. And neck work again, you did on Monday. And neck work again, I am a believer in training neck I am a believer in training neck I am a believer in training neck multiple times per week. multiple times per week. multiple times per week. And if you are able to finish all of And if you are able to finish all of And if you are able to finish all of that in 45 or 50 minutes, great. Most that in 45 or 50 minutes, great. Most that in 45 or 50 minutes, great. Most people will find when you're doing a lot people will find when you're doing a lot people will find when you're doing a lot of small muscle groups, it actually of small muscle groups, it actually of small muscle groups, it actually takes longer because you have to go takes longer because you have to go takes longer because you have to go around to more exercises. But again, around to more exercises. But again, around to more exercises. But again, just adhere to the same principles we just adhere to the same principles we just adhere to the same principles we talked about before. About 50 to 60 talked about before. About 50 to 60 talked about before. About 50 to 60 minutes of real work after a warm-up minutes of real work after a warm-up minutes of real work after a warm-up with an asterisk next to that if with an asterisk next to that if with an asterisk next to that if someone's on the equipment or you can't someone's on the equipment or you can't someone's on the equipment or you can't find the dumbbells you need, etc. find the dumbbells you need, etc. find the dumbbells you need, etc. then maybe 75 minutes max. But really then maybe 75 minutes max. But really then maybe 75 minutes max. But really trying to not extend that workout too trying to not extend that workout too trying to not extend that workout too long. Making sure that you activate the arms Making sure that you activate the arms Making sure that you activate the arms directly but also activating the torso directly but also activating the torso directly but also activating the torso muscles indirectly. And again, I won't muscles indirectly. And again, I won't muscles indirectly. And again, I won't repeat it this time again repeat it this time again repeat it this time again but following the same weight and but following the same weight and but following the same weight and repetition and rest interval scheme that repetition and rest interval scheme that repetition and rest interval scheme that we talked about earlier. A bit heavier, we talked about earlier. A bit heavier, we talked about earlier. A bit heavier, lower reps, more lower reps, more lower reps, more sets and longer rest for about a month sets and longer rest for about a month sets and longer rest for about a month and then alternating to and then alternating to and then alternating to more repetitions yet fewer sets. more repetitions yet fewer sets. more repetitions yet fewer sets. Right? Shorter rest intervals and do that for Shorter rest intervals and do that for Shorter rest intervals and do that for about a month. This carries through for about a month. This carries through for about a month. This carries through for all the resistance training workouts all the resistance training workouts all the resistance training workouts regardless of the day of the week. So regardless of the day of the week. So regardless of the day of the week. So we've completed the total arc across the we've completed the total arc across the we've completed the total arc across the week and we can summarize it as saying week and we can summarize it as saying week and we can summarize it as saying Sunday is let's just say long endurance, Sunday is let's just say long endurance, Sunday is let's just say long endurance, Monday is leg resistance training, Monday is leg resistance training, Monday is leg resistance training, Tuesday heat cold contrast, Wednesday Tuesday heat cold contrast, Wednesday Tuesday heat cold contrast, Wednesday torso training plus neck, Thursday I torso training plus neck, Thursday I torso training plus neck, Thursday I would call it moderate intensity would call it moderate intensity would call it moderate intensity cardiovascular exercise so that cardiovascular exercise so that cardiovascular exercise so that 35-minute moderate intensity 35-minute moderate intensity 35-minute moderate intensity cardiovascular exercise, Friday high cardiovascular exercise, Friday high cardiovascular exercise, Friday high intensity interval training intensity interval training intensity interval training of sprinting or some a variation of sprinting or some a variation of sprinting or some a variation thereof. And Saturday arms, calves, neck thereof. And Saturday arms, calves, neck thereof. And Saturday arms, calves, neck and torso indirect work. and torso indirect work. and torso indirect work. That's the total structure, but I want That's the total structure, but I want That's the total structure, but I want to emphasize again you do not need to emphasize again you do not need to emphasize again you do not need to start this on Sunday. That is you could start this on Sunday. That is you could start this on Sunday. That is you could make the long endurance work start on make the long endurance work start on make the long endurance work start on Tuesday and then just Tuesday and then just Tuesday and then just fill in the rest as described before. fill in the rest as described before. fill in the rest as described before. So, really up to you. So, really up to you. So, really up to you. There's another important point I want There's another important point I want There's another important point I want to make, which is that to make, which is that to make, which is that neither I nor anyone is going to be neither I nor anyone is going to be neither I nor anyone is going to be successful in doing the exact workouts successful in doing the exact workouts successful in doing the exact workouts on the exact same days of every week on the exact same days of every week on the exact same days of every week because of travel, work, illness, other because of travel, work, illness, other because of travel, work, illness, other demands, etc. The thing about the demands, etc. The thing about the demands, etc. The thing about the schedule that I like so much is that I schedule that I like so much is that I schedule that I like so much is that I do believe that will benefit you as well do believe that will benefit you as well do believe that will benefit you as well is that you have some flexibility there. is that you have some flexibility there. is that you have some flexibility there. What's the flexibility? Well, let's say What's the flexibility? Well, let's say What's the flexibility? Well, let's say you train your typical Sunday workout of you train your typical Sunday workout of you train your typical Sunday workout of endurance, then you train legs on endurance, then you train legs on endurance, then you train legs on Monday, and then and then and then you don't manage to do your heat cold don't manage to do your heat cold don't manage to do your heat cold contrast on Tuesday for whatever reason. contrast on Tuesday for whatever reason. contrast on Tuesday for whatever reason. Well, you can put it on Wednesday. Just Well, you can put it on Wednesday. Just Well, you can put it on Wednesday. Just make sure that if you're going to do the make sure that if you're going to do the make sure that if you're going to do the cold stimulus, that you don't do it too cold stimulus, that you don't do it too cold stimulus, that you don't do it too close, not within 4, ideally 8 hours close, not within 4, ideally 8 hours close, not within 4, ideally 8 hours after the after the after the training of torso, but you could do it training of torso, but you could do it training of torso, but you could do it before. Or you could do it just heat and skip Or you could do it just heat and skip Or you could do it just heat and skip the cold that particular week, right? the cold that particular week, right? the cold that particular week, right? Not ideal, but better than not doing Not ideal, but better than not doing Not ideal, but better than not doing anything. Let's say for instance the leg anything. Let's say for instance the leg anything. Let's say for instance the leg workout was particularly brutal, you workout was particularly brutal, you workout was particularly brutal, you don't sleep that well on Monday night or don't sleep that well on Monday night or don't sleep that well on Monday night or Tuesday night. Tuesday night. Tuesday night. Well, then should you do the torso Well, then should you do the torso Well, then should you do the torso workout on Wednesday? Well, workout on Wednesday? Well, workout on Wednesday? Well, I would say, why not move the heat cold I would say, why not move the heat cold I would say, why not move the heat cold contrast to Wednesday, and then push contrast to Wednesday, and then push contrast to Wednesday, and then push that torso workout to Thursday, that torso workout to Thursday, that torso workout to Thursday, and maybe also try and do that 35-minute and maybe also try and do that 35-minute and maybe also try and do that 35-minute run on Thursday every once in a while, run on Thursday every once in a while, run on Thursday every once in a while, rather than lose the total control of rather than lose the total control of rather than lose the total control of the program and let everything shuffle the program and let everything shuffle the program and let everything shuffle forward. Here's the basic principle. I forward. Here's the basic principle. I forward. Here's the basic principle. I do believe that any one of these do believe that any one of these do believe that any one of these workouts, whether it's for endurance or resistance whether it's for endurance or resistance whether it's for endurance or resistance training, can be shifted either 1 day training, can be shifted either 1 day training, can be shifted either 1 day forward or 1 day back, forward or 1 day back, forward or 1 day back, right? You could delay it by a day, or right? You could delay it by a day, or right? You could delay it by a day, or you could accelerate it by a day you could accelerate it by a day you could accelerate it by a day in order to make sure that you get in order to make sure that you get in order to make sure that you get everything done across the week. everything done across the week. everything done across the week. In fact, I would say the best way to In fact, I would say the best way to In fact, I would say the best way to think about this think about this think about this foundational fitness program is not from foundational fitness program is not from foundational fitness program is not from the details up, but from the top down, the details up, but from the top down, the details up, but from the top down, from the big picture down to the from the big picture down to the from the big picture down to the details. And say to yourself, once a details. And say to yourself, once a details. And say to yourself, once a week you're going to get some long week you're going to get some long week you're going to get some long endurance in. endurance in. endurance in. Another day during the week you're going Another day during the week you're going Another day during the week you're going to make sure that you get a kind of to make sure that you get a kind of to make sure that you get a kind of moderate faster endurance workout in. moderate faster endurance workout in. moderate faster endurance workout in. And then one other day during the week And then one other day during the week And then one other day during the week you're going to get an all-out sprint you're going to get an all-out sprint you're going to get an all-out sprint high-intensity cardiovascular exercise workout in. cardiovascular exercise workout in. cardiovascular exercise workout in. You're going to get those three workouts You're going to get those three workouts You're going to get those three workouts in somehow. And then in addition to in somehow. And then in addition to in somehow. And then in addition to that, you will also do resistance that, you will also do resistance that, you will also do resistance training for every muscle group in your training for every muscle group in your training for every muscle group in your body. And that means doing your legs hard at And that means doing your legs hard at And that means doing your legs hard at least once a week, least once a week, least once a week, your torso hard at least once a week, your torso hard at least once a week, your torso hard at least once a week, and your arms hard at least once a week. and your arms hard at least once a week. and your arms hard at least once a week. And of course, you are also paying And of course, you are also paying And of course, you are also paying attention to train your calves. And I attention to train your calves. And I attention to train your calves. And I do, for reasons I described before, do, for reasons I described before, do, for reasons I described before, believe that you want to train your neck believe that you want to train your neck believe that you want to train your neck at least to keep it strong. You may not at least to keep it strong. You may not at least to keep it strong. You may not want to generate hypertrophy there. want to generate hypertrophy there. want to generate hypertrophy there. People vary in terms of how quickly People vary in terms of how quickly People vary in terms of how quickly their neck grows. Some people grows their neck grows. Some people grows their neck grows. Some people grows very, very fast. Other people, for the very, very fast. Other people, for the very, very fast. Other people, for the life of them, they can't get much life of them, they can't get much life of them, they can't get much hypertrophy in their neck. But keeping hypertrophy in their neck. But keeping hypertrophy in their neck. But keeping that neck strong at least through some that neck strong at least through some that neck strong at least through some very light work to moderate weight work, very light work to moderate weight work, very light work to moderate weight work, very, very important. very, very important. very, very important. For reasons I stated earlier. If you set For reasons I stated earlier. If you set For reasons I stated earlier. If you set out those goals, out those goals, out those goals, then the specific days that you do each then the specific days that you do each then the specific days that you do each workout isn't as critical, but the workout isn't as critical, but the workout isn't as critical, but the specific spacing is. So for instance, specific spacing is. So for instance, specific spacing is. So for instance, you're not going to want to do your you're not going to want to do your you're not going to want to do your high-intensity interval training the day high-intensity interval training the day high-intensity interval training the day after you train your legs. Because if after you train your legs. Because if after you train your legs. Because if you're doing that high-intensity you're doing that high-intensity you're doing that high-intensity interval training correctly, you're interval training correctly, you're interval training correctly, you're going to be going to be going to be taxing your legs and eating into their taxing your legs and eating into their taxing your legs and eating into their recovery. And so you want to space them out by two And so you want to space them out by two And so you want to space them out by two or three days. So I think you'll notice or three days. So I think you'll notice or three days. So I think you'll notice that the point is really to that the point is really to that the point is really to optimize everything on the whole rather optimize everything on the whole rather optimize everything on the whole rather than any one specific aspect of training than any one specific aspect of training than any one specific aspect of training or adaptation. Now that said, I do or adaptation. Now that said, I do or adaptation. Now that said, I do realize that some people might be realize that some people might be realize that some people might be hyper-focused on things like strength hyper-focused on things like strength hyper-focused on things like strength and hypertrophy and the aesthetics that and hypertrophy and the aesthetics that and hypertrophy and the aesthetics that come with it. A key point about strength come with it. A key point about strength come with it. A key point about strength hypertrophy and weight training, and hypertrophy and weight training, and hypertrophy and weight training, and this is something that has been covered this is something that has been covered this is something that has been covered on multiple podcasts, certainly the one on multiple podcasts, certainly the one on multiple podcasts, certainly the one with Jeff Cavalier and with Dr. Andy with Jeff Cavalier and with Dr. Andy with Jeff Cavalier and with Dr. Andy Galpin and the one that I did on Galpin and the one that I did on Galpin and the one that I did on building muscle strength and building muscle strength and building muscle strength and hypertrophy, the solo episode. hypertrophy, the solo episode. hypertrophy, the solo episode. And that is the following. And that is the following. And that is the following. It is the rare individual who has It is the rare individual who has It is the rare individual who has perfectly balanced musculature. perfectly balanced musculature. perfectly balanced musculature. Right? Most people can be a bit quad Right? Most people can be a bit quad Right? Most people can be a bit quad dominant or hamstring dominant where dominant or hamstring dominant where dominant or hamstring dominant where they have trouble activating their they have trouble activating their they have trouble activating their glutes or somebody has a terrible time glutes or somebody has a terrible time glutes or somebody has a terrible time trying to activate their chest trying to activate their chest trying to activate their chest muscles, but they're very strong in the muscles, but they're very strong in the muscles, but they're very strong in the back, etc. back, etc. back, etc. It's very clear that we can know that It's very clear that we can know that It's very clear that we can know that not just based on aesthetics, not just based on aesthetics, not just based on aesthetics, right? But based on right? But based on right? But based on deliberate contractibility of those deliberate contractibility of those deliberate contractibility of those muscles. So, I don't want to get into muscles. So, I don't want to get into muscles. So, I don't want to get into this in too much detail for sake of this in too much detail for sake of this in too much detail for sake of time, but this is something that has time, but this is something that has time, but this is something that has peer-reviewed research to support it and peer-reviewed research to support it and peer-reviewed research to support it and was also discussed extensively with Jeff was also discussed extensively with Jeff was also discussed extensively with Jeff Cavalier when he was a guest. Cavalier when he was a guest. Cavalier when he was a guest. And that actually he's really And that actually he's really And that actually he's really popularized this notion and it's popularized this notion and it's popularized this notion and it's absolutely true, which is that if you absolutely true, which is that if you absolutely true, which is that if you can contract a muscle very hard to the can contract a muscle very hard to the can contract a muscle very hard to the point where it almost feels like it's point where it almost feels like it's point where it almost feels like it's cramping, if you can do that even when cramping, if you can do that even when cramping, if you can do that even when there's no weight in your hand or there's no weight in your hand or there's no weight in your hand or there's no resistance against it, so there's no resistance against it, so there's no resistance against it, so you're just using your mind-muscle you're just using your mind-muscle you're just using your mind-muscle connection to contract that muscle hard connection to contract that muscle hard connection to contract that muscle hard and isolate it, chances are you'll be and isolate it, chances are you'll be and isolate it, chances are you'll be able to generate hypertrophy and able to generate hypertrophy and able to generate hypertrophy and strength gains pretty easily in that strength gains pretty easily in that strength gains pretty easily in that muscle compared to muscles that you have muscle compared to muscles that you have muscle compared to muscles that you have a harder time activating. So, during all a harder time activating. So, during all a harder time activating. So, during all resistance training that mind-muscle resistance training that mind-muscle resistance training that mind-muscle link is really important. link is really important. link is really important. Uh so much so that some people will even Uh so much so that some people will even Uh so much so that some people will even try and emphasize contraction of the try and emphasize contraction of the try and emphasize contraction of the muscles in between sets, etc. I muscles in between sets, etc. I muscles in between sets, etc. I personally, because I'm not somebody who personally, because I'm not somebody who personally, because I'm not somebody who uh likes a mirror when I work out and uh likes a mirror when I work out and uh likes a mirror when I work out and I'm not somebody who wants to spend time I'm not somebody who wants to spend time I'm not somebody who wants to spend time in between sets flexing muscles and etc. in between sets flexing muscles and etc. in between sets flexing muscles and etc. Uh for whatever reason, I want to Uh for whatever reason, I want to Uh for whatever reason, I want to actually rest between sets and I'm more actually rest between sets and I'm more actually rest between sets and I'm more concerned with performance during those concerned with performance during those concerned with performance during those sets and really putting my mind into the sets and really putting my mind into the sets and really putting my mind into the muscle during the set, muscle during the set, muscle during the set, I really try and emphasize deep I really try and emphasize deep I really try and emphasize deep relaxation between sets and so here's a relaxation between sets and so here's a relaxation between sets and so here's a tool that again is built out of a tool that again is built out of a tool that again is built out of science and I should say peer-reviewed studies, and I should say peer-reviewed studies, and I should say peer-reviewed studies, some of which are being done in my lab, some of which are being done in my lab, some of which are being done in my lab, but other labs as well, which is that in but other labs as well, which is that in but other labs as well, which is that in between sets, what I really strive to do between sets, what I really strive to do between sets, what I really strive to do is to bring my heart rate down as much is to bring my heart rate down as much is to bring my heart rate down as much as possible, calm myself down as much as possible, calm myself down as much as possible, calm myself down as much as possible, and I'll do the so-called possible, and I'll do the so-called possible, and I'll do the so-called physiological sigh in order to do that. physiological sigh in order to do that. physiological sigh in order to do that. That's two inhales through the nose That's two inhales through the nose That's two inhales through the nose back-to-back. And then long full exhale through the And then long full exhale through the And then long full exhale through the mouth. I just did it partially there for mouth. I just did it partially there for mouth. I just did it partially there for the sake of time again. So, a big deep the sake of time again. So, a big deep the sake of time again. So, a big deep inhale through the nose and then sneak inhale through the nose and then sneak inhale through the nose and then sneak in a little bit more on a second inhale in a little bit more on a second inhale in a little bit more on a second inhale to maximally inflate the lungs and the to maximally inflate the lungs and the to maximally inflate the lungs and the alveoli of the lungs, and then a alveoli of the lungs, and then a alveoli of the lungs, and then a full exhale of all your air full exhale of all your air full exhale of all your air via the mouth to empty your lungs. via the mouth to empty your lungs. via the mouth to empty your lungs. That's the fastest way that we are aware That's the fastest way that we are aware That's the fastest way that we are aware of to calm your nervous system down. And of to calm your nervous system down. And of to calm your nervous system down. And really in between sets, you can use that really in between sets, you can use that really in between sets, you can use that to calm yourself down and conserve to calm yourself down and conserve to calm yourself down and conserve energy. But then, as you move into the energy. But then, as you move into the energy. But then, as you move into the weight training set, weight training set, weight training set, you really want to ratchet up your focus you really want to ratchet up your focus you really want to ratchet up your focus and attention to the muscles that you're and attention to the muscles that you're and attention to the muscles that you're going to be using. Now, I'd like to going to be using. Now, I'd like to going to be using. Now, I'd like to acknowledge that there's a huge range of acknowledge that there's a huge range of acknowledge that there's a huge range of parameters in terms of how to actually parameters in terms of how to actually parameters in terms of how to actually perform during the set. You can focus on perform during the set. You can focus on perform during the set. You can focus on a particular muscle and try and uh a particular muscle and try and uh a particular muscle and try and uh really isolate it from the beginning of really isolate it from the beginning of really isolate it from the beginning of the movement. Some people will really the movement. Some people will really the movement. Some people will really try and isolate it only during the peak try and isolate it only during the peak try and isolate it only during the peak contraction. Some people will accentuate contraction. Some people will accentuate contraction. Some people will accentuate the negative. There's speed and cadence. the negative. There's speed and cadence. the negative. There's speed and cadence. There are Again, remember, concepts are There are Again, remember, concepts are There are Again, remember, concepts are few, methods are many. And if you're few, methods are many. And if you're few, methods are many. And if you're interested in the various methods of interested in the various methods of interested in the various methods of eccentrics and concentrics and eccentrics and concentrics and eccentrics and concentrics and all the different ways all the different ways all the different ways of changing up cadence and so forth of changing up cadence and so forth of changing up cadence and so forth during sets, there's an enormous amount during sets, there's an enormous amount during sets, there's an enormous amount of quality information out there, far of quality information out there, far of quality information out there, far too much for us to get into in too much for us to get into in too much for us to get into in too detail now. But what I described are the detail now. But what I described are the detail now. But what I described are the general principles of how to set your general principles of how to set your general principles of how to set your mind, if you will, during the set. You mind, if you will, during the set. You mind, if you will, during the set. You should be focused on the muscles that should be focused on the muscles that should be focused on the muscles that you're using and or moving the weight. you're using and or moving the weight. you're using and or moving the weight. If movement of the weight is more If movement of the weight is more If movement of the weight is more important, you can either focus on important, you can either focus on important, you can either focus on moving the weight or challenging moving the weight or challenging moving the weight or challenging muscles, right? You can either try and muscles, right? You can either try and muscles, right? You can either try and isolate muscles and make specific isolate muscles and make specific isolate muscles and make specific muscles do the work or simply moving the muscles do the work or simply moving the muscles do the work or simply moving the weight. Moving the weight is Moving the weight is Moving the weight is going to be more geared towards is going to be more geared towards is going to be more geared towards strength improvements. strength improvements. strength improvements. But focusing on the muscle, the so-called focusing on the muscle, the so-called focusing on the muscle, the so-called mind-muscle link, is going to shift that mind-muscle link, is going to shift that mind-muscle link, is going to shift that very same set more toward hypertrophy. I very same set more toward hypertrophy. I very same set more toward hypertrophy. I realize I'm painting with a broad brush realize I'm painting with a broad brush realize I'm painting with a broad brush here, but nonetheless, this is grounded here, but nonetheless, this is grounded here, but nonetheless, this is grounded in the way that the nervous system in the way that the nervous system in the way that the nervous system governs muscular contraction. And while governs muscular contraction. And while governs muscular contraction. And while I think most people are familiar with I think most people are familiar with I think most people are familiar with the number of different variables the number of different variables the number of different variables associated with the resistance training, associated with the resistance training, associated with the resistance training, you know, sets, reps, rest intervals, you know, sets, reps, rest intervals, you know, sets, reps, rest intervals, cadence, etc. cadence, etc. cadence, etc. There are also a tremendous number of There are also a tremendous number of There are also a tremendous number of very important variables for endurance very important variables for endurance very important variables for endurance and any kind of cardiovascular training. and any kind of cardiovascular training. and any kind of cardiovascular training. And there are a lot of excellent And there are a lot of excellent And there are a lot of excellent resources out there about that. resources out there about that. resources out there about that. I think the most important one, I think the most important one, I think the most important one, in fact, I will go on record saying what in fact, I will go on record saying what in fact, I will go on record saying what I believe to be the most important I believe to be the most important I believe to be the most important variable for any endurance or variable for any endurance or variable for any endurance or cardiovascular training is that because cardiovascular training is that because cardiovascular training is that because it's a repetitive movement, that you're it's a repetitive movement, that you're it's a repetitive movement, that you're able to complete the movement safely, able to complete the movement safely, able to complete the movement safely, meaning you're not putting your body meaning you're not putting your body meaning you're not putting your body into range of motion or into positions into range of motion or into positions into range of motion or into positions that can damage joints or put you in any that can damage joints or put you in any that can damage joints or put you in any kind of compromised state. And some of kind of compromised state. And some of kind of compromised state. And some of you might think, "Well, that seems kind you might think, "Well, that seems kind you might think, "Well, that seems kind of silly." But if you've ever set the, of silly." But if you've ever set the, of silly." But if you've ever set the, for instance, the seat too high on a for instance, the seat too high on a for instance, the seat too high on a stationary bike and then done, you know, stationary bike and then done, you know, stationary bike and then done, you know, air dyne or assault bike type interval air dyne or assault bike type interval air dyne or assault bike type interval training sprints, training sprints, training sprints, if it's set too high and you're over if it's set too high and you're over if it's set too high and you're over striding, as it were, the next day you striding, as it were, the next day you striding, as it were, the next day you can really pay the price in terms of can really pay the price in terms of can really pay the price in terms of some back pain or sciatica. And some back pain or sciatica. And some back pain or sciatica. And sometimes that pain can extend for sometimes that pain can extend for sometimes that pain can extend for quite a while. So, of course, you don't quite a while. So, of course, you don't quite a while. So, of course, you don't want to approach any exercise with so want to approach any exercise with so want to approach any exercise with so much caution that it's neurotic and much caution that it's neurotic and much caution that it's neurotic and preventive, and yet you don't want to preventive, and yet you don't want to preventive, and yet you don't want to approach any exercise in any way that's approach any exercise in any way that's approach any exercise in any way that's so cavalier, so cavalier, so cavalier, forgive the pun, Jeff, that forgive the pun, Jeff, that forgive the pun, Jeff, that you're also going to compromise your the you're also going to compromise your the you're also going to compromise your the integrity of your joints and musculature integrity of your joints and musculature integrity of your joints and musculature and connective tissue. Let's talk about and connective tissue. Let's talk about and connective tissue. Let's talk about some real-world practical variables. some real-world practical variables. some real-world practical variables. For instance, let's say you get a poor For instance, let's say you get a poor For instance, let's say you get a poor to terrible night's sleep. Should you to terrible night's sleep. Should you to terrible night's sleep. Should you train the next day or not? Well, that train the next day or not? Well, that train the next day or not? Well, that really depends. I can honestly say I've really depends. I can honestly say I've really depends. I can honestly say I've had some of the best training sessions, had some of the best training sessions, had some of the best training sessions, resistance training or endurance resistance training or endurance resistance training or endurance training sessions, after a really poor training sessions, after a really poor training sessions, after a really poor night's sleep. But that's the rare night's sleep. But that's the rare night's sleep. But that's the rare event. More often than not, if I'm event. More often than not, if I'm event. More often than not, if I'm not sleeping well, not sleeping well, not sleeping well, I've had a terrible night's sleep, the I've had a terrible night's sleep, the I've had a terrible night's sleep, the next day next day next day I will just skip training that day. I will just skip training that day. I will just skip training that day. I know that will shock a number of you out know that will shock a number of you out know that will shock a number of you out there or perhaps you're already calling there or perhaps you're already calling there or perhaps you're already calling me names, weak, etc. But I find that if me names, weak, etc. But I find that if me names, weak, etc. But I find that if I've slept really poorly or I've had a I've slept really poorly or I've had a I've slept really poorly or I've had a very stressful event the day before and very stressful event the day before and very stressful event the day before and I don't sleep well, training the next I don't sleep well, training the next I don't sleep well, training the next day sets me up for getting ill and day sets me up for getting ill and day sets me up for getting ill and getting ill sets me up for not being getting ill sets me up for not being getting ill sets me up for not being able to train for multiple days. So, it able to train for multiple days. So, it able to train for multiple days. So, it is my preference in that case to skip a is my preference in that case to skip a is my preference in that case to skip a day and really focus on recovery day and really focus on recovery day and really focus on recovery and then as I mentioned earlier slide and then as I mentioned earlier slide and then as I mentioned earlier slide that work out to the next day. that work out to the next day. that work out to the next day. And rarely double that work out up with rarely double that work out up with rarely double that work out up with another work out but then just slide the another work out but then just slide the another work out but then just slide the schedule forward by a day. But I really schedule forward by a day. But I really schedule forward by a day. But I really try and strive, that is I really try to try and strive, that is I really try to try and strive, that is I really try to double up at least some work out later double up at least some work out later double up at least some work out later in the week in that case so that I can in the week in that case so that I can in the week in that case so that I can get back on schedule of starting the get back on schedule of starting the get back on schedule of starting the 7-day protocol again on the same day. 7-day protocol again on the same day. 7-day protocol again on the same day. I don't want to be excessively vague I don't want to be excessively vague I don't want to be excessively vague there. What I'm trying to say is I try there. What I'm trying to say is I try there. What I'm trying to say is I try and adhere to the same schedule, but if and adhere to the same schedule, but if and adhere to the same schedule, but if I get a poor night's sleep I'll just I get a poor night's sleep I'll just I get a poor night's sleep I'll just simply skip the work out the next day, simply skip the work out the next day, simply skip the work out the next day, slide the work out forward. There is one slide the work out forward. There is one slide the work out forward. There is one exception to that and it's an important exception to that and it's an important exception to that and it's an important exception which is exception which is exception which is there are times when I've not slept well there are times when I've not slept well there are times when I've not slept well or I've had some particularly stressful or I've had some particularly stressful or I've had some particularly stressful event the day before and haven't slept event the day before and haven't slept event the day before and haven't slept well, but I'm able to do so-called NSDR, but I'm able to do so-called NSDR, but I'm able to do so-called NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, the next day. So, non-sleep deep rest, the next day. So, non-sleep deep rest, the next day. So, there have been times when I've only got there have been times when I've only got there have been times when I've only got three or four hours of sleep the night three or four hours of sleep the night three or four hours of sleep the night before and I'm feeling really behind the before and I'm feeling really behind the before and I'm feeling really behind the ball the next morning. ball the next morning. ball the next morning. I really want to get my work out in so I really want to get my work out in so I really want to get my work out in so instead what I will do is a instead what I will do is a instead what I will do is a 10 but ideally in that case a 30 or even 10 but ideally in that case a 30 or even 10 but ideally in that case a 30 or even 60 minutes non-sleep deep rest. And 60 minutes non-sleep deep rest. And 60 minutes non-sleep deep rest. And there's a 10-minute non-sleep deep rest there's a 10-minute non-sleep deep rest there's a 10-minute non-sleep deep rest protocol uh read by me, uh read by me, uh read by me, um but it is a non-spiritual, um but it is a non-spiritual, um but it is a non-spiritual, non-mystical science-supported non-sleep deep rest protocol available non-sleep deep rest protocol available non-sleep deep rest protocol available on YouTube. You can simply put my name, on YouTube. You can simply put my name, on YouTube. You can simply put my name, Huberman, put NSDR and Virtusan, v i r t Huberman, put NSDR and Virtusan, v i r t Huberman, put NSDR and Virtusan, v i r t u s a n, u s a n, u s a n, into YouTube and you'll find that into YouTube and you'll find that into YouTube and you'll find that script. There are other NSDR scripts script. There are other NSDR scripts script. There are other NSDR scripts that you can find now on Spotify and on that you can find now on Spotify and on that you can find now on Spotify and on YouTube. And if you fall asleep during YouTube. And if you fall asleep during YouTube. And if you fall asleep during those non-sleep deep rest scripts, those non-sleep deep rest scripts, those non-sleep deep rest scripts, that's great. Uh and if you don't, you that's great. Uh and if you don't, you that's great. Uh and if you don't, you will also find that it will restore your will also find that it will restore your will also find that it will restore your ability to perform mental and physical ability to perform mental and physical ability to perform mental and physical work. So, there are times when I haven't work. So, there are times when I haven't work. So, there are times when I haven't gotten as much sleep as I would like or gotten as much sleep as I would like or gotten as much sleep as I would like or I'm feeling a bit more stressed for I'm feeling a bit more stressed for I'm feeling a bit more stressed for whatever reason, and I'll do NSDR and whatever reason, and I'll do NSDR and whatever reason, and I'll do NSDR and then I will go train, then I will go train, then I will go train, and that often works fabulously well for and that often works fabulously well for and that often works fabulously well for me, and then I don't have to skip a me, and then I don't have to skip a me, and then I don't have to skip a workout entirely just because I didn't workout entirely just because I didn't workout entirely just because I didn't get a good night's sleep. A lot of get a good night's sleep. A lot of get a good night's sleep. A lot of people ask whether or not people ask whether or not people ask whether or not you should train fasted or fed, and this you should train fasted or fed, and this you should train fasted or fed, and this is a very controversial area. I is a very controversial area. I is a very controversial area. I personally prefer to do my personally prefer to do my personally prefer to do my cardiovascular work not having eaten cardiovascular work not having eaten cardiovascular work not having eaten anything in the previous in the previous in the previous 3 to 10 hours. And typically that's 3 to 10 hours. And typically that's 3 to 10 hours. And typically that's because I wake up and I'll do the because I wake up and I'll do the because I wake up and I'll do the cardiovascular training within about an cardiovascular training within about an cardiovascular training within about an hour of waking up. hour of waking up. hour of waking up. Sometimes later because of my first meal Sometimes later because of my first meal Sometimes later because of my first meal generally falls, generally, not always, generally falls, generally, not always, generally falls, generally, not always, falls around 11:00 a.m. I don't do any falls around 11:00 a.m. I don't do any falls around 11:00 a.m. I don't do any kind of formal intermittent fasting, but kind of formal intermittent fasting, but kind of formal intermittent fasting, but typically my meal schedule somewhere typically my meal schedule somewhere typically my meal schedule somewhere between 11:00 a.m. and my last bite of between 11:00 a.m. and my last bite of between 11:00 a.m. and my last bite of food is around 8:00 p.m., but I'm not food is around 8:00 p.m., but I'm not food is around 8:00 p.m., but I'm not super strict about that. I might eat in, super strict about that. I might eat in, super strict about that. I might eat in, you know, as late as 9:00 p.m. and I you know, as late as 9:00 p.m. and I you know, as late as 9:00 p.m. and I might eat something at 10:00 a.m. if I might eat something at 10:00 a.m. if I might eat something at 10:00 a.m. if I wake up really hungry, I might have wake up really hungry, I might have wake up really hungry, I might have something before 11:00 a.m. I'm not something before 11:00 a.m. I'm not something before 11:00 a.m. I'm not neurotic about it. But, in terms of neurotic about it. But, in terms of neurotic about it. But, in terms of training, I like to train fasted, and training, I like to train fasted, and training, I like to train fasted, and that includes the resistance training that includes the resistance training that includes the resistance training workouts, and those come early in the workouts, and those come early in the workouts, and those come early in the day for me. And typically if I'm going day for me. And typically if I'm going day for me. And typically if I'm going to train legs on to train legs on to train legs on Monday, for instance, which is when I Monday, for instance, which is when I Monday, for instance, which is when I train legs, I'll make sure that the train legs, I'll make sure that the train legs, I'll make sure that the night before I'm ingesting some starch, night before I'm ingesting some starch, night before I'm ingesting some starch, some carbohydrate, like rice or pasta or some carbohydrate, like rice or pasta or some carbohydrate, like rice or pasta or something of that sort, something of that sort, something of that sort, to make sure that when I do that morning to make sure that when I do that morning to make sure that when I do that morning leg workout, I have enough glycogen in leg workout, I have enough glycogen in leg workout, I have enough glycogen in the muscles, etc. Again, nutrition is a the muscles, etc. Again, nutrition is a the muscles, etc. Again, nutrition is a somewhat controversial area. In fact, um somewhat controversial area. In fact, um somewhat controversial area. In fact, um it can evoke very strong feelings cuz I it can evoke very strong feelings cuz I it can evoke very strong feelings cuz I know we've got vegans and we've got know we've got vegans and we've got know we've got vegans and we've got omnivores and we've got carnivores and omnivores and we've got carnivores and omnivores and we've got carnivores and people who are keto. This isn't really people who are keto. This isn't really people who are keto. This isn't really the format for us to get into all of the format for us to get into all of the format for us to get into all of that. I think the rule to follow is figure out I think the rule to follow is figure out I think the rule to follow is figure out what optimizes your training for your what optimizes your training for your what optimizes your training for your particular training goals. For me, that particular training goals. For me, that particular training goals. For me, that most often means training fasted and most often means training fasted and most often means training fasted and then eating pretty soon after I train then eating pretty soon after I train then eating pretty soon after I train and if it's a high intensity resistance and if it's a high intensity resistance and if it's a high intensity resistance training workout and frankly all of my training workout and frankly all of my training workout and frankly all of my resistance training workouts are pretty resistance training workouts are pretty resistance training workouts are pretty high intensity. I'm not going to failure high intensity. I'm not going to failure high intensity. I'm not going to failure on every set but at least a about 30% of on every set but at least a about 30% of on every set but at least a about 30% of those sets I'm going to failure. those sets I'm going to failure. those sets I'm going to failure. And the other sets I'm working very hard And the other sets I'm working very hard And the other sets I'm working very hard nonetheless. Well then I eat some nonetheless. Well then I eat some nonetheless. Well then I eat some starches after I train and I also ingest starches after I train and I also ingest starches after I train and I also ingest some protein in the form of a protein some protein in the form of a protein some protein in the form of a protein drink or a meal that includes some drink or a meal that includes some drink or a meal that includes some protein food. protein food. protein food. But I don't like to eat before I do But I don't like to eat before I do But I don't like to eat before I do resistance training or not or at least resistance training or not or at least resistance training or not or at least not within the hour or two before I do not within the hour or two before I do not within the hour or two before I do resistance training. There are resistance training. There are resistance training. There are exceptions to that and I should say that exceptions to that and I should say that exceptions to that and I should say that the same basically applies to endurance the same basically applies to endurance the same basically applies to endurance work. If I'm going to head out for a run work. If I'm going to head out for a run work. If I'm going to head out for a run typically I don't want my belly full of typically I don't want my belly full of typically I don't want my belly full of food or any food at all but or any food at all but or any food at all but there are times where I wake up hungry there are times where I wake up hungry there are times where I wake up hungry and I very much need to eat something or and I very much need to eat something or and I very much need to eat something or I have something scheduled socially like I have something scheduled socially like I have something scheduled socially like a breakfast and I'll um have that a breakfast and I'll um have that a breakfast and I'll um have that breakfast and then an hour or 90 minutes breakfast and then an hour or 90 minutes breakfast and then an hour or 90 minutes later I'll do my workout um because I later I'll do my workout um because I later I'll do my workout um because I want to make sure that I finish the want to make sure that I finish the want to make sure that I finish the workout. I again am not neurotically workout. I again am not neurotically workout. I again am not neurotically attached to training fasted or fed. For attached to training fasted or fed. For attached to training fasted or fed. For me fasted is preferred but if I have to me fasted is preferred but if I have to me fasted is preferred but if I have to train fed better to train than to not train fed better to train than to not train fed better to train than to not train at all. We haven't talked so much train at all. We haven't talked so much train at all. We haven't talked so much about flexibility yet but we did an about flexibility yet but we did an about flexibility yet but we did an entire episode of the Huberman Lab entire episode of the Huberman Lab entire episode of the Huberman Lab podcast on flexibility and I encourage podcast on flexibility and I encourage podcast on flexibility and I encourage you to check out that episode if you're you to check out that episode if you're you to check out that episode if you're interested in increasing your interested in increasing your interested in increasing your flexibility but the basic takeaway from flexibility but the basic takeaway from flexibility but the basic takeaway from that episode is that if you look at what that episode is that if you look at what that episode is that if you look at what I like to call the center of mass of the I like to call the center of mass of the I like to call the center of mass of the research that is most of the studies and research that is most of the studies and research that is most of the studies and what the conclusions of most of the what the conclusions of most of the what the conclusions of most of the quality studies point to so not the quality studies point to so not the quality studies point to so not the exceptions but the kind of general rules exceptions but the kind of general rules exceptions but the kind of general rules that have been gleaned over time from that have been gleaned over time from that have been gleaned over time from multiple labs over multiple decades etc. multiple labs over multiple decades etc. multiple labs over multiple decades etc. What you find is that static stretching What you find is that static stretching What you find is that static stretching that is holding a stretch and in fact that is holding a stretch and in fact that is holding a stretch and in fact exhaling and relaxing the midsection and exhaling and relaxing the midsection and exhaling and relaxing the midsection and torso and torso and torso and relaxing into the stretch as opposed to relaxing into the stretch as opposed to relaxing into the stretch as opposed to staying full of air and tense but staying full of air and tense but staying full of air and tense but mentally and physically relaxing into mentally and physically relaxing into mentally and physically relaxing into the stretch but not stretching maximally the stretch but not stretching maximally the stretch but not stretching maximally that is not extending as far as you that is not extending as far as you that is not extending as far as you possibly can go, but more like 60% or possibly can go, but more like 60% or possibly can go, but more like 60% or even less, and then holding those static even less, and then holding those static even less, and then holding those static stretches for anywhere from 30 to 60 seconds and for anywhere from 30 to 60 seconds and for anywhere from 30 to 60 seconds and then repeating. Doing that two or three then repeating. Doing that two or three then repeating. Doing that two or three times throughout the week for multiple times throughout the week for multiple times throughout the week for multiple muscle groups, so it could be for your muscle groups, so it could be for your muscle groups, so it could be for your quadriceps, could be for hamstrings, for quadriceps, could be for hamstrings, for quadriceps, could be for hamstrings, for your lats. There are protocols out your lats. There are protocols out your lats. There are protocols out there. In fact, we have a newsletter there. In fact, we have a newsletter there. In fact, we have a newsletter that is focused entirely on protocols that is focused entirely on protocols that is focused entirely on protocols for flexibility and stretching. You can for flexibility and stretching. You can for flexibility and stretching. You can find that again by going find that again by going find that again by going hubermanlab.com. You don't even need to hubermanlab.com. You don't even need to hubermanlab.com. You don't even need to sign up for the newsletter, although we sign up for the newsletter, although we sign up for the newsletter, although we invite you to if you like, but you can invite you to if you like, but you can invite you to if you like, but you can simply go there, scroll down to the simply go there, scroll down to the simply go there, scroll down to the flexibility newsletter, and all the flexibility newsletter, and all the flexibility newsletter, and all the protocols are there protocols are there protocols are there for each of the muscle groups, etc. But for each of the muscle groups, etc. But for each of the muscle groups, etc. But what I typically try and do is some what I typically try and do is some what I typically try and do is some stretching in the evening because I stretching in the evening because I stretching in the evening because I train in the morning train in the morning train in the morning as I'm perhaps getting ready for bed or as I'm perhaps getting ready for bed or as I'm perhaps getting ready for bed or if the TV is on, which in our house if the TV is on, which in our house if the TV is on, which in our house doesn't typically go on because we don't doesn't typically go on because we don't doesn't typically go on because we don't have a TV, but of course there are have a TV, but of course there are have a TV, but of course there are computers and you know, people are on computers and you know, people are on computers and you know, people are on their computers, etc. Well, I try and do their computers, etc. Well, I try and do their computers, etc. Well, I try and do some stretching while I do that. I also some stretching while I do that. I also some stretching while I do that. I also have a standing desk, so during the day have a standing desk, so during the day have a standing desk, so during the day at work, regardless of whether or not I at work, regardless of whether or not I at work, regardless of whether or not I trained that morning or not or I'm going trained that morning or not or I'm going trained that morning or not or I'm going to train in the afternoon, I'll try and to train in the afternoon, I'll try and to train in the afternoon, I'll try and do some static stretching for my do some static stretching for my do some static stretching for my hamstrings, my quads, my lats, my hamstrings, my quads, my lats, my hamstrings, my quads, my lats, my shoulders, my back. Really doesn't take shoulders, my back. Really doesn't take shoulders, my back. Really doesn't take much time and I really try and much time and I really try and much time and I really try and space that out throughout the week, space that out throughout the week, space that out throughout the week, which if you look at the peer-reviewed which if you look at the peer-reviewed which if you look at the peer-reviewed research, matches well to what's known research, matches well to what's known research, matches well to what's known to be most effective, which are going to be most effective, which are going to be most effective, which are going to be short repeated sessions, ideally be short repeated sessions, ideally be short repeated sessions, ideally every day, but truth told, I fail every day, but truth told, I fail every day, but truth told, I fail I categorically fail. I was about to think categorically fail. I was about to think categorically fail. I was about to think of whether or not I ever stretch every of whether or not I ever stretch every of whether or not I ever stretch every day. I fail to do it every day, but I day. I fail to do it every day, but I day. I fail to do it every day, but I get about three or so stretching get about three or so stretching get about three or so stretching sessions in per week, and again, it's sessions in per week, and again, it's sessions in per week, and again, it's just static hold, trying to really relax just static hold, trying to really relax just static hold, trying to really relax into the stretch. into the stretch. into the stretch. Now, the relax into the stretch is Now, the relax into the stretch is Now, the relax into the stretch is something that's been talked about in martial arts that's been talked about in martial arts that's been talked about in martial arts circles, and Pavel Tsatsouline has an circles, and Pavel Tsatsouline has an circles, and Pavel Tsatsouline has an excellent book on stretching. We can excellent book on stretching. We can excellent book on stretching. We can provide a link to that. provide a link to that. provide a link to that. Talks about this. Has a lot to do with Talks about this. Has a lot to do with Talks about this. Has a lot to do with relaxation of the nervous system and the relaxation of the nervous system and the relaxation of the nervous system and the way that the nerves innervate muscles way that the nerves innervate muscles way that the nerves innervate muscles and allow for stretch if you will. Also, and allow for stretch if you will. Also, and allow for stretch if you will. Also, the way that the tendons and ligaments the way that the tendons and ligaments the way that the tendons and ligaments are innervated by nerves. are innervated by nerves. are innervated by nerves. The converse is also true and here The converse is also true and here The converse is also true and here again, this is a principle that uh again, this is a principle that uh again, this is a principle that uh Pavlov has put forth. Uh I believe he Pavlov has put forth. Uh I believe he Pavlov has put forth. Uh I believe he calls it irradiation, meaning calls it irradiation, meaning calls it irradiation, meaning irradiating out or emanating out from a irradiating out or emanating out from a irradiating out or emanating out from a source, which is that while exhaling and source, which is that while exhaling and source, which is that while exhaling and relaxing the torso, the midsection, some relaxing the torso, the midsection, some relaxing the torso, the midsection, some people call it the core, people call it the core, people call it the core, although some people don't like that although some people don't like that although some people don't like that term, can facilitate relaxation and stretching can facilitate relaxation and stretching can facilitate relaxation and stretching through a larger range of motion. So, through a larger range of motion. So, through a larger range of motion. So, too, can contracting the core, too, can contracting the core, too, can contracting the core, the midsection, or gripping very tightly the midsection, or gripping very tightly the midsection, or gripping very tightly with the fist can facilitate muscular with the fist can facilitate muscular with the fist can facilitate muscular contraction because of the way that the contraction because of the way that the contraction because of the way that the nervous system heavily, uh we can even nervous system heavily, uh we can even nervous system heavily, uh we can even say over represents the fists in the say over represents the fists in the say over represents the fists in the brain. And so, how would you apply this brain. And so, how would you apply this brain. And so, how would you apply this to your overall foundational fitness to your overall foundational fitness to your overall foundational fitness protocol? Well, it turns out that let's protocol? Well, it turns out that let's protocol? Well, it turns out that let's say you're doing say you're doing say you're doing a movement that involves uh one limb a movement that involves uh one limb a movement that involves uh one limb moving and then the other. Let's say moving and then the other. Let's say moving and then the other. Let's say it's bicep curls just for sake of it's bicep curls just for sake of it's bicep curls just for sake of example. Turns out that you will example. Turns out that you will example. Turns out that you will actually be stronger in moving that actually be stronger in moving that actually be stronger in moving that dumbbell with the arm that happens to be dumbbell with the arm that happens to be dumbbell with the arm that happens to be moving if you grip the handle very moving if you grip the handle very moving if you grip the handle very tightly, but also grip the handle of the opposite but also grip the handle of the opposite but also grip the handle of the opposite dumbbell very tightly. Now, that said, dumbbell very tightly. Now, that said, dumbbell very tightly. Now, that said, in between sets, I encourage you to do in between sets, I encourage you to do in between sets, I encourage you to do the opposite, to try and completely the opposite, to try and completely the opposite, to try and completely relax in between sets, combine that with relax in between sets, combine that with relax in between sets, combine that with a physiological sigh, and then when the a physiological sigh, and then when the a physiological sigh, and then when the set the next set commences, employ that set the next set commences, employ that set the next set commences, employ that very strong grip both again of the of very strong grip both again of the of very strong grip both again of the of the weight that's moving in the in the weight that's moving in the in the weight that's moving in the in the weight that at that moment might be weight that at that moment might be weight that at that moment might be stationary or in isometric position. stationary or in isometric position. stationary or in isometric position. So, the nervous system, of course, is So, the nervous system, of course, is So, the nervous system, of course, is what controls muscles and that operates what controls muscles and that operates what controls muscles and that operates in both directions. If you want to in both directions. If you want to in both directions. If you want to relax, try and use long exhales, maybe relax, try and use long exhales, maybe relax, try and use long exhales, maybe even physiological sighs, and really even physiological sighs, and really even physiological sighs, and really concentrate on mentally and physically concentrate on mentally and physically concentrate on mentally and physically relaxing, in particular your core and relaxing, in particular your core and relaxing, in particular your core and your fists. And if you want to generate your fists. And if you want to generate your fists. And if you want to generate force, right, you want to move a heavy barbell right, you want to move a heavy barbell right, you want to move a heavy barbell or dumbbell, or dumbbell, or dumbbell, you want to do a chin-up with the you want to do a chin-up with the you want to do a chin-up with the maximal force, that's when you can maximal force, that's when you can maximal force, that's when you can employ the opposite, which would be to employ the opposite, which would be to employ the opposite, which would be to grip the bar or dumbbell, etc. very grip the bar or dumbbell, etc. very grip the bar or dumbbell, etc. very tightly, and you want to contract your tightly, and you want to contract your tightly, and you want to contract your core, or even fill your body with air as core, or even fill your body with air as core, or even fill your body with air as they say plug all the leaks, etc. So, they say plug all the leaks, etc. So, they say plug all the leaks, etc. So, this gets into kind of form and this gets into kind of form and this gets into kind of form and movement, um which is an extensive, near movement, um which is an extensive, near movement, um which is an extensive, near infinite landscape of discussion, again, infinite landscape of discussion, again, infinite landscape of discussion, again, that we don't have time to go into. I that we don't have time to go into. I that we don't have time to go into. I just want to mention those two nervous just want to mention those two nervous just want to mention those two nervous system-related tips because I suppose as system-related tips because I suppose as system-related tips because I suppose as a neuroscientist, they appeal to me a neuroscientist, they appeal to me a neuroscientist, they appeal to me because they are grounded in fundamental because they are grounded in fundamental because they are grounded in fundamental principles of how the nervous muscle, principles of how the nervous muscle, principles of how the nervous muscle, and I know that they will benefit you and I know that they will benefit you and I know that they will benefit you the first time you use them and every the first time you use them and every the first time you use them and every time. Speaking of grip and nervous time. Speaking of grip and nervous time. Speaking of grip and nervous system and fitness and longevity, Dr. system and fitness and longevity, Dr. system and fitness and longevity, Dr. Peter Attia, who is a medical doctor, Peter Attia, who is a medical doctor, Peter Attia, who is a medical doctor, was a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast was a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast was a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast and provided an enormous wealth of and provided an enormous wealth of and provided an enormous wealth of information on that podcast episode. I information on that podcast episode. I information on that podcast episode. I really encourage you to check it out uh really encourage you to check it out uh really encourage you to check it out uh when you have time. And of course, has when you have time. And of course, has when you have time. And of course, has his own spectacular podcast, The Drive his own spectacular podcast, The Drive his own spectacular podcast, The Drive with Peter Attia. Peter, with Peter Attia. Peter, with Peter Attia. Peter, Dr. Attia, I should say, Dr. Attia, I should say, Dr. Attia, I should say, often talks about certain movements or often talks about certain movements or often talks about certain movements or exercises that you should perform not exercises that you should perform not exercises that you should perform not just to improve your fitness, but also just to improve your fitness, but also just to improve your fitness, but also to touch into or measure how fit you are to touch into or measure how fit you are to touch into or measure how fit you are and how well you are progressing toward and how well you are progressing toward and how well you are progressing toward a long lifespan and healthspan. And one a long lifespan and healthspan. And one a long lifespan and healthspan. And one of those includes the ability to hang of those includes the ability to hang of those includes the ability to hang from a bar for a minute or longer. And from a bar for a minute or longer. And from a bar for a minute or longer. And there are a number of different there are a number of different there are a number of different expectations that one can have of expectations that one can have of expectations that one can have of how long they should be able to hang how long they should be able to hang how long they should be able to hang from a bar depending on their age and from a bar depending on their age and from a bar depending on their age and their fitness level, etc. Please check their fitness level, etc. Please check their fitness level, etc. Please check out Dr. Attia's podcast and his various out Dr. Attia's podcast and his various out Dr. Attia's podcast and his various social media sites to get more social media sites to get more social media sites to get more information on that. But, what I can information on that. But, what I can information on that. But, what I can tell you is that if you're going to hang tell you is that if you're going to hang tell you is that if you're going to hang from a bar from a bar from a bar and you want to hang from that bar as and you want to hang from that bar as and you want to hang from that bar as long as possible, which turns out to be long as possible, which turns out to be long as possible, which turns out to be a interesting and important metric of a interesting and important metric of a interesting and important metric of your health, your health, your health, then gripping the bar very tightly will then gripping the bar very tightly will then gripping the bar very tightly will actually help. Earlier, we talked about actually help. Earlier, we talked about actually help. Earlier, we talked about whether or not to train if you're whether or not to train if you're whether or not to train if you're sleep-deprived and how to recover from sleep-deprived and how to recover from sleep-deprived and how to recover from what I would say is moderate sleep what I would say is moderate sleep what I would say is moderate sleep deprivation by doing NSDR as opposed to deprivation by doing NSDR as opposed to deprivation by doing NSDR as opposed to total sleep deprivation, like being up total sleep deprivation, like being up total sleep deprivation, like being up all night or having a truly miserable all night or having a truly miserable all night or having a truly miserable night, in which case, I think you should night, in which case, I think you should night, in which case, I think you should just skip training the next day and just skip training the next day and just skip training the next day and slide it forward. Now, a similar issue slide it forward. Now, a similar issue slide it forward. Now, a similar issue comes up from time to time comes up from time to time comes up from time to time where people wonder whether or not they where people wonder whether or not they where people wonder whether or not they should train or not if they are sick. should train or not if they are sick. should train or not if they are sick. Here there's all sorts of crazy Here there's all sorts of crazy Here there's all sorts of crazy gym lore and sports specific lore. For gym lore and sports specific lore. For gym lore and sports specific lore. For instance, I used to hear this when I ran cross I used to hear this when I ran cross I used to hear this when I ran cross country, there was this country, there was this country, there was this adage that if the symptoms were from the adage that if the symptoms were from the adage that if the symptoms were from the neck up, you could still train. That is, neck up, you could still train. That is, neck up, you could still train. That is, if you were really congested and you had if you were really congested and you had if you were really congested and you had a headache, you could still run. Whereas a headache, you could still run. Whereas a headache, you could still run. Whereas if it was in your chest and in your if it was in your chest and in your if it was in your chest and in your lungs, you couldn't run. I don't think lungs, you couldn't run. I don't think lungs, you couldn't run. I don't think there's any data whatsoever to support there's any data whatsoever to support there's any data whatsoever to support whether or not that's true or whether or whether or not that's true or whether or whether or not that's true or whether or not it's not true. not it's not true. not it's not true. For myself For myself For myself and because of my general goal is to be and because of my general goal is to be and because of my general goal is to be training and fit over time, but also to training and fit over time, but also to training and fit over time, but also to include general health in the fitness include general health in the fitness include general health in the fitness equation. That is, to not be sick or equation. That is, to not be sick or equation. That is, to not be sick or chronically sick and certainly not to chronically sick and certainly not to chronically sick and certainly not to get other people sick. get other people sick. get other people sick. If I have a little tiny sniffle If I have a little tiny sniffle If I have a little tiny sniffle like I think I might be getting sick like I think I might be getting sick like I think I might be getting sick even then, I'm a little cautious in the even then, I'm a little cautious in the even then, I'm a little cautious in the sense that I'm not going to do my sense that I'm not going to do my sense that I'm not going to do my typical workout. I might stop it about typical workout. I might stop it about typical workout. I might stop it about 15 minutes earlier and I would do that 15 minutes earlier and I would do that 15 minutes earlier and I would do that not by not by not by neglecting any body parts or anything of neglecting any body parts or anything of neglecting any body parts or anything of that sort. If it's a weight training that sort. If it's a weight training that sort. If it's a weight training workout by simply reducing the total workout by simply reducing the total workout by simply reducing the total number of sets. I probably wouldn't do number of sets. I probably wouldn't do number of sets. I probably wouldn't do any sets to failure. If I did, I might any sets to failure. If I did, I might any sets to failure. If I did, I might reduce the total number or percentage of reduce the total number or percentage of reduce the total number or percentage of sets to failure from about 30% of sets to failure from about 30% of sets to failure from about 30% of sets to maybe closer to 10% of sets, to maybe closer to 10% of sets, to maybe closer to 10% of sets, something like that. And if it was something like that. And if it was something like that. And if it was endurance work, I might throttle back by endurance work, I might throttle back by endurance work, I might throttle back by 10 or 20%. And I will shorten the total 10 or 20%. And I will shorten the total 10 or 20%. And I will shorten the total duration of the workout and I often find duration of the workout and I often find duration of the workout and I often find that because of the known that because of the known that because of the known yes, peer-reviewed, known immune system yes, peer-reviewed, known immune system yes, peer-reviewed, known immune system enhancing effects of exercise, sometimes enhancing effects of exercise, sometimes enhancing effects of exercise, sometimes that alone will allow me to avoid that alone will allow me to avoid that alone will allow me to avoid getting sick. getting sick. getting sick. But of course, I'm also careful to get But of course, I'm also careful to get But of course, I'm also careful to get home, take a hot shower, not stress home, take a hot shower, not stress home, take a hot shower, not stress myself out if I can avoid getting myself out if I can avoid getting myself out if I can avoid getting myself stressed out and focus on sleep and SDR, stressed out and focus on sleep and SDR, stressed out and focus on sleep and SDR, other forms of recovery, good nutrition, other forms of recovery, good nutrition, other forms of recovery, good nutrition, etc. If, however, I have a real sniffle, a If, however, I have a real sniffle, a If, however, I have a real sniffle, a cold, I'm not feeling well, or I think I cold, I'm not feeling well, or I think I cold, I'm not feeling well, or I think I might be coming down with the flu, I might be coming down with the flu, I might be coming down with the flu, I absolutely do not train, and I don't get absolutely do not train, and I don't get absolutely do not train, and I don't get back into training of any kind until I'm back into training of any kind until I'm back into training of any kind until I'm completely recovered. So, what I'm completely recovered. So, what I'm completely recovered. So, what I'm basically saying is that no, I don't basically saying is that no, I don't basically saying is that no, I don't believe you should train if you're sick. believe you should train if you're sick. believe you should train if you're sick. And perhaps equally importantly, And perhaps equally importantly, And perhaps equally importantly, when you come back from a layoff of any when you come back from a layoff of any when you come back from a layoff of any kind, whether or not because of illness kind, whether or not because of illness kind, whether or not because of illness or for whatever reason, or for whatever reason, or for whatever reason, I do believe that because your body is a I do believe that because your body is a I do believe that because your body is a bit untrained, it's not ideal to jump bit untrained, it's not ideal to jump bit untrained, it's not ideal to jump right back into maximal training, and to right back into maximal training, and to right back into maximal training, and to take one, maybe two weeks of ramping up take one, maybe two weeks of ramping up take one, maybe two weeks of ramping up the to the full duration and intensity the to the full duration and intensity the to the full duration and intensity of workouts, and then I would continue of workouts, and then I would continue of workouts, and then I would continue on going on going on going for however many cycles I can complete for however many cycles I can complete for however many cycles I can complete before I hit another before I hit another before I hit another sickness, or I hit another gap in my sickness, or I hit another gap in my sickness, or I hit another gap in my schedule due to family obligations or schedule due to family obligations or schedule due to family obligations or other obligations, etc. So, we've other obligations, etc. So, we've other obligations, etc. So, we've covered a lot of tools and protocols and covered a lot of tools and protocols and covered a lot of tools and protocols and variables related to fitness, but we variables related to fitness, but we variables related to fitness, but we have by no means covered all the have by no means covered all the have by no means covered all the available tools and protocols and available tools and protocols and available tools and protocols and variables. Before we wrap up, I do want to Before we wrap up, I do want to Before we wrap up, I do want to emphasize one tool. It's a very easy, in emphasize one tool. It's a very easy, in emphasize one tool. It's a very easy, in fact, zero-cost, very low time fact, zero-cost, very low time fact, zero-cost, very low time commitment tool. And this was one that commitment tool. And this was one that commitment tool. And this was one that was provided again by Dr. Andy Galpin was provided again by Dr. Andy Galpin was provided again by Dr. Andy Galpin when he was on the Huberman Lab podcast. when he was on the Huberman Lab podcast. when he was on the Huberman Lab podcast. And it's a tool that there is excellent And it's a tool that there is excellent And it's a tool that there is excellent research to support the effectiveness research to support the effectiveness research to support the effectiveness of, and that I do believe should come at the and that I do believe should come at the and that I do believe should come at the end of every training session. And end of every training session. And end of every training session. And that's to do three to five minutes of that's to do three to five minutes of that's to do three to five minutes of deliberately slow breathing. deliberately slow breathing. deliberately slow breathing. It sounds so simple. Three to five It sounds so simple. Three to five It sounds so simple. Three to five minutes of deliberately slowed minutes of deliberately slowed minutes of deliberately slowed breathing. So, this could be while breathing. So, this could be while breathing. So, this could be while you're in the shower, or when you arrive you're in the shower, or when you arrive you're in the shower, or when you arrive at your car, you might sit in your car at your car, you might sit in your car at your car, you might sit in your car quietly and do that if you have time, or quietly and do that if you have time, or quietly and do that if you have time, or maybe even while you're driving maybe even while you're driving maybe even while you're driving back to or onto your next destination, back to or onto your next destination, back to or onto your next destination, just to really slow down your breathing, just to really slow down your breathing, just to really slow down your breathing, to really look at the recovery period to really look at the recovery period to really look at the recovery period that has to follow each training session that has to follow each training session that has to follow each training session and of course during which the and of course during which the and of course during which the adaptations, the changes that make you adaptations, the changes that make you adaptations, the changes that make you more fit than you were going into the more fit than you were going into the more fit than you were going into the exercise occur. exercise occur. exercise occur. And that 3 to 5 minutes of deliberately And that 3 to 5 minutes of deliberately And that 3 to 5 minutes of deliberately slowed breathing has been shown in slowed breathing has been shown in slowed breathing has been shown in Andy's group and in related experiments, Andy's group and in related experiments, Andy's group and in related experiments, not exactly the same but related not exactly the same but related not exactly the same but related experiments in our laboratory and experiments in our laboratory and experiments in our laboratory and another laboratories to really so-called another laboratories to really so-called another laboratories to really so-called downshift the nervous system and really downshift the nervous system and really downshift the nervous system and really set you up for maximal recovery, set you up for maximal recovery, set you up for maximal recovery, rapid recovery and allow you to lean rapid recovery and allow you to lean rapid recovery and allow you to lean into the next training session with full into the next training session with full into the next training session with full intensity when that training session intensity when that training session intensity when that training session eventually arrives. So, it's a very eventually arrives. So, it's a very eventually arrives. So, it's a very simple tool but a very potent tool for simple tool but a very potent tool for simple tool but a very potent tool for your overall fitness. So, thank you for your overall fitness. So, thank you for your overall fitness. So, thank you for joining me for this discussion of what joining me for this discussion of what joining me for this discussion of what I'm calling a foundational I'm calling a foundational I'm calling a foundational or I guess we could even get bold and or I guess we could even get bold and or I guess we could even get bold and call it an optimal fitness protocol. call it an optimal fitness protocol. call it an optimal fitness protocol. Although, the word optimal is a tricky Although, the word optimal is a tricky Although, the word optimal is a tricky one. There's no real optimal fitness one. There's no real optimal fitness one. There's no real optimal fitness protocol and today what I've really protocol and today what I've really protocol and today what I've really tried to focus on is this foundational tried to focus on is this foundational tried to focus on is this foundational protocol because it does allow you to protocol because it does allow you to protocol because it does allow you to check off most if not all the boxes check off most if not all the boxes check off most if not all the boxes related to strength, related to strength, related to strength, endurance, hypertrophy, endurance, hypertrophy, endurance, hypertrophy, speed, power, speed, power, speed, power, flexibility. It will also teach you how to regulate It will also teach you how to regulate It will also teach you how to regulate your nervous system up and down, that is your nervous system up and down, that is your nervous system up and down, that is to ramp up and focus, mind muscle link, to ramp up and focus, mind muscle link, to ramp up and focus, mind muscle link, etc. And then quickly calm down etc. And then quickly calm down etc. And then quickly calm down physiological size, 3 to 5 minute physiological size, 3 to 5 minute physiological size, 3 to 5 minute decompress breathing at the end of decompress breathing at the end of decompress breathing at the end of training, etc. Really, even though I training, etc. Really, even though I training, etc. Really, even though I talked about the protocol that I follow talked about the protocol that I follow talked about the protocol that I follow and again that we will provide as a and again that we will provide as a and again that we will provide as a newsletter at hubermanlab.com if you newsletter at hubermanlab.com if you newsletter at hubermanlab.com if you want to look at it in more detail. want to look at it in more detail. want to look at it in more detail. Even though we talked about it in the Even though we talked about it in the Even though we talked about it in the context of what I do, again I really context of what I do, again I really context of what I do, again I really want to emphasize that this protocol and want to emphasize that this protocol and want to emphasize that this protocol and the description of this protocol and all the description of this protocol and all the description of this protocol and all its variables is really for you and for its variables is really for you and for its variables is really for you and for you to tailor to your specific needs. you to tailor to your specific needs. you to tailor to your specific needs. So, please take the protocol into So, please take the protocol into So, please take the protocol into consideration but do not treat it as consideration but do not treat it as consideration but do not treat it as holy. Treat it as a starting point from holy. Treat it as a starting point from holy. Treat it as a starting point from which you can adapt it to your specific which you can adapt it to your specific which you can adapt it to your specific fitness needs. If you're learning from fitness needs. If you're learning from fitness needs. If you're learning from and or enjoying the Huberman Lab and or enjoying the Huberman Lab and or enjoying the Huberman Lab podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast on subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast on subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you also have the opportunity and Apple, you also have the opportunity and Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. If to leave us up to a five-star review. If to leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions for us or comments you have questions for us or comments you have questions for us or comments about the information we've covered or about the information we've covered or about the information we've covered or suggestions about future guests, please suggestions about future guests, please suggestions about future guests, please put those in the comment section on put those in the comment section on put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. YouTube. We do read all the comments. YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's mentioned at the beginning of today's mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support the Huberman Lab podcast. Not so much the Huberman Lab podcast. Not so much the Huberman Lab podcast. Not so much today, but in many previous episodes of today, but in many previous episodes of today, but in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't supplements. While supplements aren't supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people necessary for everybody, many people necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for derive tremendous benefit from them for derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus things like enhancing sleep and focus things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone optimization. The Huberman and hormone optimization. The Huberman and hormone optimization. The Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements that the Huberman Lab supplements that the Huberman Lab supplements that the Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentus on, podcast has partnered with Momentus on, podcast has partnered with Momentus on, you can go to livemomentous, spelled you can go to livemomentous, spelled you can go to livemomentous, spelled OUS, so livemomentous.com/huberman, OUS, so livemomentous.com/huberman, OUS, so livemomentous.com/huberman, and there you'll see a number of the and there you'll see a number of the and there you'll see a number of the supplements that we talk about regularly supplements that we talk about regularly supplements that we talk about regularly on the podcast. I should just mention on the podcast. I should just mention on the podcast. I should just mention that catalog of supplements is that catalog of supplements is that catalog of supplements is constantly being updated. As mentioned constantly being updated. As mentioned constantly being updated. As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, the at the beginning of today's episode, the at the beginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a premium channel. That premium channel premium channel. That premium channel premium channel. That premium channel will feature monthly AMAs or ask me will feature monthly AMAs or ask me will feature monthly AMAs or ask me anythings where I answer your questions anythings where I answer your questions anythings where I answer your questions in depth, as well as other premium in depth, as well as other premium in depth, as well as other premium resources. If you'd like to subscribe to resources. If you'd like to subscribe to resources. If you'd like to subscribe to the premium channel, you can simply go the premium channel, you can simply go the premium channel, you can simply go to hubermanlab.com/premium. to hubermanlab.com/premium. to hubermanlab.com/premium. I should mention that the proceeds from I should mention that the proceeds from I should mention that the proceeds from the premium channel go to support the premium channel go to support the premium channel go to support the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which standard Huberman Lab podcast, which standard Huberman Lab podcast, which will continue to be released every will continue to be released every will continue to be released every Monday per usual, as well as supporting Monday per usual, as well as supporting Monday per usual, as well as supporting various research projects done on humans various research projects done on humans various research projects done on humans to create the sorts of tools for mental to create the sorts of tools for mental to create the sorts of tools for mental health, physical health, and performance health, physical health, and performance health, physical health, and performance that you hear about on the Huberman Lab that you hear about on the Huberman Lab that you hear about on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's podcast. Again, it's podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab.com/premium to subscribe. It's $10 a month or $100 to subscribe. It's $10 a month or $100 to subscribe. It's $10 a month or $100 per year. If you haven't already per year. If you haven't already per year. If you haven't already subscribed to our zero-cost newsletter, subscribed to our zero-cost newsletter, subscribed to our zero-cost newsletter, we have what is called the Neural we have what is called the Neural we have what is called the Neural Network Newsletter. You can subscribe by Network Newsletter. You can subscribe by Network Newsletter. You can subscribe by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the going to hubermanlab.com, go to the going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, and click on newsletter. Those menu, and click on newsletter. Those menu, and click on newsletter. Those newsletters include summaries of podcast newsletters include summaries of podcast newsletters include summaries of podcast episodes, lists of tools from the episodes, lists of tools from the episodes, lists of tools from the Huberman Lab podcast, and if you'd like Huberman Lab podcast, and if you'd like Huberman Lab podcast, and if you'd like to see previous newsletters that we've to see previous newsletters that we've to see previous newsletters that we've released, you can also just go to released, you can also just go to released, you can also just go to hubermanlab.com, click on newsletter in hubermanlab.com, click on newsletter in hubermanlab.com, click on newsletter in the menu, and you'll see various the menu, and you'll see various the menu, and you'll see various downloadable PDFs. If you want to sign downloadable PDFs. If you want to sign downloadable PDFs. If you want to sign up for the newsletter, we just ask for up for the newsletter, we just ask for up for the newsletter, we just ask for your email. We do not share your email your email. We do not share your email your email. We do not share your email with anybody, and again, it's completely with anybody, and again, it's completely with anybody, and again, it's completely zero cost. If you're not already zero cost. If you're not already zero cost. If you're not already following me on social media, it's following me on social media, it's following me on social media, it's Huberman Lab on Twitter, on Facebook, Huberman Lab on Twitter, on Facebook, Huberman Lab on Twitter, on Facebook, and on Instagram. And at all three of and on Instagram. And at all three of and on Instagram. And at all three of those places, I cover topics and subject those places, I cover topics and subject those places, I cover topics and subject matter that are sometimes overlapping matter that are sometimes overlapping matter that are sometimes overlapping with the information covered on the with the information covered on the with the information covered on the Huberman Lab podcast, but that's often Huberman Lab podcast, but that's often Huberman Lab podcast, but that's often distinct from information on the distinct from information on the distinct from information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media channels. So, thank you for joining me channels. So, thank you for joining me channels. So, thank you for joining me today for our discussion about building today for our discussion about building today for our discussion about building your optimal toolkit for fitness. And your optimal toolkit for fitness. And your optimal toolkit for fitness. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.