Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Ask Me Anything episode or AMA. This is Ask Me Anything episode or AMA. This is Ask Me Anything episode or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber channel. part of our premium subscriber channel. part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel was Our premium subscriber channel was Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support for started in order to provide support for started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab Podcast, which the standard Huberman Lab Podcast, which the standard Huberman Lab Podcast, which comes out every Monday and is available comes out every Monday and is available comes out every Monday and is available at zero cost to everybody on all at zero cost to everybody on all at zero cost to everybody on all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify and elsewhere. We also started the and elsewhere. We also started the and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate premium channel as a way to generate premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, discoveries that assist mental health, physical health and performance. I'm physical health and performance. I'm physical health and performance. I'm also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for also pleased to inform you that for every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium every dollar the Huberman Lab premium channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, channel generates for research studies, the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match that amount. So now we are able to that amount. So now we are able to that amount. So now we are able to double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical to studies of mental health, physical health and human performance. If you'd health and human performance. If you'd health and human performance. If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel, please go to Podcast premium channel, please go to Podcast premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe or you It is $10 a month to subscribe or you It is $10 a month to subscribe or you can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. entire 12-month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one-time payment and model that is a one-time payment and model that is a one-time payment and again you can find that option at again you can find that option at again you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already For those of you that are already For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription and download the premium subscription feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not feed. And for those of you that are not Huberman Lab Podcast premium Huberman Lab Podcast premium Huberman Lab Podcast premium subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. And now premium subscriber is for you. And now premium subscriber is for you. And now without further ado, I will answer your without further ado, I will answer your without further ado, I will answer your questions and as always I will strive to questions and as always I will strive to questions and as always I will strive to be as thorough as possible, as clear as be as thorough as possible, as clear as be as thorough as possible, as clear as possible and as concise as possible. Our possible and as concise as possible. Our possible and as concise as possible. Our first question is about abstaining from first question is about abstaining from first question is about abstaining from thoughts and in answering this question thoughts and in answering this question thoughts and in answering this question we're going to skirt right up against a we're going to skirt right up against a we're going to skirt right up against a topic that I've covered before on the topic that I've covered before on the topic that I've covered before on the podcast, which is obsessive-compulsive podcast, which is obsessive-compulsive podcast, which is obsessive-compulsive disorder, which is a very serious disorder, which is a very serious disorder, which is a very serious disorder. I mean, it can have a range of disorder. I mean, it can have a range of disorder. I mean, it can have a range of severity, but people with true OCD severity, but people with true OCD severity, but people with true OCD suffer a lot from obsessions. suffer a lot from obsessions. suffer a lot from obsessions. These are intrusive thoughts and These are intrusive thoughts and These are intrusive thoughts and compulsions, which are the behaviors typically which are the behaviors typically which are the behaviors typically associated with those thoughts. I think associated with those thoughts. I think associated with those thoughts. I think it's really important that we define OCD it's really important that we define OCD it's really important that we define OCD really clearly so that we can make sure really clearly so that we can make sure really clearly so that we can make sure that we're talking about intrusive that we're talking about intrusive that we're talking about intrusive thoughts and the desire to abstain from thoughts and the desire to abstain from thoughts and the desire to abstain from thoughts versus OCD and where there thoughts versus OCD and where there thoughts versus OCD and where there might be some overlap there. The might be some overlap there. The might be some overlap there. The functional definition of OCD functional definition of OCD functional definition of OCD that really pertains to the disorder, that really pertains to the disorder, that really pertains to the disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, OCD as opposed to, you know, we call OCD as opposed to, you know, we call OCD as opposed to, you know, we call people neurotic or we say you have OCD people neurotic or we say you have OCD people neurotic or we say you have OCD or I'm so OCD about this or OCD about or I'm so OCD about this or OCD about or I'm so OCD about this or OCD about that. That's become kind of common use that. That's become kind of common use that. That's become kind of common use of the of the acronym OCD. But true OCD of the of the acronym OCD. But true OCD of the of the acronym OCD. But true OCD is a situation in which the engaging in is a situation in which the engaging in is a situation in which the engaging in a particular compulsive behavior a particular compulsive behavior a particular compulsive behavior does not serve to reduce does not serve to reduce does not serve to reduce the intensity or the frequency of the intensity or the frequency of the intensity or the frequency of the obsessions. In fact, it makes it worse. obsessions. In fact, it makes it worse. obsessions. In fact, it makes it worse. Okay, so um the typical thing that we Okay, so um the typical thing that we Okay, so um the typical thing that we hear these days is, "Oh, you're so OCD." hear these days is, "Oh, you're so OCD." hear these days is, "Oh, you're so OCD." Or he's so OCD or she's so OCD or I'm so Or he's so OCD or she's so OCD or I'm so Or he's so OCD or she's so OCD or I'm so OCD. Now, if someone is OCD in that sense, Now, if someone is OCD in that sense, Now, if someone is OCD in that sense, okay, so not the clinical disorder, okay, so not the clinical disorder, okay, so not the clinical disorder, but OCD in the sense that, you know, but OCD in the sense that, you know, but OCD in the sense that, you know, they're really clean. They're they're really clean. They're they're really clean. They're really fastidious. They need everything really fastidious. They need everything really fastidious. They need everything perfect. However, that person can perfect. However, that person can perfect. However, that person can achieve some level of calm and comfort achieve some level of calm and comfort achieve some level of calm and comfort that's fairly long-lasting if that's fairly long-lasting if that's fairly long-lasting if everything's clean and perfect, well, everything's clean and perfect, well, everything's clean and perfect, well, then that's not obsessive-compulsive then that's not obsessive-compulsive then that's not obsessive-compulsive disorder. This is really important to disorder. This is really important to disorder. This is really important to understand as we venture into answering understand as we venture into answering understand as we venture into answering the question about intrusive thoughts the question about intrusive thoughts the question about intrusive thoughts and the desire to abstain from certain and the desire to abstain from certain and the desire to abstain from certain thoughts. A person with true OCD A person with true OCD A person with true OCD will keep cleaning and cleaning or will keep cleaning and cleaning or will keep cleaning and cleaning or washing their hands or arranging washing their hands or arranging washing their hands or arranging things at perfect right angles, but the things at perfect right angles, but the things at perfect right angles, but the more they do it, the more their anxiety more they do it, the more their anxiety more they do it, the more their anxiety goes up. goes up. goes up. A person who has more typical, um, gosh, A person who has more typical, um, gosh, A person who has more typical, um, gosh, we don't really even have a language for we don't really even have a language for we don't really even have a language for this nowadays, unfortunately, but the this nowadays, unfortunately, but the this nowadays, unfortunately, but the sort of person that's extremely sort of person that's extremely sort of person that's extremely particular, they need things a certain particular, they need things a certain particular, they need things a certain way, and they're very driven to resolve way, and they're very driven to resolve way, and they're very driven to resolve things and do things to make sure that things and do things to make sure that things and do things to make sure that things are done in a certain way things are done in a certain way things are done in a certain way or handled in a certain way. or handled in a certain way. or handled in a certain way. Well, if that person can experience Well, if that person can experience Well, if that person can experience relief from engaging in, let's say, relief from engaging in, let's say, relief from engaging in, let's say, exercise or from cleaning, right? You'd exercise or from cleaning, right? You'd exercise or from cleaning, right? You'd say, "You're so OCD about exercise." say, "You're so OCD about exercise." say, "You're so OCD about exercise." Well, but if exercising for an hour or Well, but if exercising for an hour or Well, but if exercising for an hour or even 2 hours in the morning makes even 2 hours in the morning makes even 2 hours in the morning makes somebody really calm the rest of the day somebody really calm the rest of the day somebody really calm the rest of the day and they don't need to exercise, well, and they don't need to exercise, well, and they don't need to exercise, well, then they're not necessarily true OCD. then they're not necessarily true OCD. then they're not necessarily true OCD. They don't necessarily have a disorder They don't necessarily have a disorder They don't necessarily have a disorder related to exercise. However, if they're related to exercise. However, if they're related to exercise. However, if they're exercising for 2 hours in the morning exercising for 2 hours in the morning exercising for 2 hours in the morning and then they find they can't and then they find they can't and then they find they can't concentrate on other things and their concentrate on other things and their concentrate on other things and their desire to exercise just increases and desire to exercise just increases and desire to exercise just increases and increases and becomes intrusive for increases and becomes intrusive for increases and becomes intrusive for them, disrupting their quality of life them, disrupting their quality of life them, disrupting their quality of life throughout the day, throughout the day, throughout the day, well, then that's falling under the well, then that's falling under the well, then that's falling under the umbrella of what we would call a true umbrella of what we would call a true umbrella of what we would call a true disorder. Okay? So, we want to highlight disorder. Okay? So, we want to highlight disorder. Okay? So, we want to highlight that because the question is about a that because the question is about a that because the question is about a desire to abstain from thoughts, and the desire to abstain from thoughts, and the desire to abstain from thoughts, and the question is, "In your discussion with question is, "In your discussion with question is, "In your discussion with Dr. Anna Lembke," and I should just Dr. Anna Lembke," and I should just Dr. Anna Lembke," and I should just mention, Dr. Anna Lembke is the director mention, Dr. Anna Lembke is the director mention, Dr. Anna Lembke is the director of our dual diagnosis addiction clinic of our dual diagnosis addiction clinic of our dual diagnosis addiction clinic at Stanford University School of at Stanford University School of at Stanford University School of Medicine. She's the author of this Medicine. She's the author of this Medicine. She's the author of this incredible book Dopamine Nation that I incredible book Dopamine Nation that I incredible book Dopamine Nation that I think everybody should read. I do think everybody should read. I do think everybody should read. I do believe everyone should read that book. believe everyone should read that book. believe everyone should read that book. So important for the addict and So important for the addict and So important for the addict and non-addict alike because it deals with non-addict alike because it deals with non-addict alike because it deals with basically the state of our life basically the state of our life basically the state of our life nowadays. We're living in this nowadays. We're living in this nowadays. We're living in this dopamine-rich world where we can quickly dopamine-rich world where we can quickly dopamine-rich world where we can quickly become dopamine depleted, which is become dopamine depleted, which is become dopamine depleted, which is terrible, leads to depression in terrible, leads to depression in terrible, leads to depression in addition to things like addiction in addition to things like addiction in addition to things like addiction in some folks, etc. Anna was a guest on the some folks, etc. Anna was a guest on the some folks, etc. Anna was a guest on the podcast. You can find her episode at podcast. You can find her episode at podcast. You can find her episode at hubermanlab.com. Just put Anna. I think hubermanlab.com. Just put Anna. I think hubermanlab.com. Just put Anna. I think she's the only guest we've had thus far she's the only guest we've had thus far she's the only guest we've had thus far whose, um, name is Anna, so it'll just whose, um, name is Anna, so it'll just whose, um, name is Anna, so it'll just pop up there. The entire website is pop up there. The entire website is pop up there. The entire website is searchable, but if you want to listen to searchable, but if you want to listen to searchable, but if you want to listen to that episode or watch that episode, that episode or watch that episode, that episode or watch that episode, you can access it at hubermanlab.com. you can access it at hubermanlab.com. you can access it at hubermanlab.com. The question in your discussion with Dr. The question in your discussion with Dr. The question in your discussion with Dr. Anna Lembke, you were talking about Anna Lembke, you were talking about Anna Lembke, you were talking about abstaining from people's drug of choice abstaining from people's drug of choice abstaining from people's drug of choice for 30 days to reset the dopamine reward for 30 days to reset the dopamine reward for 30 days to reset the dopamine reward pathway. And indeed, that is the pathway. And indeed, that is the pathway. And indeed, that is the prescriptive that Dr. Anna Lembke gives prescriptive that Dr. Anna Lembke gives prescriptive that Dr. Anna Lembke gives for most all addictions and for people for most all addictions and for people for most all addictions and for people that are suffering from milder even that are suffering from milder even that are suffering from milder even severe depression related to dopamine severe depression related to dopamine severe depression related to dopamine seeking behaviors, seeking behaviors, seeking behaviors, social media, video games, social media, video games, social media, video games, sex, food, etc. However, of course, in sex, food, etc. However, of course, in sex, food, etc. However, of course, in the instance of food or in some other the instance of food or in some other the instance of food or in some other addictions, you can't abstain for 30 addictions, you can't abstain for 30 addictions, you can't abstain for 30 days, right? That would be terrible to days, right? That would be terrible to days, right? That would be terrible to abstain from food for 30 days. I'm sure abstain from food for 30 days. I'm sure abstain from food for 30 days. I'm sure people have done it, um but it is not people have done it, um but it is not people have done it, um but it is not healthy to do. Certain things like healthy to do. Certain things like healthy to do. Certain things like alcohol and drugs, people can abstain alcohol and drugs, people can abstain alcohol and drugs, people can abstain for 30 days in efforts to never go back for 30 days in efforts to never go back for 30 days in efforts to never go back to them again. There are cases of severe to them again. There are cases of severe to them again. There are cases of severe alcohol or opiate dependence where alcohol or opiate dependence where alcohol or opiate dependence where people can't go cold turkey or they risk people can't go cold turkey or they risk people can't go cold turkey or they risk dying. So, there they need to really dying. So, there they need to really dying. So, there they need to really work with a physician, but the 30-day work with a physician, but the 30-day work with a physician, but the 30-day reset of the dopamine system is something of the dopamine system is something of the dopamine system is something that's very real and that pertains to that's very real and that pertains to that's very real and that pertains to most people. That is, it's going to be most people. That is, it's going to be most people. That is, it's going to be very effective for most people very effective for most people very effective for most people struggling with either behavioral, what struggling with either behavioral, what struggling with either behavioral, what are sometimes called process addictions, are sometimes called process addictions, are sometimes called process addictions, or other types of addictions including or other types of addictions including or other types of addictions including substance abuse issues. substance abuse issues. substance abuse issues. The question continues, you said you The question continues, you said you The question continues, you said you were going to ask Anna how to abstain if were going to ask Anna how to abstain if were going to ask Anna how to abstain if your drug of choice is a thought or your drug of choice is a thought or your drug of choice is a thought or narrative as opposed to a substance or a narrative as opposed to a substance or a narrative as opposed to a substance or a behavior. The question continues, as far as I can The question continues, as far as I can The question continues, as far as I can tell, your discussion with Anna moved on tell, your discussion with Anna moved on tell, your discussion with Anna moved on before you asked her the question. before you asked her the question. before you asked her the question. Would you be able to discuss strategies Would you be able to discuss strategies Would you be able to discuss strategies for abstaining from addictive thoughts for abstaining from addictive thoughts for abstaining from addictive thoughts and narratives? Okay, so let's talk and narratives? Okay, so let's talk and narratives? Okay, so let's talk about intrusive thoughts and let's start about intrusive thoughts and let's start about intrusive thoughts and let's start off by asking ourselves, what is a off by asking ourselves, what is a off by asking ourselves, what is a thought? Okay, in the realm of thought? Okay, in the realm of thought? Okay, in the realm of neurobiology, we have sensations, which neurobiology, we have sensations, which neurobiology, we have sensations, which are the uh processes by which our are the uh processes by which our are the uh processes by which our neurons, nerve cells, convert light, neurons, nerve cells, convert light, neurons, nerve cells, convert light, photons, sound waves, photons, sound waves, photons, sound waves, touch, mechanical pressure, touch, mechanical pressure, touch, mechanical pressure, etc. into electrical signals and etc. into electrical signals and etc. into electrical signals and chemical signals that head into our chemical signals that head into our chemical signals that head into our nervous system including our brain, and nervous system including our brain, and nervous system including our brain, and then our brain at least we think makes then our brain at least we think makes then our brain at least we think makes sense of them sense of them sense of them and help us navigate the world that and help us navigate the world that and help us navigate the world that we're in. Okay, so the sensation part is we're in. Okay, so the sensation part is we're in. Okay, so the sensation part is a pure transformation of mechanical a pure transformation of mechanical a pure transformation of mechanical information or information or information or in some cases chemical information like in some cases chemical information like in some cases chemical information like smell. Chemicals literally, volatile smell. Chemicals literally, volatile smell. Chemicals literally, volatile chemicals floating around in the world chemicals floating around in the world chemicals floating around in the world are brought into your nose and your are brought into your nose and your are brought into your nose and your neurons in your olfactory bulb convert neurons in your olfactory bulb convert neurons in your olfactory bulb convert those into electrical and chemical those into electrical and chemical those into electrical and chemical signals that your brain can understand. signals that your brain can understand. signals that your brain can understand. Perceptions are your idea of what those signals out are your idea of what those signals out are your idea of what those signals out in the world are. in the world are. in the world are. Either because you're paying attention Either because you're paying attention Either because you're paying attention to them or for some other reason you to them or for some other reason you to them or for some other reason you decide that a stop sign in front of you decide that a stop sign in front of you decide that a stop sign in front of you is red and that um the sign behind it is red and that um the sign behind it is red and that um the sign behind it is white and that the sky is blue or white and that the sky is blue or white and that the sky is blue or cloudy. Those are perceptions. Okay? So cloudy. Those are perceptions. Okay? So cloudy. Those are perceptions. Okay? So we have sensations and perceptions. we have sensations and perceptions. we have sensations and perceptions. Then we have emotions which are these Then we have emotions which are these Then we have emotions which are these things that include the mind and body things that include the mind and body things that include the mind and body that um are related to neuromodulators that um are related to neuromodulators that um are related to neuromodulators like dopamine, serotonin, etc. Although like dopamine, serotonin, etc. Although like dopamine, serotonin, etc. Although those chemicals do other things as well. those chemicals do other things as well. those chemicals do other things as well. And then of course we have behaviors, And then of course we have behaviors, And then of course we have behaviors, actions, everything from me moving my actions, everything from me moving my actions, everything from me moving my pen on a piece of paper to walking, pen on a piece of paper to walking, pen on a piece of paper to walking, running, etc. running, etc. running, etc. Thoughts are a fifth category of neural Thoughts are a fifth category of neural Thoughts are a fifth category of neural functioning that we really need to functioning that we really need to functioning that we really need to define but that doesn't have as strict a define but that doesn't have as strict a define but that doesn't have as strict a definition as sensations, perceptions, definition as sensations, perceptions, definition as sensations, perceptions, or feeling, or action. But thoughts are or feeling, or action. But thoughts are or feeling, or action. But thoughts are real, right? We all know this. Thoughts real, right? We all know this. Thoughts real, right? We all know this. Thoughts are real. And one way that we can define are real. And one way that we can define are real. And one way that we can define thoughts is that thoughts are thoughts is that thoughts are thoughts is that thoughts are perceptions that perceptions that perceptions that include data from the past present or include data from the past present or include data from the past present or future. Okay? Or combinations of past future. Okay? Or combinations of past future. Okay? Or combinations of past and present or present and future or and present or present and future or and present or present and future or future and past. Okay? I'm not trying to future and past. Okay? I'm not trying to future and past. Okay? I'm not trying to give an overly complicated definition give an overly complicated definition give an overly complicated definition here, but if we are going to answer for here, but if we are going to answer for here, but if we are going to answer for question about how to abstain from question about how to abstain from question about how to abstain from thoughts in a really direct and thoughts in a really direct and thoughts in a really direct and actionable way, we really need to actionable way, we really need to actionable way, we really need to address what are thoughts. So, thoughts address what are thoughts. So, thoughts address what are thoughts. So, thoughts are perceptions that are generated are perceptions that are generated are perceptions that are generated internally, right? We don't need any internally, right? We don't need any internally, right? We don't need any external sensation in order to have a external sensation in order to have a external sensation in order to have a thought. We can close our eyes, we could thought. We can close our eyes, we could thought. We can close our eyes, we could be in sensory isolation for that matter. be in sensory isolation for that matter. be in sensory isolation for that matter. We can be floating with no gravity and We can be floating with no gravity and We can be floating with no gravity and we can have a thought. we can have a thought. we can have a thought. Thoughts tend to run Thoughts tend to run Thoughts tend to run pretty much automatically in the pretty much automatically in the pretty much automatically in the background all the time. Some people background all the time. Some people background all the time. Some people refer to this as chatter in the back of refer to this as chatter in the back of refer to this as chatter in the back of our minds in a very unstructured way. our minds in a very unstructured way. our minds in a very unstructured way. And then if we force our thoughts to be And then if we force our thoughts to be And then if we force our thoughts to be structured because we decide they need to be or if because we decide they need to be or if because we decide they need to be or if something in our environment captures something in our environment captures something in our environment captures our perception, our perception, our perception, then our thoughts tend to be structured. then our thoughts tend to be structured. then our thoughts tend to be structured. Let me give you an example. If I'm just Let me give you an example. If I'm just Let me give you an example. If I'm just walking around, walking around, walking around, if there were a way in which we could if there were a way in which we could if there were a way in which we could broadcast my thoughts onto a screen, I broadcast my thoughts onto a screen, I broadcast my thoughts onto a screen, I hope we wouldn't do that, but those hope we wouldn't do that, but those hope we wouldn't do that, but those thoughts would be a mixture of thoughts would be a mixture of thoughts would be a mixture of semi-complete sentences and gibberish. semi-complete sentences and gibberish. semi-complete sentences and gibberish. However, if somebody stops me and says, However, if somebody stops me and says, However, if somebody stops me and says, "Hi. Um good to see you. What are you "Hi. Um good to see you. What are you "Hi. Um good to see you. What are you doing today?" and I start answering, doing today?" and I start answering, doing today?" and I start answering, well, then my thoughts are suddenly well, then my thoughts are suddenly well, then my thoughts are suddenly being driven by an external stimulus, being driven by an external stimulus, being driven by an external stimulus, their question, and some internal ideas, their question, and some internal ideas, their question, and some internal ideas, memory of who I am and what I'm doing memory of who I am and what I'm doing memory of who I am and what I'm doing that day, so past and present and so on. that day, so past and present and so on. that day, so past and present and so on. And so thoughts become structured. And so thoughts become structured. And so thoughts become structured. So, when we have a question about how to So, when we have a question about how to So, when we have a question about how to abstain from thoughts, we need to be abstain from thoughts, we need to be abstain from thoughts, we need to be additionally specific and really additionally specific and really additionally specific and really pinpoint that what we're trying to do is pinpoint that what we're trying to do is pinpoint that what we're trying to do is to abstain from thoughts we don't want, to abstain from thoughts we don't want, to abstain from thoughts we don't want, presumably, either because they are too presumably, either because they are too presumably, either because they are too repetitive and distracting or because repetitive and distracting or because repetitive and distracting or because what's contained in those thoughts is what's contained in those thoughts is what's contained in those thoughts is disturbing. Okay. This is important because it gives us This is important because it gives us This is important because it gives us two answers to the questions that are two answers to the questions that are two answers to the questions that are highly divergent. highly divergent. highly divergent. One answer to the question of how to One answer to the question of how to One answer to the question of how to abstain from intrusive thoughts, you abstain from intrusive thoughts, you abstain from intrusive thoughts, you know, thoughts that we're addicted to, know, thoughts that we're addicted to, know, thoughts that we're addicted to, is if those thoughts are merely on loop is if those thoughts are merely on loop is if those thoughts are merely on loop all the time and we You stop them, but all the time and we You stop them, but all the time and we You stop them, but the thoughts themselves aren't the thoughts themselves aren't the thoughts themselves aren't particularly disturbing. So, think about particularly disturbing. So, think about particularly disturbing. So, think about a song you can't get out of your head, a song you can't get out of your head, a song you can't get out of your head, or you keep recounting some event, but or you keep recounting some event, but or you keep recounting some event, but the event itself isn't very disturbing. the event itself isn't very disturbing. the event itself isn't very disturbing. It's just intrusive because it's there. It's just intrusive because it's there. It's just intrusive because it's there. Well, in that case, the data really Well, in that case, the data really Well, in that case, the data really point to trying to anchor your thoughts point to trying to anchor your thoughts point to trying to anchor your thoughts to some external stimulus. So, getting to some external stimulus. So, getting to some external stimulus. So, getting into action, into action, into action, getting into activities that really draw getting into activities that really draw getting into activities that really draw your attention away from that thought. your attention away from that thought. your attention away from that thought. Now, you may still hear it scrolling in Now, you may still hear it scrolling in Now, you may still hear it scrolling in the background, so you might be sitting the background, so you might be sitting the background, so you might be sitting in class still hearing that loop of in class still hearing that loop of in class still hearing that loop of thoughts in the background. That's thoughts in the background. That's thoughts in the background. That's something that over time ought to wane, something that over time ought to wane, something that over time ought to wane, it ought to disappear, it ought to disappear, it ought to disappear, if we try and bring more and more if we try and bring more and more if we try and bring more and more attention to whatever it is that's in our to whatever it is that's in our to whatever it is that's in our environment, whatever it is that we environment, whatever it is that we environment, whatever it is that we happen to happen to happen to be learning or be learning or be learning or doing physically, et cetera. doing physically, et cetera. doing physically, et cetera. Things like mindful meditation, doing a Things like mindful meditation, doing a Things like mindful meditation, doing a 10 or even just 5-minute a day practice 10 or even just 5-minute a day practice 10 or even just 5-minute a day practice of sitting with eyes closed or lying of sitting with eyes closed or lying of sitting with eyes closed or lying down with eyes closed and really down with eyes closed and really down with eyes closed and really focusing on one's breath, focusing one's focusing on one's breath, focusing one's focusing on one's breath, focusing one's attention on the sometimes it's called attention on the sometimes it's called attention on the sometimes it's called the third eye center, but in science the third eye center, but in science the third eye center, but in science we'd say the just the region right we'd say the just the region right we'd say the just the region right behind the forehead, you're directing behind the forehead, you're directing behind the forehead, you're directing your attention there, has been shown to your attention there, has been shown to your attention there, has been shown to increase focus for singular topics, increase focus for singular topics, increase focus for singular topics, and can improve memory and do a bunch of and can improve memory and do a bunch of and can improve memory and do a bunch of other things as well. Those are data other things as well. Those are data other things as well. Those are data from Dr. Wendy Suzuki's lab at New York from Dr. Wendy Suzuki's lab at New York from Dr. Wendy Suzuki's lab at New York University. She was a guest on the University. She was a guest on the University. She was a guest on the podcast as well. My laboratory has run podcast as well. My laboratory has run podcast as well. My laboratory has run studies on mindful meditation as well. studies on mindful meditation as well. studies on mindful meditation as well. So, what you're really trying to do is So, what you're really trying to do is So, what you're really trying to do is learn how to focus better on one thing, learn how to focus better on one thing, learn how to focus better on one thing, and by focusing on that one thing, you and by focusing on that one thing, you and by focusing on that one thing, you focus off these repetitive thoughts. focus off these repetitive thoughts. focus off these repetitive thoughts. Now, I have a feeling that this question Now, I have a feeling that this question Now, I have a feeling that this question was asked and that many people upvoted was asked and that many people upvoted was asked and that many people upvoted this question because the issue isn't this question because the issue isn't this question because the issue isn't just thoughts that are intrusive because just thoughts that are intrusive because just thoughts that are intrusive because they're there and on repeat, but because they're there and on repeat, but because they're there and on repeat, but because the thoughts themselves the thoughts themselves the thoughts themselves are actually are actually are actually troubling. This could be recounting a trauma, This could be recounting a trauma, This could be recounting a trauma, someone harmed you, you observed someone harmed you, you observed someone harmed you, you observed something that was disturbing, something that was disturbing, something that was disturbing, um you felt wronged, um you felt someone um you felt wronged, um you felt someone um you felt wronged, um you felt someone else was wronged, um you can't seem to else was wronged, um you can't seem to else was wronged, um you can't seem to get your mind off of something and your get your mind off of something and your get your mind off of something and your emotions tend to follow and so it's emotions tend to follow and so it's emotions tend to follow and so it's uncomfortable. I have a feeling this is uncomfortable. I have a feeling this is uncomfortable. I have a feeling this is the root of the question. the root of the question. the root of the question. In that case, the approach is very In that case, the approach is very In that case, the approach is very different. What we know from essentially different. What we know from essentially different. What we know from essentially all of the quality scientific and all of the quality scientific and all of the quality scientific and clinical studies clinical studies clinical studies is that those sorts of intrusive is that those sorts of intrusive is that those sorts of intrusive thoughts are very much like a trauma. thoughts are very much like a trauma. thoughts are very much like a trauma. Now, we have to be clear in defining Now, we have to be clear in defining Now, we have to be clear in defining what trauma is. I'll use the definition what trauma is. I'll use the definition what trauma is. I'll use the definition that Dr. Paul Conti, another incredible that Dr. Paul Conti, another incredible that Dr. Paul Conti, another incredible guest that was on our podcast, guest that was on our podcast, guest that was on our podcast, a psychiatrist, Stanford, Harvard a psychiatrist, Stanford, Harvard a psychiatrist, Stanford, Harvard trained I think one of the world's trained I think one of the world's trained I think one of the world's foremost leaders on the issue of trauma foremost leaders on the issue of trauma foremost leaders on the issue of trauma and psychiatry and psychology generally. and psychiatry and psychology generally. and psychiatry and psychology generally. He defines trauma as an event or He defines trauma as an event or He defines trauma as an event or something that fundamentally changes the something that fundamentally changes the something that fundamentally changes the way that your nervous system works such way that your nervous system works such way that your nervous system works such that you function less adaptively going that you function less adaptively going that you function less adaptively going forward from that event. Okay, so not forward from that event. Okay, so not forward from that event. Okay, so not every bad occurrence in your life is a every bad occurrence in your life is a every bad occurrence in your life is a trauma. That's good news. The bad news is many That's good news. The bad news is many That's good news. The bad news is many people have traumas and traumas change people have traumas and traumas change people have traumas and traumas change the way that our nervous system works so the way that our nervous system works so the way that our nervous system works so that we don't function as well as we that we don't function as well as we that we don't function as well as we could. So in that sense, could. So in that sense, could. So in that sense, intrusive thoughts that are disturbing intrusive thoughts that are disturbing intrusive thoughts that are disturbing are in many ways traumas and are in many ways traumas and are in many ways traumas and are reinforcing that trauma. Now, we know reinforcing that trauma. Now, we know reinforcing that trauma. Now, we know that almost counterintuitively, that almost counterintuitively, that almost counterintuitively, in order to deal with trauma, you have in order to deal with trauma, you have in order to deal with trauma, you have to get very close to that trauma. You to get very close to that trauma. You to get very close to that trauma. You don't have to re-expose and I would hope don't have to re-expose and I would hope don't have to re-expose and I would hope you would not re-expose yourself to the you would not re-expose yourself to the you would not re-expose yourself to the very same trauma, but we know that one very same trauma, but we know that one very same trauma, but we know that one of the best ways to deal with traumas is of the best ways to deal with traumas is of the best ways to deal with traumas is to get very clear about the narrative to get very clear about the narrative to get very clear about the narrative around those traumas. Now, this can be around those traumas. Now, this can be around those traumas. Now, this can be done with a therapist done with a therapist done with a therapist ideally, but not everyone has access to therapy but not everyone has access to therapy but not everyone has access to therapy or can afford therapy. or can afford therapy. or can afford therapy. There's a range of quality of therapists There's a range of quality of therapists There's a range of quality of therapists for that matter. So, we're always for that matter. So, we're always for that matter. So, we're always referring to the desire for people to referring to the desire for people to referring to the desire for people to great therapy with really great therapy with really great therapy with really great meaning excellently trained people. meaning excellently trained people. meaning excellently trained people. But it turns out that if you want to But it turns out that if you want to But it turns out that if you want to extinguish an intrusive thought, one of extinguish an intrusive thought, one of extinguish an intrusive thought, one of the best ways to do that is to journal the best ways to do that is to journal the best ways to do that is to journal about that particular thought about that particular thought about that particular thought extensively. So, rather than the earlier extensively. So, rather than the earlier extensively. So, rather than the earlier strategy for intrusive thoughts where strategy for intrusive thoughts where strategy for intrusive thoughts where they're just on loop and intrusive they're just on loop and intrusive they're just on loop and intrusive because they're on loop and present, because they're on loop and present, because they're on loop and present, but their content isn't disturbing. When but their content isn't disturbing. When but their content isn't disturbing. When a thought is disturbing and intrusive, a thought is disturbing and intrusive, a thought is disturbing and intrusive, we know that it's very useful to script we know that it's very useful to script we know that it's very useful to script out as much detail about that particular out as much detail about that particular out as much detail about that particular thought and the things around it as thought and the things around it as thought and the things around it as possible. Obviously, you want to do this possible. Obviously, you want to do this possible. Obviously, you want to do this in a way that in a way that in a way that is fairly structured, so you ideally is fairly structured, so you ideally is fairly structured, so you ideally would use complete sentences. So, the would use complete sentences. So, the would use complete sentences. So, the reason for doing that is that thoughts, reason for doing that is that thoughts, reason for doing that is that thoughts, as I mentioned earlier, can often be as I mentioned earlier, can often be as I mentioned earlier, can often be fragmentary, so they pop up in our fragmentary, so they pop up in our fragmentary, so they pop up in our mind almost mind almost mind almost we seemingly spontaneously. They're we seemingly spontaneously. They're we seemingly spontaneously. They're they're inhibiting our ability to focus they're inhibiting our ability to focus they're inhibiting our ability to focus or be present to work or family or other or be present to work or family or other or be present to work or family or other things or sleep. things or sleep. things or sleep. Writing things down in a lot of detail Writing things down in a lot of detail Writing things down in a lot of detail does seem to have this quality of both does seem to have this quality of both does seem to have this quality of both reducing the emotional load of whatever reducing the emotional load of whatever reducing the emotional load of whatever it is that thought is about, it is that thought is about, it is that thought is about, as well as diminishing the frequency of as well as diminishing the frequency of as well as diminishing the frequency of those intrusive thoughts over time. those intrusive thoughts over time. those intrusive thoughts over time. So, this is far and away different than So, this is far and away different than So, this is far and away different than the strategy I mentioned for the other the strategy I mentioned for the other the strategy I mentioned for the other types of intrusive thoughts. And really, types of intrusive thoughts. And really, types of intrusive thoughts. And really, it's far and away different from the it's far and away different from the it's far and away different from the 30-day abstinence approach that Dr. Anna 30-day abstinence approach that Dr. Anna 30-day abstinence approach that Dr. Anna Lembke was talking about for substance Lembke was talking about for substance Lembke was talking about for substance or behavioral addictions. Now, of or behavioral addictions. Now, of or behavioral addictions. Now, of course, this process of abstaining from course, this process of abstaining from course, this process of abstaining from thoughts or thoughts or thoughts or removing the addictive nature of certain removing the addictive nature of certain removing the addictive nature of certain thoughts can definitely take some time. So, a can definitely take some time. So, a can definitely take some time. So, a good example there would be good example there would be good example there would be superstitions. You know, I'll come clean superstitions. You know, I'll come clean superstitions. You know, I'll come clean here, and I've talked about this before here, and I've talked about this before here, and I've talked about this before on a few podcasts, that when I was in on a few podcasts, that when I was in on a few podcasts, that when I was in college, I developed a sort of college, I developed a sort of college, I developed a sort of knock-on-wood superstition. Um anytime knock-on-wood superstition. Um anytime knock-on-wood superstition. Um anytime I'd say something that I didn't want to I'd say something that I didn't want to I'd say something that I didn't want to happen or did want to happen, I'd say happen or did want to happen, I'd say happen or did want to happen, I'd say knock on wood, and I'd knock on wood. knock on wood, and I'd knock on wood. knock on wood, and I'd knock on wood. And then I started um suppressing the And then I started um suppressing the And then I started um suppressing the behavior, mostly because it was a little behavior, mostly because it was a little behavior, mostly because it was a little embarrassing. And then I started just embarrassing. And then I started just embarrassing. And then I started just telling myself in my head knock on wood, telling myself in my head knock on wood, telling myself in my head knock on wood, knock on wood, knock on wood. And it was knock on wood, knock on wood. And it was knock on wood, knock on wood. And it was clearly a little bit of an OCD type clearly a little bit of an OCD type clearly a little bit of an OCD type thing. But again, OCD in air quotes thing. But again, OCD in air quotes thing. But again, OCD in air quotes here. Um I think it qualified as OCD in here. Um I think it qualified as OCD in here. Um I think it qualified as OCD in the sense that the more I did it, the sense that the more I did it, the sense that the more I did it, the more I wanted to do it. So, I needed to more I wanted to do it. So, I needed to more I wanted to do it. So, I needed to go cold turkey on the thinking, but how go cold turkey on the thinking, but how go cold turkey on the thinking, but how can you go cold turkey on a thought? You can you go cold turkey on a thought? You can you go cold turkey on a thought? You couldn't. What I was told to do and what couldn't. What I was told to do and what couldn't. What I was told to do and what worked very well for me was to just worked very well for me was to just worked very well for me was to just write down the worst possible outcome write down the worst possible outcome write down the worst possible outcome that I was concerned about. So, to that I was concerned about. So, to that I was concerned about. So, to really get close to the nature or the really get close to the nature or the really get close to the nature or the underlying basis of that intrusive underlying basis of that intrusive underlying basis of that intrusive thought. And I raise this because a lot thought. And I raise this because a lot thought. And I raise this because a lot of times the intrusive thought is not, of times the intrusive thought is not, of times the intrusive thought is not, "Okay, I'm thinking about a car "Okay, I'm thinking about a car "Okay, I'm thinking about a car accident." or "I'm thinking about a accident." or "I'm thinking about a accident." or "I'm thinking about a breakup." or "I'm thinking about an exam breakup." or "I'm thinking about an exam breakup." or "I'm thinking about an exam that I have." that I have." that I have." That can be intrusive, but a lot of That can be intrusive, but a lot of That can be intrusive, but a lot of times it's some kind of um times it's some kind of um times it's some kind of um nebulous, abstract set of words or ideas nebulous, abstract set of words or ideas nebulous, abstract set of words or ideas or images around something that happened or images around something that happened or images around something that happened that we saw or heard or experienced. that we saw or heard or experienced. that we saw or heard or experienced. And by putting a lot of clear structure And by putting a lot of clear structure And by putting a lot of clear structure to what the thought is exactly to what the thought is exactly to what the thought is exactly and to putting some thought and to putting some thought and to putting some thought and structure onto paper about structure onto paper about structure onto paper about what that pattern of not healthy what that pattern of not healthy what that pattern of not healthy thinking relates to, thinking relates to, thinking relates to, people often achieve tremendous relief people often achieve tremendous relief people often achieve tremendous relief in a fairly short amount of time. in a fairly short amount of time. in a fairly short amount of time. Sometimes just in one session of writing Sometimes just in one session of writing Sometimes just in one session of writing it down, sometimes they need to write it down, sometimes they need to write it down, sometimes they need to write it down multiple times. What you're down multiple times. What you're down multiple times. What you're essentially trying to do with a essentially trying to do with a essentially trying to do with a intrusive thought or a trauma of any intrusive thought or a trauma of any intrusive thought or a trauma of any kind is you're trying to turn a kind is you're trying to turn a kind is you're trying to turn a disturbing story, that is a story that disturbing story, that is a story that disturbing story, that is a story that evokes a lot of emotion, and evokes a lot of emotion, and evokes a lot of emotion, and captures, it kind of hijacks your captures, it kind of hijacks your captures, it kind of hijacks your nervous system, nervous system, nervous system, into what is essentially a known, but into what is essentially a known, but into what is essentially a known, but repetitive and kind of old boring story repetitive and kind of old boring story repetitive and kind of old boring story where the emotional load has been where the emotional load has been where the emotional load has been depleted. And there are, of course, I depleted. And there are, of course, I depleted. And there are, of course, I have to highlight the fact that getting have to highlight the fact that getting have to highlight the fact that getting sufficient rapid eye movement sleep, we sufficient rapid eye movement sleep, we sufficient rapid eye movement sleep, we also know is very important for removing also know is very important for removing also know is very important for removing the emotional load of traumatic the emotional load of traumatic the emotional load of traumatic experiences and intrusive thoughts. So, experiences and intrusive thoughts. So, experiences and intrusive thoughts. So, you really want to strive to get the you really want to strive to get the you really want to strive to get the best possible sleep you can that best possible sleep you can that best possible sleep you can that includes sufficient rapid eye movement includes sufficient rapid eye movement includes sufficient rapid eye movement sleep. And we have multiple zero cost resources And we have multiple zero cost resources And we have multiple zero cost resources for that at hubermanlab.com. We have the for that at hubermanlab.com. We have the for that at hubermanlab.com. We have the episode on master your sleep, we have episode on master your sleep, we have episode on master your sleep, we have the episode on perfect your sleep, we the episode on perfect your sleep, we the episode on perfect your sleep, we have the toolkit for sleep, all of which have the toolkit for sleep, all of which have the toolkit for sleep, all of which are time-stamped and all of which can be are time-stamped and all of which can be are time-stamped and all of which can be accessed completely zero cost to try and accessed completely zero cost to try and accessed completely zero cost to try and get your sleep um as good as possible get your sleep um as good as possible get your sleep um as good as possible including lots of rapid eye movement including lots of rapid eye movement including lots of rapid eye movement sleep. So, in order to sleep. So, in order to sleep. So, in order to remove intrusive and addictive thoughts, remove intrusive and addictive thoughts, remove intrusive and addictive thoughts, ask yourself, is this OCD of the classic ask yourself, is this OCD of the classic ask yourself, is this OCD of the classic sense? If it is, you should see a sense? If it is, you should see a sense? If it is, you should see a psychiatrist. They won't necessarily psychiatrist. They won't necessarily psychiatrist. They won't necessarily prescribe medication, but there are prescribe medication, but there are prescribe medication, but there are tools for true OCD that are very tools for true OCD that are very tools for true OCD that are very effective in many cases. effective in many cases. effective in many cases. And we did the episode on OCD which I And we did the episode on OCD which I And we did the episode on OCD which I invite you to listen to as well. You want to ask yourself, are the You want to ask yourself, are the You want to ask yourself, are the thoughts disturbing or merely intrusive thoughts disturbing or merely intrusive thoughts disturbing or merely intrusive and repetitive? If they're merely and repetitive? If they're merely and repetitive? If they're merely intrusive and repetitive, well, then intrusive and repetitive, well, then intrusive and repetitive, well, then learning to focus your attention on learning to focus your attention on learning to focus your attention on other things and getting better at other things and getting better at other things and getting better at focusing on single things through an focusing on single things through an focusing on single things through an exercise like mindful mindfulness exercise like mindful mindfulness exercise like mindful mindfulness meditation can really help and indeed meditation can really help and indeed meditation can really help and indeed the perhaps the best use of mindfulness perhaps the best use of mindfulness perhaps the best use of mindfulness meditation is to improve your level of focus. It is to improve your level of focus. It is to improve your level of focus. It does have other benefits as well, but does have other benefits as well, but does have other benefits as well, but that's going to be the major one that that's going to be the major one that that's going to be the major one that one will experience even with these very one will experience even with these very one will experience even with these very short five or 10-minute a day short five or 10-minute a day short five or 10-minute a day meditations. Great data on that from the meditations. Great data on that from the meditations. Great data on that from the scientific literature. scientific literature. scientific literature. And then, if those intrusive thoughts And then, if those intrusive thoughts And then, if those intrusive thoughts are not only intrusive, but they're also are not only intrusive, but they're also are not only intrusive, but they're also disturbing, in that case, you really disturbing, in that case, you really disturbing, in that case, you really want to put as much structure want to put as much structure want to put as much structure and thought, believe it or not, into and thought, believe it or not, into and thought, believe it or not, into what those thoughts are really about, what those thoughts are really about, what those thoughts are really about, write them out on paper in complete write them out on paper in complete write them out on paper in complete sentences, and maybe do that multiple sentences, and maybe do that multiple sentences, and maybe do that multiple times until the underlying emotions times until the underlying emotions times until the underlying emotions related to those thoughts really start related to those thoughts really start related to those thoughts really start to diminish. And by doing that, you're to diminish. And by doing that, you're to diminish. And by doing that, you're essentially doing your own form of essentially doing your own form of essentially doing your own form of trauma therapy, for lack of a better way trauma therapy, for lack of a better way trauma therapy, for lack of a better way to put it. And again, the data really to put it. And again, the data really to put it. And again, the data really point to the fact that getting close to point to the fact that getting close to point to the fact that getting close to the specific details around those the specific details around those the specific details around those intrusive thoughts is going to be the intrusive thoughts is going to be the intrusive thoughts is going to be the best way to extinguish them. Thank you best way to extinguish them. Thank you best way to extinguish them. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this for joining for the beginning of this for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes full episode and to hear future episodes full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and to receive transcripts of them and to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not standard channel and premium tools not standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast and to fund research. In particular, and to fund research. In particular, and to fund research. In particular, research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree as a species which I think we all agree as a species which I think we all agree as a species that we are most interested in, and we that we are most interested in, and we that we are most interested in, and we are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And those health, and performance. And those health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media Huberman Lab podcast and other media Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give channels. So, the idea here is to give you information to your burning you information to your burning you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium channel. So, this is a terrific way that they're So, this is a terrific way that they're So, this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further support research for science and support research for science and support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be some premium content such as transcripts some premium content such as transcripts some premium content such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and of the AMAs and various transcripts and of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast protocols of Huberman Lab podcast protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, episodes not found elsewhere. And again, episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental you'll be supporting research for mental you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the performance. You can sign up for the performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to premium channel by going to premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your interest in science.