We're living in this amazing moment of We're living in this amazing moment of We're living in this amazing moment of biology where we can put a gene that biology where we can put a gene that biology where we can put a gene that encodes something on the surface of T encodes something on the surface of T encodes something on the surface of T cells that will make them programmed to cells that will make them programmed to cells that will make them programmed to search and destroy for cancer cells. search and destroy for cancer cells. search and destroy for cancer cells. Now, this is largely known as CAR-T cells, this is largely known as CAR-T cells, this is largely known as CAR-T cells, chimeric antigen receptor. This is a chimeric antigen receptor. This is a chimeric antigen receptor. This is a receptor that it was designed in a lab, receptor that it was designed in a lab, receptor that it was designed in a lab, does not exist in nature. When those T does not exist in nature. When those T does not exist in nature. When those T cells get reinfused into a patient the cells get reinfused into a patient the cells get reinfused into a patient the way that you get like a blood way that you get like a blood way that you get like a blood transfusion, those CARs are directed to go against those CARs are directed to go against those CARs are directed to go against cancers. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Alex Marson. Dr. Alex today is Dr. Alex Marson. Dr. Alex today is Dr. Alex Marson. Dr. Alex Marson is a medical doctor and scientist Marson is a medical doctor and scientist Marson is a medical doctor and scientist at the University of California, San at the University of California, San at the University of California, San Francisco. He is developing new ways to Francisco. He is developing new ways to Francisco. He is developing new ways to reprogram the immune system to cure reprogram the immune system to cure reprogram the immune system to cure cancers. Today we discuss how your immune system Today we discuss how your immune system Today we discuss how your immune system works, how autoimmunity works, and how works, how autoimmunity works, and how works, how autoimmunity works, and how gene editing and other new technologies gene editing and other new technologies gene editing and other new technologies can be successfully leveraged to defeat can be successfully leveraged to defeat can be successfully leveraged to defeat childhood and adult cancers. childhood and adult cancers. childhood and adult cancers. Dr. Marson is truly one of a kind in his Dr. Marson is truly one of a kind in his Dr. Marson is truly one of a kind in his understanding of the clinical aspects of understanding of the clinical aspects of understanding of the clinical aspects of cancer treatment, the science of the cancer treatment, the science of the cancer treatment, the science of the immune system, and as you'll soon hear, immune system, and as you'll soon hear, immune system, and as you'll soon hear, in explaining the things that genuinely in explaining the things that genuinely in explaining the things that genuinely increase your cancer risk, many of which increase your cancer risk, many of which increase your cancer risk, many of which are surprising, and the actionable steps are surprising, and the actionable steps are surprising, and the actionable steps that we can all take to reduce our that we can all take to reduce our that we can all take to reduce our probability of getting cancer. probability of getting cancer. probability of getting cancer. In addition to the usual factors, In addition to the usual factors, In addition to the usual factors, smoking, UV light, and environmental smoking, UV light, and environmental smoking, UV light, and environmental toxins such as pesticides, we discuss toxins such as pesticides, we discuss toxins such as pesticides, we discuss the actual cancer risks that come from the actual cancer risks that come from the actual cancer risks that come from things like eating charred meats, things like eating charred meats, things like eating charred meats, airport scanners, and food additives, airport scanners, and food additives, airport scanners, and food additives, and how to gauge your individual level and how to gauge your individual level and how to gauge your individual level of risk. We also explore gene editing of risk. We also explore gene editing of risk. We also explore gene editing for reversing diseases, which until for reversing diseases, which until for reversing diseases, which until recently was science fiction, but now is recently was science fiction, but now is recently was science fiction, but now is a reality. By the end of today's a reality. By the end of today's a reality. By the end of today's episode, thanks to Dr. Marson, you'll episode, thanks to Dr. Marson, you'll episode, thanks to Dr. Marson, you'll have the most up-to-date understanding have the most up-to-date understanding have the most up-to-date understanding of the state-of-the-art science for of the state-of-the-art science for of the state-of-the-art science for cancer prevention and treatment, cancer prevention and treatment, cancer prevention and treatment, knowledge that is certain to impact you knowledge that is certain to impact you knowledge that is certain to impact you or a close friend or family member in or a close friend or family member in or a close friend or family member in your lifetime. Before we begin, I'd like your lifetime. Before we begin, I'd like your lifetime. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring of my desire and effort to bring of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost consumer information about zero-cost consumer information about zero-cost consumer information about science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Alex Marson. Dr. Alex Marson, Dr. Alex Marson. Dr. Alex Marson, Dr. Alex Marson. Dr. Alex Marson, welcome. Andrew. welcome. Andrew. welcome. Andrew. This is the first time that we're going This is the first time that we're going This is the first time that we're going to have a serious discussion about the to have a serious discussion about the to have a serious discussion about the immune system, cancer, and immune system, cancer, and immune system, cancer, and gene editing technologies on this gene editing technologies on this gene editing technologies on this podcast. So, I'm delighted that you're podcast. So, I'm delighted that you're podcast. So, I'm delighted that you're here. It's also great to see you again. here. It's also great to see you again. here. It's also great to see you again. Thank you for having me. Really really Thank you for having me. Really really Thank you for having me. Really really good to see you. Yeah, it's been a good to see you. Yeah, it's been a good to see you. Yeah, it's been a while. Let's start off with the big picture. Let's start off with the big picture. Let's start off with the big picture. Uh how are we doing? How's uh how's biology how are we doing? How's uh how's biology how are we doing? How's uh how's biology looking? How's medicine looking? Are we looking? How's medicine looking? Are we looking? How's medicine looking? Are we are we on the fast track to much better are we on the fast track to much better are we on the fast track to much better things? Are we going to slog along for things? Are we going to slog along for things? Are we going to slog along for another 10 years before we have cures to another 10 years before we have cures to another 10 years before we have cures to the many concerns that people have about the many concerns that people have about the many concerns that people have about cancer, Alzheimer's, and the rest? Or cancer, Alzheimer's, and the rest? Or cancer, Alzheimer's, and the rest? Or are you encouraged by what's happening are you encouraged by what's happening are you encouraged by what's happening right now? I think maybe there's some right now? I think maybe there's some right now? I think maybe there's some the general public doesn't quite know the general public doesn't quite know the general public doesn't quite know how excited biologists are about what's how excited biologists are about what's how excited biologists are about what's possible. And maybe we've over-promised. possible. And maybe we've over-promised. possible. And maybe we've over-promised. Maybe in the past we've said we're on Maybe in the past we've said we're on Maybe in the past we've said we're on the brink of curing disease and people the brink of curing disease and people the brink of curing disease and people haven't seen it. haven't seen it. haven't seen it. But something is materially different But something is materially different But something is materially different right now. And there is a convergence of right now. And there is a convergence of right now. And there is a convergence of so many different ways of understanding so many different ways of understanding so many different ways of understanding biology, but then not having that stop biology, but then not having that stop biology, but then not having that stop at understanding, but to actually at understanding, but to actually at understanding, but to actually intervene and at the root causes of intervene and at the root causes of intervene and at the root causes of disease. And over the course of this conversation, I over the course of this conversation, I over the course of this conversation, I imagine we're going to talk about imagine we're going to talk about imagine we're going to talk about DNA sequencing, DNA sequencing, DNA sequencing, understanding cells, but going all the understanding cells, but going all the understanding cells, but going all the way to rewriting specific DNA sequences way to rewriting specific DNA sequences way to rewriting specific DNA sequences inside of the cells of our immune inside of the cells of our immune inside of the cells of our immune system, doing this not one at a time, system, doing this not one at a time, system, doing this not one at a time, but testing every gene and understanding but testing every gene and understanding but testing every gene and understanding pieces of DNA throughout our entire pieces of DNA throughout our entire pieces of DNA throughout our entire genome to understand what controls our genome to understand what controls our genome to understand what controls our cells. And then being able to take that And then being able to take that And then being able to take that information and actually do something information and actually do something information and actually do something about it to boost our immune system, to about it to boost our immune system, to about it to boost our immune system, to go after cancer, to balance it in for go after cancer, to balance it in for go after cancer, to balance it in for inflammation and autoimmunity. And that inflammation and autoimmunity. And that inflammation and autoimmunity. And that doesn't just have to be sort of doesn't just have to be sort of doesn't just have to be sort of searching for a pill. All of a sudden we searching for a pill. All of a sudden we searching for a pill. All of a sudden we can actually talk to our own cells and can actually talk to our own cells and can actually talk to our own cells and give them instructions in the language give them instructions in the language give them instructions in the language of DNA, in the language of molecular of DNA, in the language of molecular of DNA, in the language of molecular biology. And in some instances this is biology. And in some instances this is biology. And in some instances this is being done with CRISPR, but it's also being done with CRISPR, but it's also being done with CRISPR, but it's also being done with lipid nanoparticles and being done with lipid nanoparticles and being done with lipid nanoparticles and vaccines. And we're still inventing new vaccines. And we're still inventing new vaccines. And we're still inventing new ways of giving these instructions, but ways of giving these instructions, but ways of giving these instructions, but all of a sudden medicine all of a sudden medicine all of a sudden medicine is programming the behavior of cells in is programming the behavior of cells in is programming the behavior of cells in a way that's much more directed than was a way that's much more directed than was a way that's much more directed than was ever conceivable before. Like there's ever conceivable before. Like there's ever conceivable before. Like there's really a step function in what's really a step function in what's really a step function in what's imaginable and achievable in medicine. imaginable and achievable in medicine. imaginable and achievable in medicine. Super exciting. Super exciting. Super exciting. Do you Do you Do you think that molecular biology and genetic think that molecular biology and genetic think that molecular biology and genetic engineering and or AI are the reasons engineering and or AI are the reasons engineering and or AI are the reasons that things are on this accelerated that things are on this accelerated that things are on this accelerated timeline? Yes is the answer. All of timeline? Yes is the answer. All of timeline? Yes is the answer. All of those things. those things. those things. I think we can I think we can I think we can do experiments at a different level of do experiments at a different level of do experiments at a different level of scale. We can generate data. scale. We can generate data. scale. We can generate data. And then we have the computational And then we have the computational And then we have the computational tools, including AI, but we have tools, including AI, but we have tools, including AI, but we have computational sophistication to actually computational sophistication to actually computational sophistication to actually extract insights from massive amounts of extract insights from massive amounts of extract insights from massive amounts of data. And you know, I think historically biology you know, I think historically biology you know, I think historically biology was we were at it was an observational we were at it was an observational we were at it was an observational science. If you especially if you wanted science. If you especially if you wanted science. If you especially if you wanted to study things in humans, there to study things in humans, there to study things in humans, there wasn't a way to intervene. Now all of a wasn't a way to intervene. Now all of a wasn't a way to intervene. Now all of a sudden when taking human cells, we're sudden when taking human cells, we're sudden when taking human cells, we're putting taking them into the lab and putting taking them into the lab and putting taking them into the lab and making genetic changes and reading out making genetic changes and reading out making genetic changes and reading out the consequences and directly being able the consequences and directly being able the consequences and directly being able to observe the effect. And to observe the effect. And to observe the effect. And we have all that we have tools to we have all that we have tools to we have all that we have tools to do this with imaging. We have the tools do this with imaging. We have the tools do this with imaging. We have the tools to do this with DNA sequencing. And we to do this with DNA sequencing. And we to do this with DNA sequencing. And we can take this all the way into clinical can take this all the way into clinical can take this all the way into clinical trials and see what are the what are the trials and see what are the what are the trials and see what are the what are the consequences when we actually go after consequences when we actually go after consequences when we actually go after targeted DNA sequences, and make our targeted DNA sequences, and make our targeted DNA sequences, and make our cells better at treating disease. better at treating disease. better at treating disease. Would you mind educating us about the Would you mind educating us about the Would you mind educating us about the immune system a bit? The adaptive and immune system a bit? The adaptive and immune system a bit? The adaptive and the innate immune system, some of the innate immune system, some of the innate immune system, some of the major cell types, because I think those major cell types, because I think those major cell types, because I think those are going to form the kind of building are going to form the kind of building are going to form the kind of building blocks of our discussions about cancer blocks of our discussions about cancer blocks of our discussions about cancer and other things today. Our immune and other things today. Our immune and other things today. Our immune system permeates almost every aspect of system permeates almost every aspect of system permeates almost every aspect of our health and disease. It is a system our health and disease. It is a system our health and disease. It is a system really in the sense of it it's involved really in the sense of it it's involved really in the sense of it it's involved in every part of our body in every part of our body in every part of our body that has evolved to protect us. that has evolved to protect us. that has evolved to protect us. Largely to protect us against Largely to protect us against Largely to protect us against infections, viruses, bacteria, fungus, infections, viruses, bacteria, fungus, infections, viruses, bacteria, fungus, all sorts of foreign invasions, and our all sorts of foreign invasions, and our all sorts of foreign invasions, and our immune system has developed a balance immune system has developed a balance immune system has developed a balance that is when it's working properly, that is when it's working properly, that is when it's working properly, doesn't recognize the cells that are doesn't recognize the cells that are doesn't recognize the cells that are supposed to be in the body, supposed to be in the body, supposed to be in the body, but is finely tuned to recognize signs but is finely tuned to recognize signs but is finely tuned to recognize signs of things that shouldn't be in the body, of things that shouldn't be in the body, of things that shouldn't be in the body, and to eliminate them. and to eliminate them. and to eliminate them. I mean I mean I mean at its core that's the at its core that's the at its core that's the basic job of the immune system. basic job of the immune system. basic job of the immune system. &gt;&gt; To recognize us versus non-us. &gt;&gt; To recognize us versus non-us. &gt;&gt; To recognize us versus non-us. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Exactly. And you talked about the innate And you talked about the innate And you talked about the innate versus the adaptive immune system. versus the adaptive immune system. versus the adaptive immune system. Largely what we're talking about are Largely what we're talking about are Largely what we're talking about are white blood cells. white blood cells. white blood cells. We're we're talking about different We're we're talking about different We're we're talking about different types of white blood cells that are types of white blood cells that are types of white blood cells that are either inside of tissues or circulating either inside of tissues or circulating either inside of tissues or circulating in our bloodstream that go around and in our bloodstream that go around and in our bloodstream that go around and play coordinated and specialized roles coordinated and specialized roles coordinated and specialized roles in sensing when something comes in that in sensing when something comes in that in sensing when something comes in that is not us, that's foreign, that is not us, that's foreign, that is not us, that's foreign, that shouldn't be there. shouldn't be there. shouldn't be there. The innate immune system does it as is The innate immune system does it as is The innate immune system does it as is sort of thought of as the first sort of thought of as the first sort of thought of as the first alarm system that something something's alarm system that something something's alarm system that something something's wrong. And with the innate immune system, which And with the innate immune system, which And with the innate immune system, which consists of cells like dendritic cells, consists of cells like dendritic cells, consists of cells like dendritic cells, macrophages, these are cells that are going around these are cells that are going around these are cells that are going around and they're looking for and they're looking for and they're looking for patterns of things that just generally patterns of things that just generally patterns of things that just generally aren't in human cells. aren't in human cells. aren't in human cells. Some signs of damage, some signs of Some signs of damage, some signs of Some signs of damage, some signs of things that are just that shouldn't be things that are just that shouldn't be things that are just that shouldn't be there in a in a generic way in a healthy there in a in a generic way in a healthy there in a in a generic way in a healthy human. When those first alarm systems get When those first alarm systems get When those first alarm systems get triggered, all of a sudden these innate triggered, all of a sudden these innate triggered, all of a sudden these innate immune systems start releasing things. immune systems start releasing things. immune systems start releasing things. They change their state and they send They change their state and they send They change their state and they send off an alarm to other cells in the off an alarm to other cells in the off an alarm to other cells in the immune system. immune system. immune system. And then they often recruit in the second then they often recruit in the second then they often recruit in the second arm of the immune system that you arm of the immune system that you arm of the immune system that you mentioned, the adaptive immune system. mentioned, the adaptive immune system. mentioned, the adaptive immune system. We'll talk a lot about the adaptive We'll talk a lot about the adaptive We'll talk a lot about the adaptive immune system today and the major immune system today and the major immune system today and the major players in the adaptive immune system players in the adaptive immune system players in the adaptive immune system are a group of white blood cells that are a group of white blood cells that are a group of white blood cells that are collectively known as lymphocytes. are collectively known as lymphocytes. are collectively known as lymphocytes. But we'll talk about B cells and T cells But we'll talk about B cells and T cells But we'll talk about B cells and T cells in particular, which are major groups of in particular, which are major groups of in particular, which are major groups of lymphocytes. We've been focused of lymphocytes. We've been focused of lymphocytes. We've been focused heavily on T cells. heavily on T cells. heavily on T cells. T cells play a central role in T cells play a central role in T cells play a central role in coordinating the fine-tuning of the immune response. the fine-tuning of the immune response. the fine-tuning of the immune response. One of the amazing things about the T One of the amazing things about the T One of the amazing things about the T cells is that each T cell naturally in cells is that each T cell naturally in cells is that each T cell naturally in our body it's one of the few places our body it's one of the few places our body it's one of the few places where each cell will actually have a where each cell will actually have a where each cell will actually have a different piece of DNA that's not different piece of DNA that's not different piece of DNA that's not inherited in our germline sequence. inherited in our germline sequence. inherited in our germline sequence. Each T cell will make its own receptor Each T cell will make its own receptor Each T cell will make its own receptor that is generated largely at random that is generated largely at random that is generated largely at random to go and sense something and those to go and sense something and those to go and sense something and those sensors that get put on the those sensors that get put on the those sensors that get put on the surface of T cells are there to engage surface of T cells are there to engage surface of T cells are there to engage and if they're engaged, it's a sign that and if they're engaged, it's a sign that and if they're engaged, it's a sign that something has been recognized as something has been recognized as something has been recognized as foreign. And so we have this incredible foreign. And so we have this incredible foreign. And so we have this incredible diversity of different T cell receptors that of different T cell receptors that of different T cell receptors that are have developed on our T cells. Each are have developed on our T cells. Each are have developed on our T cells. Each one will have a different unique one will have a different unique one will have a different unique receptor on its surface. Each cell will receptor on its surface. Each cell will receptor on its surface. Each cell will have a different receptor on its have a different receptor on its have a different receptor on its surface. And the way to think about surface. And the way to think about surface. And the way to think about these receptors is that they're sensors. these receptors is that they're sensors. these receptors is that they're sensors. For they're when they're engaged, they For they're when they're engaged, they For they're when they're engaged, they send a signal to the T cell that okay, send a signal to the T cell that okay, send a signal to the T cell that okay, we found something that you've been we found something that you've been we found something that you've been programmed to recognize and program is programmed to recognize and program is programmed to recognize and program is recognized as foreign if it if the recognized as foreign if it if the recognized as foreign if it if the immune system is working properly. And immune system is working properly. And immune system is working properly. And are the genes that these T cells make as are the genes that these T cells make as are the genes that these T cells make as these receptors these receptors these receptors are those based on experience of the of are those based on experience of the of are those based on experience of the of the organism because you said that it the organism because you said that it the organism because you said that it doesn't come from the germ line. But we doesn't come from the germ line. But we doesn't come from the germ line. But we should clarify that the germ line is not should clarify that the germ line is not should clarify that the germ line is not about infectious germs in this context. about infectious germs in this context. about infectious germs in this context. The germ line DNA is from The germ line DNA is from The germ line DNA is from the sperm and egg that were your parents the sperm and egg that were your parents the sperm and egg that were your parents and became you. There's recombination of and became you. There's recombination of and became you. There's recombination of those genes and then there's you all those genes and then there's you all those genes and then there's you all each and all each and all each and all and the T cells are making genes that and the T cells are making genes that and the T cells are making genes that neither your parents necessarily neither your parents necessarily neither your parents necessarily expressed nor that you were expected to expressed nor that you were expected to expressed nor that you were expected to express except based on what exposure to express except based on what exposure to express except based on what exposure to particular pathogens. Like why do they particular pathogens. Like why do they particular pathogens. Like why do they make certain receptors and not others? make certain receptors and not others? make certain receptors and not others? &gt;&gt; Largely random. &gt;&gt; Largely random. &gt;&gt; Largely random. It is actually there's the pieces of DNA It is actually there's the pieces of DNA It is actually there's the pieces of DNA at this part of the DNA actually at this part of the DNA actually at this part of the DNA actually recombine and get pasted together in recombine and get pasted together in recombine and get pasted together in unique ways. So it's probabilistic. in unique ways. So it's probabilistic. in unique ways. So it's probabilistic. &gt;&gt; It's probabilistic and that's what &gt;&gt; It's probabilistic and that's what &gt;&gt; It's probabilistic and that's what allows us to have cells that lying there allows us to have cells that lying there allows us to have cells that lying there and waiting for things that we've never and waiting for things that we've never and waiting for things that we've never encountered. If a bacteria might come encountered. If a bacteria might come encountered. If a bacteria might come into existence or a virus might come into existence or a virus might come into existence or a virus might come into existence that doesn't even exist into existence that doesn't even exist into existence that doesn't even exist now in nature but we might have T cells now in nature but we might have T cells now in nature but we might have T cells lying there waiting that could be lying there waiting that could be lying there waiting that could be engaged by those proteins on the surface engaged by those proteins on the surface engaged by those proteins on the surface that viruses would introduce. That's that viruses would introduce. That's that viruses would introduce. That's incredible. Would you mind mentioning incredible. Would you mind mentioning incredible. Would you mind mentioning the role of the thymus? These days the role of the thymus? These days the role of the thymus? These days I'm hearing more and more about we have I'm hearing more and more about we have I'm hearing more and more about we have a thymus and we lose a thymus. Would it a thymus and we lose a thymus. Would it a thymus and we lose a thymus. Would it be beneficial if we could keep our be beneficial if we could keep our be beneficial if we could keep our thymus around? So thymus is actually thymus around? So thymus is actually thymus around? So thymus is actually the reason the T cells are called T the reason the T cells are called T the reason the T cells are called T cells is the T stands for thymus. cells is the T stands for thymus. cells is the T stands for thymus. And the thymus is an organ that And the thymus is an organ that And the thymus is an organ that it does sort of shrink as we age but at it does sort of shrink as we age but at it does sort of shrink as we age but at least in childhood it's it sort of lies least in childhood it's it sort of lies least in childhood it's it sort of lies by your heart by your heart by your heart and it is the place where T cells go and it is the place where T cells go and it is the place where T cells go and a key place of their education. So they a key place of their education. So they a key place of their education. So they they've have are making these sensors at they've have are making these sensors at they've have are making these sensors at largely at random. largely at random. largely at random. And then in the they get culled, they And then in the they get culled, they And then in the they get culled, they get selected, and they the ones that by selected, and they the ones that by selected, and they the ones that by accident are generated that recognize accident are generated that recognize accident are generated that recognize something that is supposed to be in your something that is supposed to be in your something that is supposed to be in your body, if the if the T cell engages a if the if the T cell engages a if the if the T cell engages a natural target in the thymus, those natural target in the thymus, those natural target in the thymus, those cells will die. And so what emerges from cells will die. And so what emerges from cells will die. And so what emerges from the thymus should be, and this is not the thymus should be, and this is not the thymus should be, and this is not perfect process, but should be things perfect process, but should be things perfect process, but should be things that have are that have are that have are have emerged at random, but then are have emerged at random, but then are have emerged at random, but then are selected to remove things that recognize selected to remove things that recognize selected to remove things that recognize your own body targets. There's sort of a your own body targets. There's sort of a your own body targets. There's sort of a negative selection. negative selection. negative selection. &gt;&gt; There's a negative selection. of the &gt;&gt; There's a negative selection. of the &gt;&gt; There's a negative selection. of the stuff that's you, so that your immune stuff that's you, so that your immune stuff that's you, so that your immune system doesn't attack you, and it knows system doesn't attack you, and it knows system doesn't attack you, and it knows you from non-you. Yeah, that's exactly you from non-you. Yeah, that's exactly you from non-you. Yeah, that's exactly right. There's actually both a positive right. There's actually both a positive right. There's actually both a positive selection and a negative selection. selection and a negative selection. selection and a negative selection. That's exactly the right way to think of That's exactly the right way to think of That's exactly the right way to think of The cells get will only emerge from the The cells get will only emerge from the The cells get will only emerge from the thymus that if they have a thymus that if they have a thymus that if they have a receptor on their surface that's there, receptor on their surface that's there, receptor on their surface that's there, so that's so that's so that's one's positive selection. one's positive selection. one's positive selection. But if it engages with a self-target in But if it engages with a self-target in But if it engages with a self-target in the thymus, it gets negatively selected. the thymus, it gets negatively selected. the thymus, it gets negatively selected. So what comes out are T cells that are So what comes out are T cells that are So what comes out are T cells that are there with sensors in place there with sensors in place there with sensors in place to recognize things that shouldn't be to recognize things that shouldn't be to recognize things that shouldn't be there. Okay, so your thymus and your T cells Okay, so your thymus and your T cells Okay, so your thymus and your T cells get educated in childhood, and that's get educated in childhood, and that's get educated in childhood, and that's what you're working with. what you're working with. what you're working with. Except that the immune system can adapt Except that the immune system can adapt Except that the immune system can adapt and make and make and make antibodies to things it doesn't antibodies to things it doesn't antibodies to things it doesn't recognize. The antibodies come from the recognize. The antibodies come from the recognize. The antibodies come from the from the other from the other from the other type of lymph cell so lymphocytes. So type of lymph cell so lymphocytes. So type of lymph cell so lymphocytes. So now we can talk about the B cells. B now we can talk about the B cells. B now we can talk about the B cells. B cells are this cells are this cells are this other type of lymphocyte that work in other type of lymphocyte that work in other type of lymphocyte that work in coordination with T cells, and they're coordination with T cells, and they're coordination with T cells, and they're the antibody producing cells. So they the antibody producing cells. So they the antibody producing cells. So they actually have a similar process where actually have a similar process where actually have a similar process where they're generating different antibodies they're generating different antibodies they're generating different antibodies at random with through a similar kind of at random with through a similar kind of at random with through a similar kind of recombination event. They have their own recombination event. They have their own recombination event. They have their own form of selection that they go through. form of selection that they go through. form of selection that they go through. And then those antibodies can then be And then those antibodies can then be And then those antibodies can then be released into the bloodstream and released into the bloodstream and released into the bloodstream and are the basis for protection against are the basis for protection against are the basis for protection against infections after we get them. infections after we get them. infections after we get them. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. entirely online. entirely online. Now, I've been doing therapy for a very Now, I've been doing therapy for a very Now, I've been doing therapy for a very long time, and I can tell you that it's long time, and I can tell you that it's long time, and I can tell you that it's a lot like physical workouts. There are a lot like physical workouts. There are a lot like physical workouts. There are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I want to do it, and there are days when I don't want to do it. But days when I don't want to do it. But days when I don't want to do it. But when I finish a therapy session, every when I finish a therapy session, every when I finish a therapy session, every single time I come away feeling better single time I come away feeling better single time I come away feeling better and knowing that the time was well and knowing that the time was well and knowing that the time was well spent. And typically, when I finish a spent. And typically, when I finish a spent. And typically, when I finish a therapy session, I come away with a therapy session, I come away with a therapy session, I come away with a valuable insight or some new perspective valuable insight or some new perspective valuable insight or some new perspective on something that I've been working on something that I've been working on something that I've been working through, whether or not that's with through, whether or not that's with through, whether or not that's with work, with relationships, my personal work, with relationships, my personal work, with relationships, my personal life, or simply my relationship with life, or simply my relationship with life, or simply my relationship with myself. There's just so much benefit myself. There's just so much benefit myself. There's just so much benefit that comes through effective therapy, that comes through effective therapy, that comes through effective therapy, and that's not just my personal and that's not just my personal and that's not just my personal experience. There are loads and loads of experience. There are loads and loads of experience. There are loads and loads of clinical studies to support that. clinical studies to support that. clinical studies to support that. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy With BetterHelp, they make it very easy With BetterHelp, they make it very easy to find an expert therapist who can help to find an expert therapist who can help to find an expert therapist who can help provide the benefits that come through provide the benefits that come through provide the benefits that come through effective therapy. They have a short effective therapy. They have a short effective therapy. They have a short questionnaire to help match you to the questionnaire to help match you to the questionnaire to help match you to the ideal therapist for you, and while ideal therapist for you, and while ideal therapist for you, and while BetterHelp has an industry-leading match BetterHelp has an industry-leading match BetterHelp has an industry-leading match rate, if you aren't happy with your rate, if you aren't happy with your rate, if you aren't happy with your match, you can switch to a different match, you can switch to a different match, you can switch to a different therapist anytime. Also, because therapist anytime. Also, because therapist anytime. Also, because BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's BetterHelp is done entirely online, it's extremely time-efficient. You simply log extremely time-efficient. You simply log extremely time-efficient. You simply log on and have your session. If you would on and have your session. If you would on and have your session. If you would like to try BetterHelp, go to like to try BetterHelp, go to like to try BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are mattresses and pillows that are mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep needs. customized to your unique sleep needs. customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on Now, I've spoken many times before on Now, I've spoken many times before on this and on other podcasts about the this and on other podcasts about the this and on other podcasts about the fact that getting a great night's sleep fact that getting a great night's sleep fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, is the foundation of mental health, is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. When physical health, and performance. When physical health, and performance. When we aren't getting great sleep on a we aren't getting great sleep on a we aren't getting great sleep on a consistent basis, everything suffers, consistent basis, everything suffers, consistent basis, everything suffers, and when we are sleeping well and when we are sleeping well and when we are sleeping well and enough, our mental health, physical enough, our mental health, physical enough, our mental health, physical health, and performance in all endeavors health, and performance in all endeavors health, and performance in all endeavors improve markedly. Now, the mattress you improve markedly. Now, the mattress you improve markedly. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the sleep on makes a huge difference in the sleep on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft it is or how firm it is night. How soft it is or how firm it is night. How soft it is or how firm it is all play into your comfort and need to all play into your comfort and need to all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you can If you go to the Helix website, you can If you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief 2-minute quiz, and it will take a brief 2-minute quiz, and it will take a brief 2-minute quiz, and it will ask you questions such as, do you sleep ask you questions such as, do you sleep ask you questions such as, do you sleep on your back, your side, or your on your back, your side, or your on your back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe you know, maybe you stomach? Maybe you know, maybe you stomach? Maybe you know, maybe you don't. Do you tend to run hot or cold don't. Do you tend to run hot or cold don't. Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night? Things of that sort. during the night? Things of that sort. during the night? Things of that sort. You answer those questions, and Helix You answer those questions, and Helix You answer those questions, and Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for will match you to the ideal mattress for will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the you. For me, that turned out to be the you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk, D U S K, mattress. I've been Dusk, D U S K, mattress. I've been Dusk, D U S K, mattress. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress for more sleeping on a Dusk mattress for more sleeping on a Dusk mattress for more than 4 years now, and it's been far and than 4 years now, and it's been far and than 4 years now, and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. away the best sleep that I've ever had. away the best sleep that I've ever had. If you'd like to try Helix, you can go If you'd like to try Helix, you can go If you'd like to try Helix, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, to helixsleep.com/huberman, to helixsleep.com/huberman, take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix take that 2-minute sleep quiz, and Helix will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's will match you to a mattress that's customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is customized for you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 27% off their entire site. giving up to 27% off their entire site. giving up to 27% off their entire site. Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, Helix has also teamed up with TrueMed, which allows you to use your HSA, FSA which allows you to use your HSA, FSA which allows you to use your HSA, FSA dollars to shop Helix's award-winning dollars to shop Helix's award-winning dollars to shop Helix's award-winning mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's mattresses. Again, that's helixsleep.com/huberman to get up to 27% off. What, um, to get up to 27% off. What, um, to get up to 27% off. What, um, underlies the underlies the underlies the sort of efficiency and functioning of sort of efficiency and functioning of sort of efficiency and functioning of the immune system? I know I and many the immune system? I know I and many the immune system? I know I and many people are thinking, okay, we hear like people are thinking, okay, we hear like people are thinking, okay, we hear like our immune system gets activated, or our immune system gets activated, or our immune system gets activated, or our uh our immune system is impaired. Um, uh our immune system is impaired. Um, uh our immune system is impaired. Um, the one thing that I'm certain uh the one thing that I'm certain uh the one thing that I'm certain uh supports the immune system is great supports the immune system is great supports the immune system is great sleep. Right? We just know this. If we sleep. Right? We just know this. If we sleep. Right? We just know this. If we don't sleep well or enough, we get sick. don't sleep well or enough, we get sick. don't sleep well or enough, we get sick. Is that because there's a known Is that because there's a known Is that because there's a known impairment of the immune system? I impairment of the immune system? I impairment of the immune system? I wonder about this, too. I mean, I agree wonder about this, too. I mean, I agree wonder about this, too. I mean, I agree anecdotally, I've experienced that so anecdotally, I've experienced that so anecdotally, I've experienced that so many times of being run down and then many times of being run down and then many times of being run down and then being feeling experiencing that being feeling experiencing that being feeling experiencing that I'm susceptible to infection, but I I'm susceptible to infection, but I I'm susceptible to infection, but I don't actually know don't actually know don't actually know the basis of that. I mean, there's it's the basis of that. I mean, there's it's the basis of that. I mean, there's it's kind of amazing how much we don't know kind of amazing how much we don't know kind of amazing how much we don't know about these determinants of immune about these determinants of immune about these determinants of immune health, largely because they're often health, largely because they're often health, largely because they're often variables that are left out of the variables that are left out of the variables that are left out of the mouse studies that we're doing, where, mouse studies that we're doing, where, mouse studies that we're doing, where, you know, we're studying largely steady you know, we're studying largely steady you know, we're studying largely steady state immune responses in mice, and immune responses in mice, and immune responses in mice, and I would say we don't haven't done a full I would say we don't haven't done a full I would say we don't haven't done a full exploration yet of all of the types of exploration yet of all of the types of exploration yet of all of the types of ways that general health impinges on the ways that general health impinges on the ways that general health impinges on the immune system. I don't immune system. I don't immune system. I don't Someone in my lab, Someone in my lab, Someone in my lab, a post doc named Sagar Bapat, who came a post doc named Sagar Bapat, who came a post doc named Sagar Bapat, who came to my lab with an interest in to my lab with an interest in to my lab with an interest in metabolic health and wanted to study in metabolic health and wanted to study in metabolic health and wanted to study the effect of metabolic health on T the effect of metabolic health on T the effect of metabolic health on T cells. And this there's some cells. And this there's some cells. And this there's some growing stuff on this, but it's another growing stuff on this, but it's another growing stuff on this, but it's another like what are the determinants of like what are the determinants of like what are the determinants of it? He did an He did experiments in my it? He did an He did experiments in my it? He did an He did experiments in my lab where he lab where he lab where he exposed something allergen, something that something allergen, something that something allergen, something that irritated the skin, and caused an irritated the skin, and caused an irritated the skin, and caused an allergic type reaction in the skin of allergic type reaction in the skin of allergic type reaction in the skin of mice. He did it in mice that were eating mice. He did it in mice that were eating mice. He did it in mice that were eating a normal mouse diet versus a high fat a normal mouse diet versus a high fat a normal mouse diet versus a high fat diet that caused obesity. diet that caused obesity. diet that caused obesity. And what we saw was that it was actually And what we saw was that it was actually And what we saw was that it was actually not just a not just a not just a quality quantitative difference in the quality quantitative difference in the quality quantitative difference in the immune system, but actually qualitative immune system, but actually qualitative immune system, but actually qualitative difference. The actual type of difference. The actual type of difference. The actual type of inflammation, the cell responses were inflammation, the cell responses were inflammation, the cell responses were different in the mice eating a high different in the mice eating a high different in the mice eating a high fat diet. And I think we haven't done fat diet. And I think we haven't done fat diet. And I think we haven't done enough studies like that where we enough studies like that where we enough studies like that where we actually start playing with the actually start playing with the actually start playing with the variables of life and test them in variables of life and test them in variables of life and test them in mechanistic way to isolate individual mechanistic way to isolate individual mechanistic way to isolate individual variants. What was interesting there was variants. What was interesting there was variants. What was interesting there was that the allergic reaction actually looked the allergic reaction actually looked the allergic reaction actually looked totally different in the obese mice. And totally different in the obese mice. And totally different in the obese mice. And if we used surrogates that are for the if we used surrogates that are for the if we used surrogates that are for the types of drugs that are being used now types of drugs that are being used now types of drugs that are being used now to treat severe allergy. So, we gave to treat severe allergy. So, we gave to treat severe allergy. So, we gave antibodies that block allergic antibodies that block allergic antibodies that block allergic responses. The normal flip diet mice would respond The normal flip diet mice would respond The normal flip diet mice would respond favorably to these. favorably to these. favorably to these. It they didn't help the mice that It they didn't help the mice that It they didn't help the mice that had the obese high fat diet response to had the obese high fat diet response to had the obese high fat diet response to inflammation. And in some cases it inflammation. And in some cases it inflammation. And in some cases it actually maybe made it worse. So, I actually maybe made it worse. So, I actually maybe made it worse. So, I think that there are these think that there are these think that there are these systemic ways I mean clearly we know we systemic ways I mean clearly we know we systemic ways I mean clearly we know we Our intuition tells us this strongly Our intuition tells us this strongly Our intuition tells us this strongly that systemic health can feed into that systemic health can feed into that systemic health can feed into our immune responses. our immune responses. our immune responses. But I think it's still been under But I think it's still been under But I think it's still been under explored in rigorous ways. explored in rigorous ways. explored in rigorous ways. I realize I'm asking very top contour I realize I'm asking very top contour I realize I'm asking very top contour type questions for which there probably type questions for which there probably type questions for which there probably aren't specific answers, but uh we all aren't specific answers, but uh we all aren't specific answers, but uh we all know people that um get sick all the know people that um get sick all the know people that um get sick all the time. Um and we know people who never seem to Um and we know people who never seem to Um and we know people who never seem to catch the bugs that everyone else seems catch the bugs that everyone else seems catch the bugs that everyone else seems to catch. Is there any understanding of to catch. Is there any understanding of to catch. Is there any understanding of what a more robust immune system is at what a more robust immune system is at what a more robust immune system is at the level Is it more T cells? Is it um the level Is it more T cells? Is it um the level Is it more T cells? Is it um but you know, are that the B cells engaged you know, are that the B cells engaged you know, are that the B cells engaged more quickly so they can generate more quickly so they can generate more quickly so they can generate antibodies more quickly? antibodies more quickly? antibodies more quickly? What is it? What is it? What is it? &gt;&gt; These are great questions I that I &gt;&gt; These are great questions I that I &gt;&gt; These are great questions I that I don't think have full answers. don't think have full answers. don't think have full answers. There are There's been a lot of work on There are There's been a lot of work on There are There's been a lot of work on genetic determinants and there's genetic determinants and there's genetic determinants and there's extreme cases where people have a extreme cases where people have a extreme cases where people have a genetic gap in their immune system where genetic gap in their immune system where genetic gap in their immune system where they're really they're really they're really susceptible to something that healthy susceptible to something that healthy susceptible to something that healthy people should not be susceptible to. And people should not be susceptible to. And people should not be susceptible to. And you see that there's certain types of you see that there's certain types of you see that there's certain types of infections that either happen or happen infections that either happen or happen infections that either happen or happen with a different type of severity in with a different type of severity in with a different type of severity in people with genetic people with genetic people with genetic deficits in certain branches of deficits in certain branches of deficits in certain branches of their immune system. And in some their immune system. And in some their immune system. And in some cases you can pinpoint that we just cases you can pinpoint that we just cases you can pinpoint that we just talked about the innate immune response, talked about the innate immune response, talked about the innate immune response, the adaptive immune response. You can the adaptive immune response. You can the adaptive immune response. You can see that certain genetic mutations that see that certain genetic mutations that see that certain genetic mutations that people inherit could influence one or people inherit could influence one or people inherit could influence one or multiple branches of that immune multiple branches of that immune multiple branches of that immune responses and the consequences that you responses and the consequences that you responses and the consequences that you that manifests itself with different that manifests itself with different that manifests itself with different types of infection. And I suspect that types of infection. And I suspect that types of infection. And I suspect that there's some spectrum of that we there's some spectrum of that we there's some spectrum of that we see the really you can diagnose the see the really you can diagnose the see the really you can diagnose the really strong genetic consequences and really strong genetic consequences and really strong genetic consequences and then there might be a long tail of more then there might be a long tail of more then there might be a long tail of more subtle genetic that might be subtle genetic that might be subtle genetic that might be multi-multigenic that we don't fully understand. And then that we don't fully understand. And then that we don't fully understand. And then I'm sure that there's other determinants I'm sure that there's other determinants I'm sure that there's other determinants of health that are just of health that are just of health that are just multi-factorial. And multi-factorial. And multi-factorial. And it's so it's you know, it also becomes it's so it's you know, it also becomes it's so it's you know, it also becomes this interplay between the health and this interplay between the health and this interplay between the health and then what you get exposed to by your then what you get exposed to by your then what you get exposed to by your environment. Yeah, speaking of which I'm environment. Yeah, speaking of which I'm environment. Yeah, speaking of which I'm familiar with some studies from familiar with some studies from familiar with some studies from Stanford, I believe, where Stanford, I believe, where Stanford, I believe, where um kids that have no exposure to peanuts kids that have no exposure to peanuts kids that have no exposure to peanuts get peanut allergies. And um get peanut allergies. And um get peanut allergies. And um careful, subtle careful, subtle careful, subtle increasing exposure to peanuts increasing exposure to peanuts increasing exposure to peanuts essentially um protects them against essentially um protects them against essentially um protects them against peanut allergies. So, is it true that peanut allergies. So, is it true that peanut allergies. So, is it true that when we're young that exposure to when we're young that exposure to when we're young that exposure to pathogens um and different foods gives pathogens um and different foods gives pathogens um and different foods gives us a more robust immune system? us a more robust immune system? us a more robust immune system? I think I think I think that there's the what we're exposed to that there's the what we're exposed to that there's the what we're exposed to and what we develop tolerance for and what we develop tolerance for and what we develop tolerance for is critically important during is critically important during is critically important during there's some windows of early life that there's some windows of early life that there's some windows of early life that I think you're we're particularly I think you're we're particularly I think you're we're particularly susceptible to becoming tolerant. susceptible to becoming tolerant. susceptible to becoming tolerant. And I think if we don't get the proper And I think if we don't get the proper And I think if we don't get the proper exposure to certain things, all of a exposure to certain things, all of a exposure to certain things, all of a sudden our body can start to be sudden our body can start to be sudden our body can start to be hypersensitive to them which manifests hypersensitive to them which manifests hypersensitive to them which manifests as allergies. Now, there's this as allergies. Now, there's this as allergies. Now, there's this balancing act. I think the fear of balancing act. I think the fear of balancing act. I think the fear of allergies makes people more allergies makes people more allergies makes people more hesitant to expose kids. And I think you hesitant to expose kids. And I think you hesitant to expose kids. And I think you can it can get into these can it can get into these can it can get into these dangerous zones of you don't want to dangerous zones of you don't want to dangerous zones of you don't want to expose kids who are going to have a expose kids who are going to have a expose kids who are going to have a dangerous allergic response. But on a dangerous allergic response. But on a dangerous allergic response. But on the other hand, critical early exposure the other hand, critical early exposure the other hand, critical early exposure is part of how tolerance is maintained. is part of how tolerance is maintained. is part of how tolerance is maintained. And I think I think peanut allergies And I think I think peanut allergies And I think I think peanut allergies there is strong evidence that there is strong evidence that there is strong evidence that exposure to peanuts can be beneficial exposure to peanuts can be beneficial exposure to peanuts can be beneficial in people who are not yet allergic. in people who are not yet allergic. in people who are not yet allergic. What's going on with autoimmune What's going on with autoimmune What's going on with autoimmune conditions? Yeah. conditions? Yeah. conditions? Yeah. Is this that the B cells and T cells Is this that the B cells and T cells Is this that the B cells and T cells are at a probabilistic level that T are at a probabilistic level that T are at a probabilistic level that T cells developed cells developed cells developed um some reaction, so to speak, a um some reaction, so to speak, a um some reaction, so to speak, a binding to um cells that we naturally binding to um cells that we naturally binding to um cells that we naturally make that they shouldn't have? Or is it make that they shouldn't have? Or is it make that they shouldn't have? Or is it just like it happens? Yeah. I've always just like it happens? Yeah. I've always just like it happens? Yeah. I've always been intrigued by the idea that when been intrigued by the idea that when been intrigued by the idea that when the immune system is really ramped up um the immune system is really ramped up um the immune system is really ramped up um people will experience autoimmune-like people will experience autoimmune-like people will experience autoimmune-like symptoms. I symptoms. I symptoms. I experienced that as a master's student. experienced that as a master's student. experienced that as a master's student. I was working so much and probably not I was working so much and probably not I was working so much and probably not eating enough and drinking so much eating enough and drinking so much eating enough and drinking so much caffeine back then that I got some kind caffeine back then that I got some kind caffeine back then that I got some kind of funky skin lesion things. I went to of funky skin lesion things. I went to of funky skin lesion things. I went to the doctor and they're like, "Oh, you're the doctor and they're like, "Oh, you're the doctor and they're like, "Oh, you're starting to get some attack of the starting to get some attack of the starting to get some attack of the deeper layers of your skin, deeper layers of your skin, deeper layers of your skin, Um you just need to work a little less. Um you just need to work a little less. Um you just need to work a little less. And sure enough, did that and And sure enough, did that and And sure enough, did that and it did the trick. You know, but I was it did the trick. You know, but I was it did the trick. You know, but I was just it made me so keenly aware of how just it made me so keenly aware of how just it made me so keenly aware of how um the immune system will, for lack of a the immune system will, for lack of a the immune system will, for lack of a better word, adapt to conditions and it better word, adapt to conditions and it better word, adapt to conditions and it was trying to keep me healthy and it was trying to keep me healthy and it was trying to keep me healthy and it overshot the mark, basically. I sort of overshot the mark, basically. I sort of overshot the mark, basically. I sort of walked you through it at a first walked you through it at a first walked you through it at a first principle, like how things are supposed principle, like how things are supposed principle, like how things are supposed to work. I told you, okay, there's this to work. I told you, okay, there's this to work. I told you, okay, there's this process of generating receptors on the process of generating receptors on the process of generating receptors on the surface of T cells, antibodies get surface of T cells, antibodies get surface of T cells, antibodies get generated on B cells, they go through generated on B cells, they go through generated on B cells, they go through this positive and selection and negative this positive and selection and negative this positive and selection and negative selection. That's a delicate balancing selection. That's a delicate balancing selection. That's a delicate balancing act and it doesn't actually work that act and it doesn't actually work that act and it doesn't actually work that way in practice. way in practice. way in practice. In practice, T cells escape from the In practice, T cells escape from the In practice, T cells escape from the thymus that do recognize our own self thymus that do recognize our own self thymus that do recognize our own self antigens. And there's actually secondary antigens. And there's actually secondary antigens. And there's actually secondary mechanisms that to block that, but mechanisms that to block that, but mechanisms that to block that, but autoimmune diseases emerge when those autoimmune diseases emerge when those autoimmune diseases emerge when those normal checks fail. normal checks fail. normal checks fail. This and I think it's a consequence that This and I think it's a consequence that This and I think it's a consequence that the immune system has two major the immune system has two major the immune system has two major responsibilities. It has to be primed to responsibilities. It has to be primed to responsibilities. It has to be primed to protect us from infections, which would protect us from infections, which would protect us from infections, which would be fatal, be fatal, be fatal, and be strong and recognize this and be strong and recognize this and be strong and recognize this incredible diversity of potential incredible diversity of potential incredible diversity of potential foreign dangerous things that we might foreign dangerous things that we might foreign dangerous things that we might experience, but it also has to not experience, but it also has to not experience, but it also has to not recognize our own cells. recognize our own cells. recognize our own cells. And it can miss the mark in both ways. And it can miss the mark in both ways. And it can miss the mark in both ways. And so, autoimmune disease manifests in And so, autoimmune disease manifests in And so, autoimmune disease manifests in different tissues. If if you if your different tissues. If if you if your different tissues. If if you if your immune system starts recognizing targets immune system starts recognizing targets immune system starts recognizing targets in your joints, it can cause rheumatoid in your joints, it can cause rheumatoid in your joints, it can cause rheumatoid arthritis. If it's in those cells that arthritis. If it's in those cells that arthritis. If it's in those cells that produce insulin in the pancreas, it produce insulin in the pancreas, it produce insulin in the pancreas, it causes type 1 or childhood diabetes. causes type 1 or childhood diabetes. causes type 1 or childhood diabetes. Um if it's the myelin myelinated cells Um if it's the myelin myelinated cells Um if it's the myelin myelinated cells in the brain, it's multiple sclerosis. in the brain, it's multiple sclerosis. in the brain, it's multiple sclerosis. So, this is autoimmunity and So, this is autoimmunity and So, this is autoimmunity and inflammation of different kinds inflammation of different kinds inflammation of different kinds cause their own pathology. So, cause their own pathology. So, cause their own pathology. So, we want to we want to we want to the immune system is always these sort the immune system is always these sort the immune system is always these sort of two sides of the coin, making sure of two sides of the coin, making sure of two sides of the coin, making sure that we're having strong responses to that we're having strong responses to that we're having strong responses to infection. We'll talk about cancer where we want to We'll talk about cancer where we want to We'll talk about cancer where we want to also strengthen our responses, but for also strengthen our responses, but for also strengthen our responses, but for autoimmunity, inflammation, allergies, autoimmunity, inflammation, allergies, autoimmunity, inflammation, allergies, we want to make sure that like our goal we want to make sure that like our goal we want to make sure that like our goal therapeutically with drugs is to make therapeutically with drugs is to make therapeutically with drugs is to make sure that we sure that we sure that we make the immune system under control. make the immune system under control. make the immune system under control. And ideally do it in a targeted way so And ideally do it in a targeted way so And ideally do it in a targeted way so that you don't have to turn off the that you don't have to turn off the that you don't have to turn off the whole immune system with blanket whole immune system with blanket whole immune system with blanket immunosuppression, but to do it in a way that just makes but to do it in a way that just makes but to do it in a way that just makes you tolerant or not reactive against the you tolerant or not reactive against the you tolerant or not reactive against the things that are being inappropriately things that are being inappropriately things that are being inappropriately targeted by the immune system. targeted by the immune system. targeted by the immune system. Two things that I'd love to understand Two things that I'd love to understand Two things that I'd love to understand about the immune system is uh about the immune system is uh about the immune system is uh how is it that um how is it that um how is it that um an immune response, let's say to a cold an immune response, let's say to a cold an immune response, let's say to a cold virus, is systemic? Like like virus, is systemic? Like like virus, is systemic? Like like where is the sort of master uh where is the sort of master uh where is the sort of master uh controller is it or maybe it's a controller is it or maybe it's a controller is it or maybe it's a distributed system that says like, distributed system that says like, distributed system that says like, "Okay, we need to launch a body-wide "Okay, we need to launch a body-wide "Okay, we need to launch a body-wide response as opposed to a localized response as opposed to a localized response as opposed to a localized response." I can I can imagine like with response." I can I can imagine like with response." I can I can imagine like with a splinter, of course, you're going to a splinter, of course, you're going to a splinter, of course, you're going to get localized response. It's a little get localized response. It's a little get localized response. It's a little piece of wood or metal. And so you're piece of wood or metal. And so you're piece of wood or metal. And so you're going to get the innate response and going to get the innate response and going to get the innate response and you're going to get some pus around it you're going to get some pus around it you're going to get some pus around it and it'll kind of localize the wound, and it'll kind of localize the wound, and it'll kind of localize the wound, but when it comes to an invasive virus like when it comes to an invasive virus like when it comes to an invasive virus like the cold virus, uh it overtakes us, the cold virus, uh it overtakes us, the cold virus, uh it overtakes us, right? The production of mucus, we get right? The production of mucus, we get right? The production of mucus, we get the headache, like the and I think it's the headache, like the and I think it's the headache, like the and I think it's the systemic effect that um that the systemic effect that um that the systemic effect that um that intrigues me so much. Like it where is intrigues me so much. Like it where is intrigues me so much. Like it where is the signal to launch a systemic the signal to launch a systemic the signal to launch a systemic versus a localized response in the versus a localized response in the versus a localized response in the immune system? How does it determine immune system? How does it determine immune system? How does it determine that? You know, I think some of it that? You know, I think some of it that? You know, I think some of it depends on what virus we're talking depends on what virus we're talking depends on what virus we're talking about, how systemically invasive about, how systemically invasive about, how systemically invasive different viruses can be. And some of it different viruses can be. And some of it different viruses can be. And some of it can be that the immune system has can be that the immune system has can be that the immune system has different levels of, you know, it can different levels of, you know, it can different levels of, you know, it can have a local response, but the immune have a local response, but the immune have a local response, but the immune system the cells that we talked about in system the cells that we talked about in system the cells that we talked about in the immune system, one of their jobs can the immune system, one of their jobs can the immune system, one of their jobs can actually be to secrete things into the actually be to secrete things into the actually be to secrete things into the bloodstream, things that what things that what things that what are essentially chemical signals that are essentially chemical signals that are essentially chemical signals that something is wrong. something is wrong. something is wrong. Major ones are they're called cytokines Major ones are they're called cytokines Major ones are they're called cytokines and they can act locally, but they can and they can act locally, but they can and they can act locally, but they can also have more distributed effects. And also have more distributed effects. And also have more distributed effects. And some of the things that the some of the things that the some of the things that the cytokines can do can influence what can cytokines can do can influence what can cytokines can do can influence what can cause the development of fever. All cause the development of fever. All cause the development of fever. All right, so you can have these sort of right, so you can have these sort of right, so you can have these sort of cascading effects of something being cascading effects of something being cascading effects of something being recognized at a particular site of the recognized at a particular site of the recognized at a particular site of the body, then sending distributed signals body, then sending distributed signals body, then sending distributed signals to the blood that will make us feel to the blood that will make us feel to the blood that will make us feel sick. And you know, in some cases, sick. And you know, in some cases, sick. And you know, in some cases, there's again this balancing act of there's again this balancing act of there's again this balancing act of maybe the fever gives us some edge in maybe the fever gives us some edge in maybe the fever gives us some edge in fighting some types of fighting some types of fighting some types of infection, but it also makes us feel infection, but it also makes us feel infection, but it also makes us feel lousy. And so the you know, the lousy. And so the you know, the lousy. And so the you know, the immune system is always walking. immune system is always walking. immune system is always walking. I think in sometimes the immune system I think in sometimes the immune system I think in sometimes the immune system immune system response to infections is immune system response to infections is immune system response to infections is too strong, and a lot of the too strong, and a lot of the too strong, and a lot of the negative consequence of what we negative consequence of what we negative consequence of what we experience is the immune system going experience is the immune system going experience is the immune system going too far and having to come back as too far and having to come back as too far and having to come back as the as the as an infection gets under the as the as an infection gets under the as the as an infection gets under control. Thank you. One of the reasons I control. Thank you. One of the reasons I control. Thank you. One of the reasons I asked that is well, I hate being sick. I asked that is well, I hate being sick. I asked that is well, I hate being sick. I fortunately I don't get sick too often fortunately I don't get sick too often fortunately I don't get sick too often if I take good care, which I think is if I take good care, which I think is if I take good care, which I think is like most people. I think about like most people. I think about like most people. I think about antibiotics for instance. Antibiotics antibiotics for instance. Antibiotics antibiotics for instance. Antibiotics are amazing. are amazing. are amazing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've had a few things where I was &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've had a few things where I was &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've had a few things where I was like, "Oh, this thing is like, "Oh, this thing is like, "Oh, this thing is bothering me." And uh like I had this bothering me." And uh like I had this bothering me." And uh like I had this sinus infection a few years back. And I sinus infection a few years back. And I sinus infection a few years back. And I was like, "Oh, this is definitely not a was like, "Oh, this is definitely not a was like, "Oh, this is definitely not a cold." And then they tell you it's not a cold." And then they tell you it's not a cold." And then they tell you it's not a sinus infection. And last I was like, "I sinus infection. And last I was like, "I sinus infection. And last I was like, "I have a feeling." Now, I'm not a have a feeling." Now, I'm not a have a feeling." Now, I'm not a physician, of course, but physician, of course, but physician, of course, but um it got really bad. um it got really bad. um it got really bad. And I took antibiotics, and within And I took antibiotics, and within And I took antibiotics, and within a day, I was feeling substantially a day, I was feeling substantially a day, I was feeling substantially better. That's great. Many people have such That's great. Many people have such That's great. Many people have such experiences with antibiotics. I realize experiences with antibiotics. I realize experiences with antibiotics. I realize they can be over prescribed, and you can they can be over prescribed, and you can they can be over prescribed, and you can end up with antibiotic resistant end up with antibiotic resistant end up with antibiotic resistant infections. That's a concern, for sure, infections. That's a concern, for sure, infections. That's a concern, for sure, but what is the sort of inherent danger of what is the sort of inherent danger of what is the sort of inherent danger of using things like antibiotics the way I using things like antibiotics the way I using things like antibiotics the way I described, like not in a in a life or described, like not in a in a life or described, like not in a in a life or death situation, to mitigate the death situation, to mitigate the death situation, to mitigate the duration of or the intensity of some duration of or the intensity of some duration of or the intensity of some sort of infection? Because surely you're sort of infection? Because surely you're sort of infection? Because surely you're short-circuiting your immune system's short-circuiting your immune system's short-circuiting your immune system's uh ability to eventually just fight that uh ability to eventually just fight that uh ability to eventually just fight that thing off. Like is part of building a thing off. Like is part of building a thing off. Like is part of building a robust immune system across your robust immune system across your robust immune system across your lifespan allowing your immune system to do the allowing your immune system to do the allowing your immune system to do the work and going through the misery of work and going through the misery of work and going through the misery of being really sick and infected? being really sick and infected? being really sick and infected? &gt;&gt; I don't think so. Great. Okay, &gt;&gt; I don't think so. Great. Okay, &gt;&gt; I don't think so. Great. Okay, fantastic. Love that answer. Love that fantastic. Love that answer. Love that fantastic. Love that answer. Love that answer. I think you probably were answer. I think you probably were answer. I think you probably were exposed and had an immune response. The exposed and had an immune response. The exposed and had an immune response. The antibiotics when they're used for antibiotics when they're used for antibiotics when they're used for bacterial infections that are bacterial infections that are bacterial infections that are susceptible to them are a miracle. And susceptible to them are a miracle. And susceptible to them are a miracle. And you know, we live in this amazing sliver you know, we live in this amazing sliver you know, we live in this amazing sliver of human history where we have of human history where we have of human history where we have antibiotics that can cure disease. I antibiotics that can cure disease. I antibiotics that can cure disease. I mean I think many of us have had I think many of us have had I think many of us have had bacterial infections of different kinds, bacterial infections of different kinds, bacterial infections of different kinds, cuts and wounds cuts and wounds cuts and wounds that would have been deadly in other that would have been deadly in other that would have been deadly in other generations and we're the generations and we're the generations and we're the beneficiaries of having antibiotics that beneficiaries of having antibiotics that beneficiaries of having antibiotics that work. We are at some risk that if we overuse We are at some risk that if we overuse We are at some risk that if we overuse them, that window of human history might them, that window of human history might them, that window of human history might come to an end if we don't continue to come to an end if we don't continue to come to an end if we don't continue to replenish new antibiotics, but we gain replenish new antibiotics, but we gain replenish new antibiotics, but we gain more and more bacteria that are more and more bacteria that are more and more bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics. Are people resistant to antibiotics. Are people resistant to antibiotics. Are people developing new antibiotics? It's an developing new antibiotics? It's an developing new antibiotics? It's an underfunded area of medicine. Cuz I just underfunded area of medicine. Cuz I just underfunded area of medicine. Cuz I just hear amoxicillin, penicillin. I have a hear amoxicillin, penicillin. I have a hear amoxicillin, penicillin. I have a friend over in the UK who's been having friend over in the UK who's been having friend over in the UK who's been having some eye symptoms that some eye symptoms that some eye symptoms that from what I'm learning we're still from what I'm learning we're still from what I'm learning we're still learning is likely an infection learning is likely an infection learning is likely an infection in near the posterior chamber which just near the posterior chamber which just near the posterior chamber which just simply means his vision is potentially simply means his vision is potentially simply means his vision is potentially at risk. Systemic antibiotics are very at risk. Systemic antibiotics are very at risk. Systemic antibiotics are very likely going to save his vision. likely going to save his vision. likely going to save his vision. And so people say, "Well, antibiotics And so people say, "Well, antibiotics And so people say, "Well, antibiotics are like are like are like 100 years ago he probably would have 100 years ago he probably would have 100 years ago he probably would have just they would have just enucleated the just they would have just enucleated the just they would have just enucleated the eye which is be blind, right? So it's I eye which is be blind, right? So it's I eye which is be blind, right? So it's I think they're a spectacularly good tool, think they're a spectacularly good tool, think they're a spectacularly good tool, but it seems like there's just a kit of but it seems like there's just a kit of but it seems like there's just a kit of maybe what a maybe what a maybe what a five to a dozen very commonly prescribed five to a dozen very commonly prescribed five to a dozen very commonly prescribed ones. Why aren't people developing ones. Why aren't people developing ones. Why aren't people developing better, newer new generation better, newer new generation better, newer new generation antibiotics? Seems like it'd be a if for antibiotics? Seems like it'd be a if for antibiotics? Seems like it'd be a if for no other reason a trillion-dollar no other reason a trillion-dollar no other reason a trillion-dollar industry, but also save a lot of lives. industry, but also save a lot of lives. industry, but also save a lot of lives. I don't know whether there's a business I don't know whether there's a business I don't know whether there's a business reason for that or it's reason for that or it's reason for that or it's but it is an underfunded area. Like it's but it is an underfunded area. Like it's but it is an underfunded area. Like it's not where medicine has turned it's not where medicine has turned it's not where medicine has turned enough attention and I do think it's a enough attention and I do think it's a enough attention and I do think it's a genuine risk. Mhm. All right. Well, some genuine risk. Mhm. All right. Well, some genuine risk. Mhm. All right. Well, some entrepreneurial young guy or gal or both entrepreneurial young guy or gal or both entrepreneurial young guy or gal or both will launch into it. Um will launch into it. Um will launch into it. Um I want to understand the relationship I want to understand the relationship I want to understand the relationship between the immune system and cancer. between the immune system and cancer. between the immune system and cancer. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But perhaps first we should talk about &gt;&gt; But perhaps first we should talk about &gt;&gt; But perhaps first we should talk about cancer, what it is and what it isn't. I cancer, what it is and what it isn't. I cancer, what it is and what it isn't. I think there's a lot of misunderstanding think there's a lot of misunderstanding think there's a lot of misunderstanding out there um that cancer did not exist out there um that cancer did not exist out there um that cancer did not exist in uh our not so distant past. I mean, in uh our not so distant past. I mean, in uh our not so distant past. I mean, you hear this. People say, "Oh, you hear this. People say, "Oh, you hear this. People say, "Oh, you know, cancer is a new thing because of know, cancer is a new thing because of know, cancer is a new thing because of the advent of you know, all these the advent of you know, all these the advent of you know, all these devices with EMFs and radiation." That's devices with EMFs and radiation." That's devices with EMFs and radiation." That's certainly not what I believe. certainly not what I believe. certainly not what I believe. Has cancer been around a very long Has cancer been around a very long Has cancer been around a very long time? Do we have evidence for that? time? Do we have evidence for that? time? Do we have evidence for that? Yeah. Yeah, I mean, if anyone's really Yeah. Yeah, I mean, if anyone's really Yeah. Yeah, I mean, if anyone's really interested, I would highly recommend the interested, I would highly recommend the interested, I would highly recommend the this book The Emperor of All Maladies, this book The Emperor of All Maladies, this book The Emperor of All Maladies, which is a which is a which is a which is really a biography of cancer as which is really a biography of cancer as which is really a biography of cancer as a disease and talk about I mean, the a disease and talk about I mean, the a disease and talk about I mean, the long history of going back as far as long history of going back as far as long history of going back as far as there's records of tumors of various there's records of tumors of various there's records of tumors of various kinds and the misery associated with kinds and the misery associated with kinds and the misery associated with that. We have a very different understanding We have a very different understanding We have a very different understanding of cancer right now, right? And I of cancer right now, right? And I of cancer right now, right? And I think cancer is one of the most think cancer is one of the most think cancer is one of the most sophisticated where we have one of the sophisticated where we have one of the sophisticated where we have one of the most sophisticated most sophisticated most sophisticated genetic understandings of disease. genetic understandings of disease. genetic understandings of disease. Doesn't mean we can always do things Doesn't mean we can always do things Doesn't mean we can always do things about it, but now we can understand about it, but now we can understand about it, but now we can understand mutations that accumulate in cells mutations that accumulate in cells mutations that accumulate in cells and all of the sudden so and all of the sudden so and all of the sudden so the DNA inside of a healthy cell is the DNA inside of a healthy cell is the DNA inside of a healthy cell is there programming. So, if you have a there programming. So, if you have a there programming. So, if you have a skin cell, your DNA is programming your skin cell, your DNA is programming your skin cell, your DNA is programming your skin cell to be a skin cell. skin cell to be a skin cell. skin cell to be a skin cell. In cancer, all of a sudden some In cancer, all of a sudden some In cancer, all of a sudden some combination of mutations emerge in that combination of mutations emerge in that combination of mutations emerge in that cell that loses its normal regulation. It does the loses its normal regulation. It does the loses its normal regulation. It does the skin cells no longer skin cells no longer skin cells no longer getting the proper signals from its DNA getting the proper signals from its DNA getting the proper signals from its DNA to stay in the right place and it goes to stay in the right place and it goes to stay in the right place and it goes and switches into a mode where it's and switches into a mode where it's and switches into a mode where it's dividing out of control. And the result dividing out of control. And the result dividing out of control. And the result is that those cells will then transform is that those cells will then transform is that those cells will then transform into cancer cells. They'll start into cancer cells. They'll start into cancer cells. They'll start dividing, they'll lose the normal dividing, they'll lose the normal dividing, they'll lose the normal architecture. The risk is that they can disrupt things The risk is that they can disrupt things The risk is that they can disrupt things in the in the tissue where they are or in the in the tissue where they are or in the in the tissue where they are or that further mutations can accumulate that further mutations can accumulate that further mutations can accumulate and they can actually start spreading and they can actually start spreading and they can actually start spreading into distant sites in the body and into distant sites in the body and into distant sites in the body and that's metastasis. When you when you're that's metastasis. When you when you're that's metastasis. When you when you're when a cancer goes from one local site when a cancer goes from one local site when a cancer goes from one local site to another part of the body. And as that to another part of the body. And as that to another part of the body. And as that happens, it the those cancerous cells happens, it the those cancerous cells happens, it the those cancerous cells It's it's really an evolutionary process It's it's really an evolutionary process It's it's really an evolutionary process where those cancerous cells have where those cancerous cells have where those cancerous cells have acquired new genetics that are focused acquired new genetics that are focused acquired new genetics that are focused on their well-being. Those cells are on their well-being. Those cells are on their well-being. Those cells are dividing, they're growing out of control dividing, they're growing out of control dividing, they're growing out of control and they're taking the resources. and they're taking the resources. and they're taking the resources. They're they're growing at the They're they're growing at the They're they're growing at the expense of the normal coordination of expense of the normal coordination of expense of the normal coordination of the human body. And and that's the human body. And and that's the human body. And and that's really at its core what cancer really at its core what cancer really at its core what cancer is. It's a genetic disease where cells is. It's a genetic disease where cells is. It's a genetic disease where cells lose the normal lose the normal lose the normal regulation and are dividing out of regulation and are dividing out of regulation and are dividing out of control in various tissues. control in various tissues. control in various tissues. I can see the picture in my mind where I can see the picture in my mind where I can see the picture in my mind where otherwise healthy cell gets a mutation. otherwise healthy cell gets a mutation. otherwise healthy cell gets a mutation. We can talk about how mutations arise, We can talk about how mutations arise, We can talk about how mutations arise, but and then starts spitting off but and then starts spitting off but and then starts spitting off daughter cells as it's referred to. daughter cells as it's referred to. daughter cells as it's referred to. Why would the daughter cells inherit the Why would the daughter cells inherit the Why would the daughter cells inherit the mutation necessarily to then create more mutation necessarily to then create more mutation necessarily to then create more cells? Because that's the proliferation cells? Because that's the proliferation cells? Because that's the proliferation of the tumor. Certainly cells you of the tumor. Certainly cells you of the tumor. Certainly cells you propagate their DNA into their daughter propagate their DNA into their daughter propagate their DNA into their daughter cells, but um cells, but um cells, but um I could imagine a situation where could imagine a situation where could imagine a situation where every day some of our cells get a every day some of our cells get a every day some of our cells get a mutation, spit off a couple daughter mutation, spit off a couple daughter mutation, spit off a couple daughter cells and then those daughter cells are cells and then those daughter cells are cells and then those daughter cells are terminal as we say, right? And they are terminal as we say, right? And they are terminal as we say, right? And they don't create more cells. Is that don't create more cells. Is that don't create more cells. Is that happening all over the body every day? happening all over the body every day? happening all over the body every day? So, does this So, how is it that So, does this So, how is it that So, does this So, how is it that a the DNA that creates the further a the DNA that creates the further a the DNA that creates the further propagation gets passed from one propagation gets passed from one propagation gets passed from one cell to the next? I do think this is cell to the next? I do think this is cell to the next? I do think this is happening constantly. It's a process happening constantly. It's a process happening constantly. It's a process that every time that every time that every time a cell is around, especially as it's a cell is around, especially as it's a cell is around, especially as it's dividing, there is some imperfection in dividing, there is some imperfection in dividing, there is some imperfection in how the DNA the DNA has inside each of how the DNA the DNA has inside each of how the DNA the DNA has inside each of our cells. If that cell is going to our cells. If that cell is going to our cells. If that cell is going to replicate, the DNA has to replicate replicate, the DNA has to replicate replicate, the DNA has to replicate itself. So, you end up with two copies itself. So, you end up with two copies itself. So, you end up with two copies of DNA that should be the same, each one of DNA that should be the same, each one of DNA that should be the same, each one being passed on to the two daughter being passed on to the two daughter being passed on to the two daughter cells of that dividing cell. cells of that dividing cell. cells of that dividing cell. That process of DNA replication is That process of DNA replication is That process of DNA replication is imperfect. And if there's any kind of imperfect. And if there's any kind of imperfect. And if there's any kind of damage during that process, one of those damage during that process, one of those damage during that process, one of those two copies might end up different than two copies might end up different than two copies might end up different than the other one, in which case you end up the other one, in which case you end up the other one, in which case you end up with a mutation now in one daughter cell with a mutation now in one daughter cell with a mutation now in one daughter cell and not the other. and not the other. and not the other. If that is If that is If that is deleterious or if it's damaging, which deleterious or if it's damaging, which deleterious or if it's damaging, which probably most mutations are, those cells probably most mutations are, those cells probably most mutations are, those cells might start to die off. Okay, something might start to die off. Okay, something might start to die off. Okay, something got the DNA got messed up. Those cells got the DNA got messed up. Those cells got the DNA got messed up. Those cells that are carrying that DNA die. that are carrying that DNA die. that are carrying that DNA die. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they can't take up glucose. They &gt;&gt; Yeah, they can't take up glucose. They &gt;&gt; Yeah, they can't take up glucose. They can't They just can't do cell stuff. And can't They just can't do cell stuff. And can't They just can't do cell stuff. And there's a lot of control mechanisms in there's a lot of control mechanisms in there's a lot of control mechanisms in the cell that say something something's the cell that say something something's the cell that say something something's wrong, let's send a wrong, let's send a wrong, let's send a programmed cell death signal to that programmed cell death signal to that programmed cell death signal to that cell, and cells will kind of implode cell, and cells will kind of implode cell, and cells will kind of implode with various processes when with various processes when with various processes when something is wrong. And that's that something is wrong. And that's that something is wrong. And that's that happens most of the time. The problem is happens most of the time. The problem is happens most of the time. The problem is if that change all of a sudden if that change all of a sudden if that change all of a sudden starts to not be damaging, but to starts to not be damaging, but to starts to not be damaging, but to actually be a signal, okay, now the cell actually be a signal, okay, now the cell actually be a signal, okay, now the cell is growing more. It has some benefit is growing more. It has some benefit is growing more. It has some benefit that it's accumulated as a result of that it's accumulated as a result of that it's accumulated as a result of that mutation. Now that cell will start that mutation. Now that cell will start that mutation. Now that cell will start to divide more. to divide more. to divide more. And that cell that's carrying that first And that cell that's carrying that first And that cell that's carrying that first mutation might start dividing more. If mutation might start dividing more. If mutation might start dividing more. If both of its daughters now will pass on both of its daughters now will pass on both of its daughters now will pass on this mutation that's made it divide this mutation that's made it divide this mutation that's made it divide more. And if in subsequent rounds it more. And if in subsequent rounds it more. And if in subsequent rounds it gets a second hit, it that the gets a second hit, it that the gets a second hit, it that the combination may go from just cells that combination may go from just cells that combination may go from just cells that are dividing a little bit more to cells are dividing a little bit more to cells are dividing a little bit more to cells that take off and become full-blown that take off and become full-blown that take off and become full-blown cancer. Now, there's certain processes cancer. Now, there's certain processes cancer. Now, there's certain processes that will accelerate that. that will accelerate that. that will accelerate that. One was exposure to things that cause One was exposure to things that cause One was exposure to things that cause DNA damage, right? The major one is DNA damage, right? The major one is DNA damage, right? The major one is smoking. We say when smoking causes chemicals to We say when smoking causes chemicals to We say when smoking causes chemicals to go into your lungs, the lung cells go into your lungs, the lung cells go into your lungs, the lung cells get exposed to these chemicals get exposed to these chemicals get exposed to these chemicals that then cause higher amounts of DNA that then cause higher amounts of DNA that then cause higher amounts of DNA damage, more mutations. And just as you damage, more mutations. And just as you damage, more mutations. And just as you have more mutations at a higher have more mutations at a higher have more mutations at a higher frequency, you're more likely to frequency, you're more likely to frequency, you're more likely to accumulate this a set of mutations that accumulate this a set of mutations that accumulate this a set of mutations that will gradually go on to cause the will gradually go on to cause the will gradually go on to cause the generation of cancer. generation of cancer. generation of cancer. Another way that is that this process Another way that is that this process Another way that is that this process can be accelerated is that some people can be accelerated is that some people can be accelerated is that some people carry an underlying genetic carry an underlying genetic carry an underlying genetic predisposition to cancer. So, people predisposition to cancer. So, people predisposition to cancer. So, people will likely have heard of the BRCA or will likely have heard of the BRCA or will likely have heard of the BRCA or the BRCA genes which predispose to the BRCA genes which predispose to the BRCA genes which predispose to breast cancer and other types of cancer. breast cancer and other types of cancer. breast cancer and other types of cancer. There people start with one copy that's There people start with one copy that's There people start with one copy that's already setting them on a road to higher already setting them on a road to higher already setting them on a road to higher risk of mutations accumulating and the risk of mutations accumulating and the risk of mutations accumulating and the whole process whole process whole process happens with a higher frequency. And so, happens with a higher frequency. And so, happens with a higher frequency. And so, this march towards cancer cells is this march towards cancer cells is this march towards cancer cells is more likely to occur in people with that more likely to occur in people with that more likely to occur in people with that type of predisposition. How common is type of predisposition. How common is type of predisposition. How common is the BRCA mutation? Is it equally the BRCA mutation? Is it equally the BRCA mutation? Is it equally distributed in men and women? distributed in men and women? distributed in men and women? Um Yeah, what can you tell us and should Yeah, what can you tell us and should Yeah, what can you tell us and should everyone get tested for BRCA? And everyone get tested for BRCA? And everyone get tested for BRCA? And there's a lot of questions here. I'll there's a lot of questions here. I'll there's a lot of questions here. I'll ask them again one by one. ask them again one by one. ask them again one by one. And then of course we'll talk about And then of course we'll talk about And then of course we'll talk about things that could be protective not just things that could be protective not just things that could be protective not just but certainly avoiding smoking would be but certainly avoiding smoking would be but certainly avoiding smoking would be paramount. So, how common is BRCA? paramount. So, how common is BRCA? paramount. So, how common is BRCA? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's in terms of &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's in terms of &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's in terms of mutagens. Like the big ones are smoking, mutagens. Like the big ones are smoking, mutagens. Like the big ones are smoking, sun exposure for melanoma. I know sun exposure for melanoma. I know sun exposure for melanoma. I know there are another balancing features of there are another balancing features of there are another balancing features of sun exposure sun exposure sun exposure &gt;&gt; Yeah, we can talk about that. But but &gt;&gt; Yeah, we can talk about that. But but &gt;&gt; Yeah, we can talk about that. But but clearly UV is a risk factor for clearly UV is a risk factor for clearly UV is a risk factor for DNA damage in the skin. I mean I'm DNA damage in the skin. I mean I'm DNA damage in the skin. I mean I'm perfectly happy going on record. My the perfectly happy going on record. My the perfectly happy going on record. My the things I've said around sunlight have things I've said around sunlight have things I've said around sunlight have been contorted so many different ways been contorted so many different ways been contorted so many different ways it's like a pretzel twist now. No, it's like a pretzel twist now. No, it's like a pretzel twist now. No, it's more like one of those balloon animals more like one of those balloon animals more like one of those balloon animals at a party but it's not it's a mess. at a party but it's not it's a mess. at a party but it's not it's a mess. The too much UV is bad. The too much UV is bad. The too much UV is bad. For for skin cells it's just bad. You For for skin cells it's just bad. You For for skin cells it's just bad. You need some but too much is bad. Long need some but too much is bad. Long need some but too much is bad. Long wavelength light is great for and wavelength light is great for and wavelength light is great for and therein lies the challenge. But yeah, therein lies the challenge. But yeah, therein lies the challenge. But yeah, low sunlight but you don't want low sunlight but you don't want low sunlight but you don't want excessive UV. Don't get avoid getting excessive UV. Don't get avoid getting excessive UV. Don't get avoid getting sunburned folks. Yeah. Thank you. So sunburned folks. Yeah. Thank you. So sunburned folks. Yeah. Thank you. So yeah, the bracha mutation. I have a yeah, the bracha mutation. I have a yeah, the bracha mutation. I have a personal relationship to this cuz I lost personal relationship to this cuz I lost personal relationship to this cuz I lost both my graduate advisor and my both my graduate advisor and my both my graduate advisor and my post-doctoral advisor to post-doctoral advisor to post-doctoral advisor to bracha mutation related cancers 50 and bracha mutation related cancers 50 and bracha mutation related cancers 50 and you know just a little bit older than 60 you know just a little bit older than 60 you know just a little bit older than 60 and the other and you know, brutal and the other and you know, brutal and the other and you know, brutal especially when you especially when you especially when you know, one of them I know they're you know, one of them I know they're you know, one of them I know they're kids and you know, it's kids and you know, it's kids and you know, it's just for young people getting cancer and just for young people getting cancer and just for young people getting cancer and I know they're childhood cancers but I know they're childhood cancers but I know they're childhood cancers but bracha seems pretty common. I don't know bracha seems pretty common. I don't know bracha seems pretty common. I don't know the numbers off the top of my head. I the numbers off the top of my head. I the numbers off the top of my head. I mean they're not the major like mean they're not the major like mean they're not the major like numerical causes of numerical causes of numerical causes of cancer in the scheme of cancers that cancer in the scheme of cancers that cancer in the scheme of cancers that develops there's it's develops there's it's develops there's it's a it's a minority. It's a it's a it's a minority. It's a it's a it's a minority. It's a relatively small set number of the full relatively small set number of the full relatively small set number of the full set of cancers. The problem is if you set of cancers. The problem is if you set of cancers. The problem is if you inherit a bracha mutation inherit a bracha mutation inherit a bracha mutation as an individual you have a very high as an individual you have a very high as an individual you have a very high risk of developing cancer. So it as an risk of developing cancer. So it as an risk of developing cancer. So it as an individual your risk goes way up and individual your risk goes way up and individual your risk goes way up and of certain types of cancer in of certain types of cancer in of certain types of cancer in particular. And we can all get tested particular. And we can all get tested particular. And we can all get tested for it now pretty cheaply, right? Yeah. for it now pretty cheaply, right? Yeah. for it now pretty cheaply, right? Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's certainly recommended if &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's certainly recommended if &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's certainly recommended if there's a family history of cancer for there's a family history of cancer for there's a family history of cancer for bracha mutations and a bracha mutations and a bracha mutations and a couple of other ones but you're right. couple of other ones but you're right. couple of other ones but you're right. It's the tests are available. It's the tests are available. It's the tests are available. And you asked about men and women. And you asked about men and women. And you asked about men and women. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. It actually was It actually was It actually was men were some of the ways that those men were some of the ways that those men were some of the ways that those bracha genes were identified because bracha genes were identified because bracha genes were identified because it's so rare for men to develop breast it's so rare for men to develop breast it's so rare for men to develop breast cancer. The ones who did develop it cancer. The ones who did develop it cancer. The ones who did develop it there was a thought well, maybe there's there was a thought well, maybe there's there was a thought well, maybe there's an underlying genetic predisposition and an underlying genetic predisposition and an underlying genetic predisposition and that helped identify those genes. that helped identify those genes. that helped identify those genes. Interesting. Everyone get tested for bracha if you Everyone get tested for bracha if you Everyone get tested for bracha if you know, because there are lifestyle know, because there are lifestyle know, because there are lifestyle factors that can reduce your cancer factors that can reduce your cancer factors that can reduce your cancer risk. I'd like to talk about mutagens. risk. I'd like to talk about mutagens. risk. I'd like to talk about mutagens. Um smoking bad. smoking bad. smoking bad. I'll go on record saying vaping bad. I'll go on record saying vaping bad. I'll go on record saying vaping bad. Perhaps not as bad as smoking but still Perhaps not as bad as smoking but still Perhaps not as bad as smoking but still way worse than not vaping. way worse than not vaping. way worse than not vaping. The the to sort of protect vaping is The the to sort of protect vaping is The the to sort of protect vaping is like beyond me, but like beyond me, but like beyond me, but um okay, uh teach their own. Um okay, uh teach their own. Um okay, uh teach their own. Um environmental uh sort of and workplace environmental uh sort of and workplace environmental uh sort of and workplace hazards, you know, like known mutagens. hazards, you know, like known mutagens. hazards, you know, like known mutagens. You work in a laboratory, you're working You work in a laboratory, you're working You work in a laboratory, you're working with mutagens, right? You got you you're with mutagens, right? You got you you're with mutagens, right? You got you you're working with things that literally pull working with things that literally pull working with things that literally pull DNA apart. This always worried me DNA apart. This always worried me DNA apart. This always worried me working in a laboratory. There are a lot working in a laboratory. There are a lot working in a laboratory. There are a lot of carcinogenic chemicals in a of carcinogenic chemicals in a of carcinogenic chemicals in a laboratory. &gt;&gt; For good reason, yeah. &gt;&gt; For good reason, yeah. &gt;&gt; For good reason, yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. This is the yeah. We're we're &gt;&gt; Right. This is the yeah. We're we're &gt;&gt; Right. This is the yeah. We're we're just trying to study cancer, but we're just trying to study cancer, but we're just trying to study cancer, but we're certainly working around a lot of things certainly working around a lot of things certainly working around a lot of things that could cause cancer. Yeah. that could cause cancer. Yeah. that could cause cancer. Yeah. Chemicals, Mhm. radiation. Mhm. Chemicals, Mhm. radiation. Mhm. Chemicals, Mhm. radiation. Mhm. Uh yeah. I don't know if you about you, Uh yeah. I don't know if you about you, Uh yeah. I don't know if you about you, I did a lot of a lot of experiments I did a lot of a lot of experiments I did a lot of a lot of experiments radio-labeling cells. Yeah. I mean, we radio-labeling cells. Yeah. I mean, we radio-labeling cells. Yeah. I mean, we well, fortunately we worked with well, fortunately we worked with well, fortunately we worked with uh you know, radio-tagged amino acids uh you know, radio-tagged amino acids uh you know, radio-tagged amino acids with radiation that was with radiation that was with radiation that was we were told, and I do believe was not we were told, and I do believe was not we were told, and I do believe was not as dangerous as some of the not as dangerous as some of the not as dangerous as some of the others, but yeah, I mean, that so others, but yeah, I mean, that so others, but yeah, I mean, that so chemical exposures are a big one. chemical exposures are a big one. chemical exposures are a big one. &gt;&gt; Yep. And so those labels on paints &gt;&gt; Yep. And so those labels on paints &gt;&gt; Yep. And so those labels on paints and thinners and uh stuff in the garage, and thinners and uh stuff in the garage, and thinners and uh stuff in the garage, that's real. Those are that's a real that's real. Those are that's a real that's real. Those are that's a real thing. They mutate cells. And there's a thing. They mutate cells. And there's a thing. They mutate cells. And there's a you know, there's some spectrum of you know, there's some spectrum of you know, there's some spectrum of stronger and less strong ones and stronger and less strong ones and stronger and less strong ones and I think oftentimes we're operating and I think oftentimes we're operating and I think oftentimes we're operating in an absence of great data, but I you in an absence of great data, but I you in an absence of great data, but I you know, I think there's a lot of things know, I think there's a lot of things know, I think there's a lot of things are implicated as potential mutagens. are implicated as potential mutagens. are implicated as potential mutagens. Pesticides. Yeah, I mean, You look at Pesticides. Yeah, I mean, You look at Pesticides. Yeah, I mean, You look at cancer rates in um rural areas near cancer rates in um rural areas near cancer rates in um rural areas near where you know, crops are dusted with where you know, crops are dusted with where you know, crops are dusted with pesticides and we've had Shanna Swan pesticides and we've had Shanna Swan pesticides and we've had Shanna Swan came on here as like listen, you know, came on here as like listen, you know, came on here as like listen, you know, the cancer risks, the you know, the cancer risks, the you know, the cancer risks, the you know, endocrine disruptor risks. We think of endocrine disruptor risks. We think of endocrine disruptor risks. We think of as like big cities as like big cities as like big cities as dirty and dangerous, and they are for as dirty and dangerous, and they are for as dirty and dangerous, and they are for certain reasons, but she said, if you certain reasons, but she said, if you certain reasons, but she said, if you really see the spikes in uh really see the spikes in uh really see the spikes in uh in these cancers uh related to in these cancers uh related to in these cancers uh related to environmental factors, it's environmental factors, it's environmental factors, it's less so bus exhaust than it is less so bus exhaust than it is less so bus exhaust than it is pesticides. I mean, it is not evenly or pesticides. I mean, it is not evenly or pesticides. I mean, it is not evenly or fairly distributed. There's some people fairly distributed. There's some people fairly distributed. There's some people get exposed way more to these things. get exposed way more to these things. get exposed way more to these things. And we haven't studied them enough. We And we haven't studied them enough. We And we haven't studied them enough. We we need way more study to really be able we need way more study to really be able we need way more study to really be able to answer, okay, the And people to answer, okay, the And people to answer, okay, the And people shouldn't be left I mean, this is my shouldn't be left I mean, this is my shouldn't be left I mean, this is my This is me just speaking as an This is me just speaking as an This is me just speaking as an It's kind of amazing to me how much It's kind of amazing to me how much It's kind of amazing to me how much we're left on our own to be figuring out we're left on our own to be figuring out we're left on our own to be figuring out what the risk of individual products is. what the risk of individual products is. what the risk of individual products is. And I think it's a place where we should I think it's a place where we should I think it's a place where we should be investing a lot more to get clarity be investing a lot more to get clarity be investing a lot more to get clarity on where the real risks are. on where the real risks are. on where the real risks are. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The reason I started taking it, and the reason I started taking it, and the reason I started taking it, and the reason I still take it, is because AG1 reason I still take it, is because AG1 reason I still take it, is because AG1 is to my knowledge the highest quality is to my knowledge the highest quality is to my knowledge the highest quality and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every day. But I'm often asked if you could day. But I'm often asked if you could day. But I'm often asked if you could take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is always AG1, because it has just been oh always AG1, because it has just been oh always AG1, because it has just been oh so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, that's drinkag1 with the numeral that's drinkag1 with the numeral that's drinkag1 with the numeral one.com/huberman to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. I get x-rays at the subscription. I get x-rays at the subscription. I get x-rays at the dentist now and again, Yeah. but I dentist now and again, Yeah. but I dentist now and again, Yeah. but I prefer not to get them. X-rays cause prefer not to get them. X-rays cause prefer not to get them. X-rays cause mutations. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Again, there's a trade-off and the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Again, there's a trade-off and the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Again, there's a trade-off and the dose and I, you know, when you need an dose and I, you know, when you need an dose and I, you know, when you need an x-ray, you need an x-ray, but I wouldn't x-ray, you need an x-ray, but I wouldn't x-ray, you need an x-ray, but I wouldn't do them for fun. Right. I mean, I have do them for fun. Right. I mean, I have do them for fun. Right. I mean, I have colleagues who prefer to do the slower colleagues who prefer to do the slower colleagues who prefer to do the slower manual pat down at the airport manual pat down at the airport manual pat down at the airport to going through the scanner. It's a low to going through the scanner. It's a low to going through the scanner. It's a low level of radiation is what they tell me, level of radiation is what they tell me, level of radiation is what they tell me, but if you're traveling a lot, you're but if you're traveling a lot, you're but if you're traveling a lot, you're getting multiple low-level exposures. getting multiple low-level exposures. getting multiple low-level exposures. And we know pilots, and this is for And we know pilots, and this is for And we know pilots, and this is for other reasons, cuz they're you know, you other reasons, cuz they're you know, you other reasons, cuz they're you know, you can't tell us, but atmospherically can't tell us, but atmospherically can't tell us, but atmospherically they're exposed to more radiation. they're exposed to more radiation. they're exposed to more radiation. Cancer rates are higher in pilots. Now, Cancer rates are higher in pilots. Now, Cancer rates are higher in pilots. Now, they're sitting a lot, too. Prostate they're sitting a lot, too. Prostate they're sitting a lot, too. Prostate cancer Okay, there's a bunch of things cancer Okay, there's a bunch of things cancer Okay, there's a bunch of things there, but there, but there, but do you yourself do you yourself do you yourself avoid the scanner at the airport? avoid the scanner at the airport? avoid the scanner at the airport? Honestly, I do, but I can't say that Honestly, I do, but I can't say that Honestly, I do, but I can't say that there's data for that. I feel the same there's data for that. I feel the same there's data for that. I feel the same way as you. Like, if I can avoid it, I way as you. Like, if I can avoid it, I way as you. Like, if I can avoid it, I try to minimize. try to minimize. try to minimize. But I that's not based on some inside But I that's not based on some inside But I that's not based on some inside knowledge I have, but I have the same knowledge I have, but I have the same knowledge I have, but I have the same bias of bias of bias of &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah. less seems better. Yeah. I &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah. less seems better. Yeah. I &gt;&gt; Sure. Yeah. less seems better. Yeah. I mean, well, I'm not out to get the mean, well, I'm not out to get the mean, well, I'm not out to get the scanner industry. I just I think it's scanner industry. I just I think it's scanner industry. I just I think it's useful for people to hear that you useful for people to hear that you useful for people to hear that you could that one can have no formal data, could that one can have no formal data, could that one can have no formal data, but an understanding of mechanism that but an understanding of mechanism that but an understanding of mechanism that leads them to hedge. leads them to hedge. leads them to hedge. It's good to know. It's good to know. It's good to know. Are there any Are there any Are there any mutagens and mutagens and mutagens and well, is a carcinogen and a mutagen the well, is a carcinogen and a mutagen the well, is a carcinogen and a mutagen the same thing? So, they're closely same thing? So, they're closely same thing? So, they're closely related. Mutagen, I think, means that related. Mutagen, I think, means that related. Mutagen, I think, means that you're mutating that you're changing the you're mutating that you're changing the you're mutating that you're changing the DNA in the cell. DNA in the cell. DNA in the cell. So, that's the idea that So, that's the idea that So, that's the idea that those mutations may or may not be linked those mutations may or may not be linked those mutations may or may not be linked to cancer, but by virtue of the fact to cancer, but by virtue of the fact to cancer, but by virtue of the fact that you're causing more mutations, that you're causing more mutations, that you're causing more mutations, almost inevitably, you're also almost inevitably, you're also almost inevitably, you're also increasing the risk of cancer. And increasing the risk of cancer. And increasing the risk of cancer. And carcinogens are things that increase the carcinogens are things that increase the carcinogens are things that increase the risk of rate of cancer. risk of rate of cancer. risk of rate of cancer. I love barbecued meat. I don't like I love barbecued meat. I don't like I love barbecued meat. I don't like barbecue sauce, cuz it's sweet, but I barbecue sauce, cuz it's sweet, but I barbecue sauce, cuz it's sweet, but I love I like meat with a char. love I like meat with a char. love I like meat with a char. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Is the char bad? I think so. I mean, I &gt;&gt; Is the char bad? I think so. I mean, I &gt;&gt; Is the char bad? I think so. I mean, I like it, too, but yeah, like it, too, but yeah, like it, too, but yeah, yeah. Again, these are balancing yeah. Again, these are balancing yeah. Again, these are balancing decisions in life, But yes, there decisions in life, But yes, there decisions in life, But yes, there some there is I mean meat in there some there is I mean meat in there some there is I mean meat in general has been implicated as a general has been implicated as a general has been implicated as a potential carcinogen especially in potential carcinogen especially in potential carcinogen especially in colorectal cancer. There's some data colorectal cancer. There's some data colorectal cancer. There's some data around that. Mhm. Yeah, my read of those around that. Mhm. Yeah, my read of those around that. Mhm. Yeah, my read of those data, not the charred data, but the data, not the charred data, but the data, not the charred data, but the meat data is it's tricky. meat data is it's tricky. meat data is it's tricky. Um from my this is just my standpoint. I from my this is just my standpoint. I from my this is just my standpoint. I want to make sure I'm I put, you know, want to make sure I'm I put, you know, want to make sure I'm I put, you know, brackets around this that this is my brackets around this that this is my brackets around this that this is my under read of the literature is that under read of the literature is that under read of the literature is that many of the studies that looked at many of the studies that looked at many of the studies that looked at meat rich red meat rich diets versus meat rich red meat rich diets versus meat rich red meat rich diets versus plant-based diets, the problem is a lot plant-based diets, the problem is a lot plant-based diets, the problem is a lot times the red meat and rich diets had a times the red meat and rich diets had a times the red meat and rich diets had a bunch of other things in them. Like bunch of other things in them. Like bunch of other things in them. Like sourcing wasn't considered. There was sourcing wasn't considered. There was sourcing wasn't considered. There was also a lot of also a lot of also a lot of starches. Like starches. Like starches. Like cuz nowadays you find people who seem to cuz nowadays you find people who seem to cuz nowadays you find people who seem to at least feel better. at least feel better. at least feel better. Who knows about the longevity aspect, Who knows about the longevity aspect, Who knows about the longevity aspect, but feel better eating red meat, fruits, but feel better eating red meat, fruits, but feel better eating red meat, fruits, and vegetables at limited amounts of and vegetables at limited amounts of and vegetables at limited amounts of starches versus So, I feel like the starches versus So, I feel like the starches versus So, I feel like the nutrition studies are a mess. They're nutrition studies are a mess. They're nutrition studies are a mess. They're kind of a disaster. I certainly good kind of a disaster. I certainly good kind of a disaster. I certainly good don't have clarity on this. Yeah. Yeah, don't have clarity on this. Yeah. Yeah, don't have clarity on this. Yeah. Yeah, and then and it seems like it changes and then and it seems like it changes and then and it seems like it changes the direction. I think some things we the direction. I think some things we the direction. I think some things we have pretty good common sense intuition have pretty good common sense intuition have pretty good common sense intuition about fiber. Ultra-processed foods are about fiber. Ultra-processed foods are about fiber. Ultra-processed foods are probably bad. Like you know, probably bad. Like you know, probably bad. Like you know, but I think the balance of exactly but I think the balance of exactly but I think the balance of exactly what whole foods we're eating probably what whole foods we're eating probably what whole foods we're eating probably still needs to be worked out. How do you still needs to be worked out. How do you still needs to be worked out. How do you think about the data think about the data think about the data on like for instance food dyes? It's on like for instance food dyes? It's on like for instance food dyes? It's very timely. very timely. very timely. Where a certain food dye at a very Where a certain food dye at a very Where a certain food dye at a very high concentration in laboratory very high concentration in laboratory very high concentration in laboratory animals creates a significantly higher animals creates a significantly higher animals creates a significantly higher incidence of tumors and cancers in incidence of tumors and cancers in incidence of tumors and cancers in those animals. those animals. those animals. But then the amount of food dye that's But then the amount of food dye that's But then the amount of food dye that's in the human food is a tiny in the human food is a tiny in the human food is a tiny fraction of that. fraction of that. fraction of that. I'm not trying to get political here. I I'm not trying to get political here. I I'm not trying to get political here. I just think as a framework for people to just think as a framework for people to just think as a framework for people to think about there are many carcinogens think about there are many carcinogens think about there are many carcinogens I'm sure right in this environment. I I'm sure right in this environment. I I'm sure right in this environment. I don't doubt that the lacquer on this don't doubt that the lacquer on this don't doubt that the lacquer on this table, in fact if that's even what they table, in fact if that's even what they table, in fact if that's even what they used, um used, um used, um if ingested could cause could cause if ingested could cause could cause if ingested could cause could cause cancer. I don't doubt I don't doubt cancer. I don't doubt I don't doubt cancer. I don't doubt I don't doubt that, right? But I don't know that in that, right? But I don't know that in that, right? But I don't know that in its in its form here being near it for its in its form here being near it for its in its form here being near it for many hours a day does that. I doubt it. many hours a day does that. I doubt it. many hours a day does that. I doubt it. We're not inhaling the table. This is We're not inhaling the table. This is We're not inhaling the table. This is what I mean by this level of what I mean by this level of what I mean by this level of confusion. I think we all live with this confusion. I think we all live with this confusion. I think we all live with this background confusion of things some background confusion of things some background confusion of things some study has been published in mice at study has been published in mice at study has been published in mice at whole high concentrations exposure whole high concentrations exposure whole high concentrations exposure doesn't mean anything in our lives. doesn't mean anything in our lives. doesn't mean anything in our lives. What's the relative risk? So that's why What's the relative risk? So that's why What's the relative risk? So that's why I start with smoking, sunlight and then I start with smoking, sunlight and then I start with smoking, sunlight and then say there's a tail and I don't think we say there's a tail and I don't think we say there's a tail and I don't think we know fully what that distribution is know fully what that distribution is know fully what that distribution is yet. I'm sure there are some combination yet. I'm sure there are some combination yet. I'm sure there are some combination of things that are increasing our risk of things that are increasing our risk of things that are increasing our risk of cancer. We don't really know how to of cancer. We don't really know how to of cancer. We don't really know how to weigh duration and amount of exposure. And duration and amount of exposure. And duration and amount of exposure. And this is why I think it's really scary to this is why I think it's really scary to this is why I think it's really scary to people. People don't know people. People don't know people. People don't know you know they know smokers who you know they know smokers who you know they know smokers who don't get lung cancer. don't get lung cancer. don't get lung cancer. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, and non-smokers who do. And non-smokers and non-smokers who do. And non-smokers and non-smokers who do. And non-smokers who do. And so I think people go well who do. And so I think people go well who do. And so I think people go well like what they actually has caused I like what they actually has caused I like what they actually has caused I believe a lot of believe a lot of believe a lot of damage in the faith in medicine damage in the faith in medicine damage in the faith in medicine unfortunately because the messaging is unfortunately because the messaging is unfortunately because the messaging is all is mixed up. Yeah, I think that nowadays is mixed up. Yeah, I think that nowadays is mixed up. Yeah, I think that nowadays people are trying to do what they can to people are trying to do what they can to people are trying to do what they can to protect themselves. But people still get protect themselves. But people still get protect themselves. But people still get cancer. You can do everything right and cancer. You can do everything right and cancer. You can do everything right and still get cancer. Is that still get cancer. Is that still get cancer. Is that even if you don't have a bracha even if you don't have a bracha even if you don't have a bracha mutation? Absolutely. I mean absolutely. mutation? Absolutely. I mean absolutely. mutation? Absolutely. I mean absolutely. You know I think You know I think You know I think the last thing you ever want to do is the last thing you ever want to do is the last thing you ever want to do is like attribute someone's actions to attribute someone's actions to attribute someone's actions to cancer. I mean cancer. I mean cancer. I mean it is it is a probabilistic disease it is it is a probabilistic disease it is it is a probabilistic disease where some set of mutations occur that where some set of mutations occur that where some set of mutations occur that cause a really devastating disease. And cause a really devastating disease. And cause a really devastating disease. And so I so I so I Yeah, I mean I we don't know the answers Yeah, I mean I we don't know the answers Yeah, I mean I we don't know the answers and I think we have to be humble about and I think we have to be humble about and I think we have to be humble about that. Now what I think we can also talk Now what I think we can also talk Now what I think we can also talk about is well like how do we handle about is well like how do we handle about is well like how do we handle how do we treat cancer when it comes up how do we treat cancer when it comes up how do we treat cancer when it comes up and this is where these two and this is where these two and this is where these two conversations that we've been having conversations that we've been having conversations that we've been having really come together of talking about really come together of talking about really come together of talking about the immune system. We went through a lot the immune system. We went through a lot the immune system. We went through a lot of I mean we actually we went through a lot I mean we actually we went through a lot I mean we actually we went through a lot of sort of detailed mechanism I'm about of sort of detailed mechanism I'm about of sort of detailed mechanism I'm about the different cell constituents of our the different cell constituents of our the different cell constituents of our immune system. immune system. immune system. I will tell you that when I went to I will tell you that when I went to I will tell you that when I went to medical school, medical school, medical school, which wasn't that long ago. I graduated which wasn't that long ago. I graduated which wasn't that long ago. I graduated in 2010, the 10. in 2010, the 10. in 2010, the 10. The dogma was don't waste time thinking The dogma was don't waste time thinking The dogma was don't waste time thinking about cancer immunology. about cancer immunology. about cancer immunology. Cancer immunology is a field that's Cancer immunology is a field that's Cancer immunology is a field that's going nowhere. I mean I think going nowhere. I mean I think going nowhere. I mean I think I was in Boston and I think that was a I was in Boston and I think that was a I was in Boston and I think that was a maybe there was some local bias in that maybe there was some local bias in that maybe there was some local bias in that direction, but this was not the direction, but this was not the direction, but this was not the mainstream of thinking about how we mainstream of thinking about how we mainstream of thinking about how we would treat cancer. would treat cancer. would treat cancer. At that point that the way the cancer At that point that the way the cancer At that point that the way the cancer was being treated was being treated was being treated was chemotherapy, which you know is chemotherapy, which you know is chemotherapy, which you know is something that's been around for decades something that's been around for decades something that's been around for decades and it's basically give toxins to the and it's basically give toxins to the and it's basically give toxins to the body that will be body that will be body that will be more toxic to the cancer cells than to more toxic to the cancer cells than to more toxic to the cancer cells than to the healthy cells and as people to the healthy cells and as people to the healthy cells and as people to endure all the side effects endure all the side effects endure all the side effects because they have to get rid of the because they have to get rid of the because they have to get rid of the cancer cells and that's still the cancer cells and that's still the cancer cells and that's still the mainstay of cancer treatment. We mainstay of cancer treatment. We mainstay of cancer treatment. We all want to do better than that. It's all want to do better than that. It's all want to do better than that. It's very unpleasant. Very very unpleasant. very unpleasant. Very very unpleasant. very unpleasant. Very very unpleasant. Unpleasant and worse. I mean I mean Unpleasant and worse. I mean I mean Unpleasant and worse. I mean I mean people endure hard, you know, it's people endure hard, you know, it's people endure hard, you know, it's we put we put people through we put we put people through we put we put people through horrific things cuz it's the best we can horrific things cuz it's the best we can horrific things cuz it's the best we can do. And then there was a wave of thinking, And then there was a wave of thinking, And then there was a wave of thinking, okay, well, okay, well, okay, well, let's try to make drugs that are let's try to make drugs that are let's try to make drugs that are targeted to the mutations that we talked targeted to the mutations that we talked targeted to the mutations that we talked about and that was that was the hot about and that was that was the hot about and that was that was the hot thing. That was the promising avenue thing. That was the promising avenue thing. That was the promising avenue when I was in medical school of like, when I was in medical school of like, when I was in medical school of like, okay, now we we've really measured that okay, now we we've really measured that okay, now we we've really measured that these are mutations that accumulate these are mutations that accumulate these are mutations that accumulate inside of cancer cells. This is what's inside of cancer cells. This is what's inside of cancer cells. This is what's causing cancer. Let's let's make drugs causing cancer. Let's let's make drugs causing cancer. Let's let's make drugs that go after those things and that go after those things and that go after those things and turned out that was turned out that was turned out that was although a lot of good has come from although a lot of good has come from although a lot of good has come from that, people have extended lives, that, people have extended lives, that, people have extended lives, cancer has a way of working around that. cancer has a way of working around that. cancer has a way of working around that. So these are cell cycle inhibitors? So these are cell cycle inhibitors? So these are cell cycle inhibitors? Signaling thing various mutations affect this thing various mutations affect this thing various mutations affect this these growth properties of cells and these growth properties of cells and these growth properties of cells and there's targeted drugs that have been there's targeted drugs that have been there's targeted drugs that have been designed to go after some of those designed to go after some of those designed to go after some of those pathways that are making the cells pathways that are making the cells pathways that are making the cells divide out of control. Yeah. divide out of control. Yeah. divide out of control. Yeah. I think that benefit has come, but I think that benefit has come, but I think that benefit has come, but cancer ways of mutating around that and cancer ways of mutating around that and cancer ways of mutating around that and could become developing resistance, the could become developing resistance, the could become developing resistance, the same way we talked about resistance in same way we talked about resistance in same way we talked about resistance in bacteria to antibiotics if they're bacteria to antibiotics if they're bacteria to antibiotics if they're exposed you could cancer cells are can exposed you could cancer cells are can exposed you could cancer cells are can evolve quickly and can become resistant evolve quickly and can become resistant evolve quickly and can become resistant to these targeted modifications. to these targeted modifications. to these targeted modifications. What has emerged as a whole new way of What has emerged as a whole new way of What has emerged as a whole new way of thinking about going after cancer is thinking about going after cancer is thinking about going after cancer is using the power of the immune system using the power of the immune system using the power of the immune system that we talked about at the beginning that we talked about at the beginning that we talked about at the beginning and redirecting that against cancer and redirecting that against cancer and redirecting that against cancer targets. This has changed how we think about This has changed how we think about This has changed how we think about cancer treatment. It's the hope is that cancer treatment. It's the hope is that cancer treatment. It's the hope is that all of we taught we talked all of us all of we taught we talked all of us all of we taught we talked all of us have this immune system that goes have this immune system that goes have this immune system that goes through every organ in our body. It through every organ in our body. It through every organ in our body. It circulates. We have white blood cells circulates. We have white blood cells circulates. We have white blood cells that are constantly going around and that are constantly going around and that are constantly going around and looking for things that shouldn't be looking for things that shouldn't be looking for things that shouldn't be there. Can we unleash that immune system Can we unleash that immune system Can we unleash that immune system against cancer? against cancer? against cancer? And the hope would be that the cells And the hope would be that the cells And the hope would be that the cells that our immune system we talked about that our immune system we talked about that our immune system we talked about how they're really exquisitely evolved how they're really exquisitely evolved how they're really exquisitely evolved to make a determination of this is a to make a determination of this is a to make a determination of this is a healthy cell, this is not a healthy cell, this is not a healthy cell, this is not a healthy cell. This this cell should be here, cell. This this cell should be here, cell. This this cell should be here, this should not. If we could get that this should not. If we could get that this should not. If we could get that level of precision where we could have a level of precision where we could have a level of precision where we could have a durable immune response that gets rid of durable immune response that gets rid of durable immune response that gets rid of the cancer cells, but leaves the healthy the cancer cells, but leaves the healthy the cancer cells, but leaves the healthy cells intact, that is cells intact, that is cells intact, that is what we want. what we want. what we want. Now, that is not science fiction and has is now is not science fiction and has is now is not science fiction and has is now approved and used to treat a number of approved and used to treat a number of approved and used to treat a number of different cancers. different cancers. different cancers. The first place where that where this The first place where that where this The first place where that where this happened was happened was happened was in a class of medicines called in a class of medicines called in a class of medicines called checkpoint inhibitors. checkpoint inhibitors. checkpoint inhibitors. Um they are immunotherapy drugs. Um they are immunotherapy drugs. Um they are immunotherapy drugs. Uh a lot of a lot of people will have Uh a lot of a lot of people will have Uh a lot of a lot of people will have heard of these things. PD-1, CTLA-4 are heard of these things. PD-1, CTLA-4 are heard of these things. PD-1, CTLA-4 are some targets where there are drugs that some targets where there are drugs that some targets where there are drugs that get infused that hit these things that get infused that hit these things that get infused that hit these things that are on the surface of T cells. And they are on the surface of T cells. And they are on the surface of T cells. And they actually are natural brakes to the T actually are natural brakes to the T actually are natural brakes to the T cells. T cells might be in our body cells. T cells might be in our body cells. T cells might be in our body there, but turned off or not turned on there, but turned off or not turned on there, but turned off or not turned on enough to be strong enough against enough to be strong enough against enough to be strong enough against cancer. And for certain types of cancer, cancer. And for certain types of cancer, cancer. And for certain types of cancer, it's been it's been it's been absolutely miraculous that if you make a absolutely miraculous that if you make a absolutely miraculous that if you make a drug that hits the break on the on the T drug that hits the break on the on the T drug that hits the break on the on the T cells, the T cells go stronger and they cells, the T cells go stronger and they cells, the T cells go stronger and they can be unleashed against cancer just by can be unleashed against cancer just by can be unleashed against cancer just by taking the brakes off of them. What taking the brakes off of them. What taking the brakes off of them. What sorts of cancers has it been successful sorts of cancers has it been successful sorts of cancers has it been successful for? &gt;&gt; child for this has been melanoma. Mhm. &gt;&gt; child for this has been melanoma. Mhm. &gt;&gt; child for this has been melanoma. Mhm. One of the big success cases was One of the big success cases was One of the big success cases was Jimmy Carter who had a melanoma, which Jimmy Carter who had a melanoma, which Jimmy Carter who had a melanoma, which is a skin cell aggressive skin cancer is a skin cell aggressive skin cancer is a skin cell aggressive skin cancer that had already gone to his brain, that had already gone to his brain, that had already gone to his brain, which was thought of as a death which was thought of as a death which was thought of as a death sentence. And he got treated with sentence. And he got treated with sentence. And he got treated with checkpoint inhibitors and checkpoint inhibitors and checkpoint inhibitors and basically was cured. basically was cured. basically was cured. Amazing. Um and so, you know, there was Amazing. Um and so, you know, there was Amazing. Um and so, you know, there was they saw these tumors just shrink away they saw these tumors just shrink away they saw these tumors just shrink away and not just him, but in a in a and not just him, but in a in a and not just him, but in a in a large fraction of melanoma patients large fraction of melanoma patients large fraction of melanoma patients now respond to these. now respond to these. now respond to these. And so, that has changed how And so, that has changed how And so, that has changed how melanoma is treated. It's in other melanoma is treated. It's in other melanoma is treated. It's in other cancers to varying degrees. It's cuz some types to varying degrees. It's cuz some types to varying degrees. It's cuz some types of cancers can respond to this. of cancers can respond to this. of cancers can respond to this. That's taking the a drug that unleashes That's taking the a drug that unleashes That's taking the a drug that unleashes the T cells that are already in our the T cells that are already in our the T cells that are already in our body. The focus of my research is, well, The focus of my research is, well, The focus of my research is, well, I First thing I said was we're living in First thing I said was we're living in First thing I said was we're living in this amazing moment of biology where we this amazing moment of biology where we this amazing moment of biology where we can we can do things to cells in our can we can do things to cells in our can we can do things to cells in our body that body that body that with incredible precision and with incredible precision and with incredible precision and we're often just limited by our and we're often just limited by our and we're often just limited by our imagination. And what we can see now is that we don't And what we can see now is that we don't And what we can see now is that we don't actually have to just be limited to the actually have to just be limited to the actually have to just be limited to the cells that the T cells that are cells that the T cells that are cells that the T cells that are naturally in our body that already have naturally in our body that already have naturally in our body that already have this random distribution of sensors. We this random distribution of sensors. We this random distribution of sensors. We can actually genetically can actually genetically can actually genetically make a one of these sensors for T make a one of these sensors for T make a one of these sensors for T cells and put it into T cells. We can cells and put it into T cells. We can cells and put it into T cells. We can put in a put a gene that encodes put in a put a gene that encodes put in a put a gene that encodes something on the surface of T cells something on the surface of T cells something on the surface of T cells that will make them programmed to search that will make them programmed to search that will make them programmed to search and destroy for cancer cells. and destroy for cancer cells. and destroy for cancer cells. Now, this is this is largely known as this is this is largely known as this is this is largely known as chimeric antigen receptor T cells. chimeric antigen receptor T cells. chimeric antigen receptor T cells. That's a long term. That's a long term. That's a long term. They're known for short as CAR-T cells, They're known for short as CAR-T cells, They're known for short as CAR-T cells, chimeric antigen receptor. And what that chimeric antigen receptor. And what that chimeric antigen receptor. And what that means, chimeric, is that these are means, chimeric, is that these are means, chimeric, is that these are stitched together. This is a receptor stitched together. This is a receptor stitched together. This is a receptor that was designed in a lab, does not that was designed in a lab, does not that was designed in a lab, does not exist in nature, but can be put into a exist in nature, but can be put into a exist in nature, but can be put into a piece of DNA, delivered into a T cell. piece of DNA, delivered into a T cell. piece of DNA, delivered into a T cell. And when that DNA goes into the genetic And when that DNA goes into the genetic And when that DNA goes into the genetic code of the T cell, all of a sudden the code of the T cell, all of a sudden the code of the T cell, all of a sudden the T cell will start making proteins that T cell will start making proteins that T cell will start making proteins that go on its surface and act as these go on its surface and act as these go on its surface and act as these artificial sensors. And those CARs, artificial sensors. And those CARs, artificial sensors. And those CARs, then when those T cells get reinfused then when those T cells get reinfused then when those T cells get reinfused into a patient the way that you get like into a patient the way that you get like into a patient the way that you get like a blood transfusion, a blood transfusion, a blood transfusion, those CARs are directed to go against those CARs are directed to go against those CARs are directed to go against cancers. This has been done for certain cancers. This has been done for certain cancers. This has been done for certain types of leukemia and lymphoma, and types of leukemia and lymphoma, and types of leukemia and lymphoma, and there's been these amazing success there's been these amazing success there's been these amazing success stories. The thing that The thing that The thing that woke up me and the world was in 2012, woke up me and the world was in 2012, woke up me and the world was in 2012, there was a young girl who the first there was a young girl who the first there was a young girl who the first pediatric patient to be treated with a pediatric patient to be treated with a pediatric patient to be treated with a CAR-T cell for cancer. So, CAR-T cell for cancer. So, CAR-T cell for cancer. So, she she's become a heroic figure, she she's become a heroic figure, she she's become a heroic figure, Emily Whitehead. She was I think eight Emily Whitehead. She was I think eight Emily Whitehead. She was I think eight at the time, and she had a form of at the time, and she had a form of at the time, and she had a form of leukemia that hadn't res- it just was leukemia that hadn't res- it just was leukemia that hadn't res- it just was for some reason, whatever reason, it for some reason, whatever reason, it for some reason, whatever reason, it failed all the treatments. And failed all the treatments. And failed all the treatments. And it just nothing worked. She was going to it just nothing worked. She was going to it just nothing worked. She was going to be sent home on hospice. be sent home on hospice. be sent home on hospice. She had exhausted all the possibilities She had exhausted all the possibilities She had exhausted all the possibilities at the age of eight. at the age of eight. at the age of eight. And she And she And she got enrolled in a at that time highly got enrolled in a at that time highly got enrolled in a at that time highly experimental treatment to get these experimental treatment to get these experimental treatment to get these CAR-T cells. So, her blood cells were CAR-T cells. So, her blood cells were CAR-T cells. So, her blood cells were taken out in a big blood donation. Her taken out in a big blood donation. Her taken out in a big blood donation. Her to own T cells were genetically to own T cells were genetically to own T cells were genetically modified. And we can talk about how that modified. And we can talk about how that modified. And we can talk about how that was done. It's actually done with like a was done. It's actually done with like a was done. It's actually done with like a pretty crude technique that's been pretty crude technique that's been pretty crude technique that's been around. Actually used viruses, around. Actually used viruses, around. Actually used viruses, lentiviruses. These are sort of modified lentiviruses. These are sort of modified lentiviruses. These are sort of modified HIV viruses to deliver this extra piece HIV viruses to deliver this extra piece HIV viruses to deliver this extra piece of DNA that encoded the CAR. of DNA that encoded the CAR. of DNA that encoded the CAR. And this was done on her cells. And this was done on her cells. And this was done on her cells. And then after that extra gene was put And then after that extra gene was put And then after that extra gene was put into the T cells, the T cells were into the T cells, the T cells were into the T cells, the T cells were reinfused into her body. reinfused into her body. reinfused into her body. And it was not a straightforward course. She it was not a straightforward course. She it was not a straightforward course. She she ended up in the ICU. The immune she ended up in the ICU. The immune she ended up in the ICU. The immune system had to we people in real time system had to we people in real time system had to we people in real time people had to figure out how to control people had to figure out how to control people had to figure out how to control the immune systems and the side effects. the immune systems and the side effects. the immune systems and the side effects. But as that was controlled, all of a But as that was controlled, all of a But as that was controlled, all of a sudden that her cancer cells sudden that her cancer cells sudden that her cancer cells disappeared. Amazing. And the lentivirus disappeared. Amazing. And the lentivirus disappeared. Amazing. And the lentivirus itself didn't uh didn't spark a an itself didn't uh didn't spark a an itself didn't uh didn't spark a an immune reaction that was Mhm. that immune reaction that was Mhm. that immune reaction that was Mhm. that outweighed the benefits of the cargo. outweighed the benefits of the cargo. outweighed the benefits of the cargo. &gt;&gt; No. It's amazingly it really hasn't. I &gt;&gt; No. It's amazingly it really hasn't. I &gt;&gt; No. It's amazingly it really hasn't. I mean there there's been some discussion mean there there's been some discussion mean there there's been some discussion about the risks of using these about the risks of using these about the risks of using these lentiviruses. And we we'll talk in a lentiviruses. And we we'll talk in a lentiviruses. And we we'll talk in a second about how we can do better now. second about how we can do better now. second about how we can do better now. Yeah, people are going to hear uh Yeah, people are going to hear uh Yeah, people are going to hear uh putting viruses into cells and putting viruses into cells and putting viruses into cells and putting them into humans and a bunch of people them into humans and a bunch of people them into humans and a bunch of people will freak out, but I promise you that will freak out, but I promise you that will freak out, but I promise you that things like adeno, which is like a cold things like adeno, which is like a cold things like adeno, which is like a cold virus, or lenti, which is similar to virus, or lenti, which is similar to virus, or lenti, which is similar to HIV, and of course they didn't give her HIV, and of course they didn't give her HIV, and of course they didn't give her HIV, they changed the virus so they're HIV, they changed the virus so they're HIV, they changed the virus so they're not delivering HIV. not delivering HIV. not delivering HIV. These viruses are incredible because These viruses are incredible because These viruses are incredible because they can create long-lasting expression they can create long-lasting expression they can create long-lasting expression of genes that you deliberately put into of genes that you deliberately put into of genes that you deliberately put into them. They're a shuttle. It's an amazing them. They're a shuttle. It's an amazing them. They're a shuttle. It's an amazing application of biological understanding, application of biological understanding, application of biological understanding, right? That all of a sudden we've been right? That all of a sudden we've been right? That all of a sudden we've been studying viruses because of the risk studying viruses because of the risk studying viruses because of the risk that they have. We but we've learned that they have. We but we've learned that they have. We but we've learned that they can deliver the viruses that they can deliver the viruses that they can deliver the viruses have evolved to be very good shuttles have evolved to be very good shuttles have evolved to be very good shuttles and to deliver their genetic material and to deliver their genetic material and to deliver their genetic material into cells. The way I think of it uh into cells. The way I think of it uh into cells. The way I think of it uh that is the viruses have evolved to take that is the viruses have evolved to take that is the viruses have evolved to take advantage of our biology and our genes. advantage of our biology and our genes. advantage of our biology and our genes. Yeah. And so we did the ultimate touché Yeah. And so we did the ultimate touché Yeah. And so we did the ultimate touché in these instances. Like, you're so good in these instances. Like, you're so good in these instances. Like, you're so good at hijacking our cells' DNA and at hijacking our cells' DNA and at hijacking our cells' DNA and proliferating. All right, we'll leverage proliferating. All right, we'll leverage proliferating. All right, we'll leverage you &gt;&gt; Exactly. to help us as opposed to hurt &gt;&gt; Exactly. to help us as opposed to hurt &gt;&gt; Exactly. to help us as opposed to hurt us. Right. That's exactly right. us. Right. That's exactly right. us. Right. That's exactly right. And so that was done in 2012. Emily And so that was done in 2012. Emily And so that was done in 2012. Emily Whitehead was eight. Whitehead was eight. Whitehead was eight. It was done as an experimental treatment It was done as an experimental treatment It was done as an experimental treatment at the University of Pennsylvania. And at the University of Pennsylvania. And at the University of Pennsylvania. And the story the story the story now is that now all these years later now is that now all these years later now is that now all these years later Emily Whitehead is not only cured of her Emily Whitehead is not only cured of her Emily Whitehead is not only cured of her leukemia, she's pre-med at the leukemia, she's pre-med at the leukemia, she's pre-med at the University of Pennsylvania. University of Pennsylvania. University of Pennsylvania. &gt;&gt; So so awesome. And so like But, one &gt;&gt; So so awesome. And so like But, one &gt;&gt; So so awesome. And so like But, one could ignore that. You know, this was could ignore that. You know, this was could ignore that. You know, this was this wasn't this was just all of a this wasn't this was just all of a this wasn't this was just all of a sudden this dogma that I had just been sudden this dogma that I had just been sudden this dogma that I had just been taught a couple of years earlier in taught a couple of years earlier in taught a couple of years earlier in medical school that we should ignore medical school that we should ignore medical school that we should ignore that cancer immunotherapy. It was just that cancer immunotherapy. It was just that cancer immunotherapy. It was just we were just wrong. we were just wrong. we were just wrong. And all of a sudden the field woke up And all of a sudden the field woke up And all of a sudden the field woke up and said, "Okay, the immune system is and said, "Okay, the immune system is and said, "Okay, the immune system is not just limited to treating viruses and not just limited to treating viruses and not just limited to treating viruses and bacteria or protecting us from viruses bacteria or protecting us from viruses bacteria or protecting us from viruses and bacteria. The immune system can be and bacteria. The immune system can be and bacteria. The immune system can be exploited and potentially re-engineered exploited and potentially re-engineered exploited and potentially re-engineered to protect us from cancer and maybe to protect us from cancer and maybe to protect us from cancer and maybe other diseases." So, that was 2012. other diseases." So, that was 2012. other diseases." So, that was 2012. 2012 also was the year that a paper got 2012 also was the year that a paper got 2012 also was the year that a paper got published in Science by Emmanuelle published in Science by Emmanuelle published in Science by Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna that Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna that Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna that introduced this new technology called introduced this new technology called introduced this new technology called CRISPR. And we can we'll talk about this, but And we can we'll talk about this, but And we can we'll talk about this, but CRISPR fundamentally is a tool to rewrite DNA sequences. is a tool to rewrite DNA sequences. is a tool to rewrite DNA sequences. That came out in 2012. That came out in 2012. That came out in 2012. And on a personal level, 2012 was also the on a personal level, 2012 was also the on a personal level, 2012 was also the year that I moved to San Francisco to year that I moved to San Francisco to year that I moved to San Francisco to start a lab studying T cells and how start a lab studying T cells and how start a lab studying T cells and how genetics influences T cells. I was genetics influences T cells. I was genetics influences T cells. I was looking around and trying to figure out looking around and trying to figure out looking around and trying to figure out what my lab would do and all of a sudden what my lab would do and all of a sudden what my lab would do and all of a sudden I was arriving with an empty lab space I was arriving with an empty lab space I was arriving with an empty lab space at exactly the same moment that at exactly the same moment that at exactly the same moment that the world was shown that T cells could the world was shown that T cells could the world was shown that T cells could cure cancer. cure cancer. cure cancer. And that we had a tool that could And that we had a tool that could And that we had a tool that could potentially rewrite DNA sequences and potentially rewrite DNA sequences and potentially rewrite DNA sequences and that we wouldn't be limited to these that we wouldn't be limited to these that we wouldn't be limited to these lenti viruses which are kind of clunky, lenti viruses which are kind of clunky, lenti viruses which are kind of clunky, the best tools we had at the time, but the best tools we had at the time, but the best tools we had at the time, but pretty clunky and non-precise in how pretty clunky and non-precise in how pretty clunky and non-precise in how they insert genetic material. All of a they insert genetic material. All of a they insert genetic material. All of a sudden we could imagine that we would sudden we could imagine that we would sudden we could imagine that we would could take T cells and use CRISPR to could take T cells and use CRISPR to could take T cells and use CRISPR to actually pick individual places in the actually pick individual places in the actually pick individual places in the genome and make targeted changes to genome and make targeted changes to genome and make targeted changes to program exactly how cells behave. And program exactly how cells behave. And program exactly how cells behave. And that is the basis for my ongoing work. that is the basis for my ongoing work. that is the basis for my ongoing work. We've put a lot of work over the years We've put a lot of work over the years We've put a lot of work over the years into being able to now take CRISPR into being able to now take CRISPR into being able to now take CRISPR technology, get it to work in T cells, technology, get it to work in T cells, technology, get it to work in T cells, to learn the rules about what are the to learn the rules about what are the to learn the rules about what are the genetic changes that will be most genetic changes that will be most genetic changes that will be most effective at making T cells into effective at making T cells into effective at making T cells into immunotherapies that cure patients into immunotherapies that cure patients into immunotherapies that cure patients for with different diseases. And then to for with different diseases. And then to for with different diseases. And then to go all the way and then actually use go all the way and then actually use go all the way and then actually use CRISPR to make T-cells that can be and CRISPR to make T-cells that can be and CRISPR to make T-cells that can be and put into patients with new levels of put into patients with new levels of put into patients with new levels of precision and power. And that's precision and power. And that's precision and power. And that's in clinical trials now. We're now in clinical trials now. We're now in clinical trials now. We're now in clinical trials with these CRISPR clinical trials with these CRISPR clinical trials with these CRISPR engineered CAR T-cells and we're not engineered CAR T-cells and we're not engineered CAR T-cells and we're not just going after leukemias where these just going after leukemias where these just going after leukemias where these CAR T-cells have historically worked, CAR T-cells have historically worked, CAR T-cells have historically worked, but &gt;&gt; Okay. we're also thinking &gt;&gt; Okay. we're also thinking &gt;&gt; Okay. we're also thinking about can we make these work for the about can we make these work for the about can we make these work for the really common causes of cancer deaths, really common causes of cancer deaths, really common causes of cancer deaths, solid tumors. And that's been a solid tumors. And that's been a solid tumors. And that's been a challenge and we can talk about that, challenge and we can talk about that, challenge and we can talk about that, but getting T-cells to find the right but getting T-cells to find the right but getting T-cells to find the right targets in tumors and then work inside targets in tumors and then work inside targets in tumors and then work inside of tumor environments which are of tumor environments which are of tumor environments which are inherently immunosuppressive inherently immunosuppressive inherently immunosuppressive requires figuring out additional gene requires figuring out additional gene requires figuring out additional gene edits that are now possible with CRISPR edits that are now possible with CRISPR edits that are now possible with CRISPR to try to beat the cancer at its own to try to beat the cancer at its own to try to beat the cancer at its own game. If cancer is evolving to make game. If cancer is evolving to make game. If cancer is evolving to make itself cloaked from the immune system, itself cloaked from the immune system, itself cloaked from the immune system, CRISPR we can think about getting one CRISPR we can think about getting one CRISPR we can think about getting one step ahead and making T-cells that are step ahead and making T-cells that are step ahead and making T-cells that are able to be resist all the tricks that able to be resist all the tricks that able to be resist all the tricks that cancers throw at it to be more and the I cancers throw at it to be more and the I cancers throw at it to be more and the I think we're on the brink of having think we're on the brink of having think we're on the brink of having precise CRISPR engineered cells that precise CRISPR engineered cells that precise CRISPR engineered cells that will I hope start to melt away cancers I hope start to melt away cancers I hope start to melt away cancers without the side effects of without the side effects of without the side effects of chemotherapy. Amazing. Uh just amazing and the Amazing. Uh just amazing and the Amazing. Uh just amazing and the story of this young woman is story of this young woman is story of this young woman is spectacular. Um I've two questions before we talk about I've two questions before we talk about I've two questions before we talk about CRISPR technology. The first one is CRISPR technology. The first one is CRISPR technology. The first one is it true, I believe it is, but is it true it true, I believe it is, but is it true it true, I believe it is, but is it true that cancer risk goes up as we get that cancer risk goes up as we get that cancer risk goes up as we get older? And if so, why? And if so, why? And if so, why? Um So, that's the first question. And then So, that's the first question. And then So, that's the first question. And then uh the other question has to do with how uh the other question has to do with how uh the other question has to do with how uh the immunotherapy that you uh the immunotherapy that you uh the immunotherapy that you described um described um described um was able to target the cancer and was able to target the cancer and was able to target the cancer and not cause problems elsewhere which is not cause problems elsewhere which is not cause problems elsewhere which is kind of the major issue of chemo and kind of the major issue of chemo and kind of the major issue of chemo and radiation therapy. But the first radiation therapy. But the first radiation therapy. But the first question again was, you know, why more again was, you know, why more again was, you know, why more mutations as we get older? So I think mutations as we get older? So I think mutations as we get older? So I think there's a few cancers that there's a few cancers that there's a few cancers that peak in childhood and there's risk as peak in childhood and there's risk as peak in childhood and there's risk as the body's developing of certain cancer the body's developing of certain cancer the body's developing of certain cancer childhood cancers and there's childhood cancers and there's childhood cancers and there's childhood leukemias for example then that like leukemias for example then that like leukemias for example then that like when we talk about Emily Whitehead. But when we talk about Emily Whitehead. But when we talk about Emily Whitehead. But most cancers as you said exactly as you most cancers as you said exactly as you most cancers as you said exactly as you said that there's this sort of increase said that there's this sort of increase said that there's this sort of increase and they're largely disease of later and they're largely disease of later and they're largely disease of later stages of life. stages of life. stages of life. I think that the reason for that is I think that the reason for that is I think that the reason for that is remember when we talked about what remember when we talked about what remember when we talked about what causes cancer, it's this causes cancer, it's this causes cancer, it's this evolution where certain cells start to evolution where certain cells start to evolution where certain cells start to accumulate mutations numerically a lot accumulate mutations numerically a lot accumulate mutations numerically a lot of those cells that have the mutations of those cells that have the mutations of those cells that have the mutations will die off and it's just a game that will die off and it's just a game that will die off and it's just a game that unfolds over time and the more time you unfolds over time and the more time you unfolds over time and the more time you have cells dividing and sticking around have cells dividing and sticking around have cells dividing and sticking around in the body they're accumulating more in the body they're accumulating more in the body they're accumulating more damage and eventually you're more likely damage and eventually you're more likely damage and eventually you're more likely that damage would actually that damage would actually that damage would actually transform the cells into a cancer cell. transform the cells into a cancer cell. transform the cells into a cancer cell. So time is a big factor here. So time is a big factor here. So time is a big factor here. Time and just accumulated damage. And Time and just accumulated damage. And Time and just accumulated damage. And the other question was, you know, how is the other question was, you know, how is the other question was, you know, how is it that the lentivirus knows to um it that the lentivirus knows to um it that the lentivirus knows to um the lentiviral the lentiviral the lentiviral uh cargo carrying T cells uh cargo carrying T cells uh cargo carrying T cells uh know to attack the cancer and not know to attack the cancer and not know to attack the cancer and not something else? something else? something else? &gt;&gt; So this is the key question for the &gt;&gt; So this is the key question for the &gt;&gt; So this is the key question for the field, right? Is field, right? Is field, right? Is and I think one of the things that and I think one of the things that and I think one of the things that worked incredibly well was a brilliant worked incredibly well was a brilliant worked incredibly well was a brilliant choice by a group of scientists in choice by a group of scientists in choice by a group of scientists in different a few different places that different a few different places that different a few different places that converged on the target that was used in converged on the target that was used in converged on the target that was used in the first CAR-T cell. And what the first CAR-T cell. And what the first CAR-T cell. And what the target is known as is a protein target is known as is a protein target is known as is a protein called CD19. called CD19. called CD19. That's just the name of this thing That's just the name of this thing That's just the name of this thing that's found on a lot of different types that's found on a lot of different types that's found on a lot of different types of B cells. So this brings us back to of B cells. So this brings us back to of B cells. So this brings us back to this discussion. The the leukemias this discussion. The the leukemias this discussion. The the leukemias themselves are a disease a cancer of the themselves are a disease a cancer of the themselves are a disease a cancer of the immune cells so they're cancer of B immune cells so they're cancer of B immune cells so they're cancer of B cells. And CD19 is found on the on cells. And CD19 is found on the on cells. And CD19 is found on the on the surface of many uh the surface of many uh the surface of many uh a large number of different types of B a large number of different types of B a large number of different types of B cell leukemias and lymphomas. I see. I cell leukemias and lymphomas. I see. I cell leukemias and lymphomas. I see. I think one of the things that turns out think one of the things that turns out think one of the things that turns out to be serendipitous here is that B to be serendipitous here is that B to be serendipitous here is that B cells themselves, natural healthy B cells themselves, natural healthy B cells themselves, natural healthy B cells, actually also cells, actually also cells, actually also have CD19 on their surface. have CD19 on their surface. have CD19 on their surface. What just turns out to be serendipitous What just turns out to be serendipitous What just turns out to be serendipitous is that the body can tolerate those is that the body can tolerate those is that the body can tolerate those cells going away. cells going away. cells going away. And so, what has made this a And so, what has made this a And so, what has made this a particularly effective and so safe and particularly effective and so safe and particularly effective and so safe and relatively well-tolerated treatment for relatively well-tolerated treatment for relatively well-tolerated treatment for cancer is that the collateral damage is cancer is that the collateral damage is cancer is that the collateral damage is actually not that damaging. That actually not that damaging. That actually not that damaging. That T cells in this case are not strictly T cells in this case are not strictly T cells in this case are not strictly distinguishing between cancer and distinguishing between cancer and distinguishing between cancer and health. They're not just getting the health. They're not just getting the health. They're not just getting the leukemia cells. They're are leukemia cells. They're are leukemia cells. They're are getting collateral B cells. getting collateral B cells. getting collateral B cells. But, by and large, to a first But, by and large, to a first But, by and large, to a first approximation, people can live without approximation, people can live without approximation, people can live without those cells. And so, that side effect those cells. And so, that side effect those cells. And so, that side effect has just been tolerable. has just been tolerable. has just been tolerable. Finding that balance gets harder and Finding that balance gets harder and Finding that balance gets harder and harder for more cancers. Right? If you harder for more cancers. Right? If you harder for more cancers. Right? If you start to think about start to think about start to think about pancreatic cancer or brain cancer, pancreatic cancer or brain cancer, pancreatic cancer or brain cancer, finding targets finding targets finding targets that if you hit the hang the healthy that if you hit the hang the healthy that if you hit the hang the healthy pancreas or the healthy brain, are not pancreas or the healthy brain, are not pancreas or the healthy brain, are not toxic, it's harder and harder. So, toxic, it's harder and harder. So, toxic, it's harder and harder. So, people are thinking about more and more people are thinking about more and more people are thinking about more and more sophisticated ways to look for these sophisticated ways to look for these sophisticated ways to look for these targets that are selectively found on targets that are selectively found on targets that are selectively found on the cancer cell and not on the healthy the cancer cell and not on the healthy the cancer cell and not on the healthy cell, or to think about ways that you might or to think about ways that you might or to think about ways that you might actually make the cell depend on actually make the cell depend on actually make the cell depend on recognizing multiple features so that recognizing multiple features so that recognizing multiple features so that you can have what's sometimes talked you can have what's sometimes talked you can have what's sometimes talked about as like a two-factor about as like a two-factor about as like a two-factor authentication. Like, the T cell will authentication. Like, the T cell will authentication. Like, the T cell will only kill cancer if it finds this and only kill cancer if it finds this and only kill cancer if it finds this and this. And that combination of things are this. And that combination of things are this. And that combination of things are not found on healthy cells, even if not found on healthy cells, even if not found on healthy cells, even if one or the other might be. So, people one or the other might be. So, people one or the other might be. So, people are thinking about how do we are thinking about how do we are thinking about how do we get more sophisticated about building get more sophisticated about building get more sophisticated about building these discrimination systems in into T these discrimination systems in into T these discrimination systems in into T cells. The building blocks are there, cells. The building blocks are there, cells. The building blocks are there, but the specifics for each cancer have but the specifics for each cancer have but the specifics for each cancer have to be invented. But, to be invented. But, to be invented. But, but we have the tools to do that. but we have the tools to do that. but we have the tools to do that. Awesome. Before we talk about CRISPR, Awesome. Before we talk about CRISPR, Awesome. Before we talk about CRISPR, there was one other question that I know there was one other question that I know there was one other question that I know many people will be thinking about, Uh a many people will be thinking about, Uh a many people will be thinking about, Uh a few years back, maybe 5 10 years back, few years back, maybe 5 10 years back, few years back, maybe 5 10 years back, there was a lot of discussion, maybe there was a lot of discussion, maybe there was a lot of discussion, maybe even some enthusiasm about ketogenic even some enthusiasm about ketogenic even some enthusiasm about ketogenic diets to treat or prevent cancer. And my diets to treat or prevent cancer. And my diets to treat or prevent cancer. And my understanding from looking at that understanding from looking at that understanding from looking at that literature was that for some cancers, it literature was that for some cancers, it literature was that for some cancers, it perhaps I want to bold, underline, and I want to bold, underline, and I want to bold, underline, and capitalize perhaps, capitalize perhaps, capitalize perhaps, um might help, but for other cancers it might help, but for other cancers it might help, but for other cancers it could make things worse. And then I also could make things worse. And then I also could make things worse. And then I also more recently started hearing about low more recently started hearing about low more recently started hearing about low glutamine diets. glutamine diets. glutamine diets. So and of course this is the way the So and of course this is the way the So and of course this is the way the internet works, but I did see some internet works, but I did see some internet works, but I did see some papers in some decent journals, you papers in some decent journals, you papers in some decent journals, you know, that at least were exploring this. So that at least were exploring this. So that at least were exploring this. So are um are um are um low they're just low carb, let's call low they're just low carb, let's call low they're just low carb, let's call what they are, ketogenic diets, what they are, ketogenic diets, what they are, ketogenic diets, have they been shown to be useful for have they been shown to be useful for have they been shown to be useful for treatment or avoidance of cancer? I have treatment or avoidance of cancer? I have treatment or avoidance of cancer? I have to defer to you. Actually I don't I to defer to you. Actually I don't I to defer to you. Actually I don't I don't know the answer to that, yeah. don't know the answer to that, yeah. don't know the answer to that, yeah. Okay. My guess is that people are still Okay. My guess is that people are still Okay. My guess is that people are still looking at this, but you know, there was looking at this, but you know, there was looking at this, but you know, there was also the idea that they could be useful also the idea that they could be useful also the idea that they could be useful for certain forms of dementia. There was an certain forms of dementia. There was an certain forms of dementia. There was an effort to call dementia, you know, type effort to call dementia, you know, type effort to call dementia, you know, type 3 diabetes, but my understanding from 3 diabetes, but my understanding from 3 diabetes, but my understanding from talking to the experts in this is that talking to the experts in this is that talking to the experts in this is that it might help through indirect it might help through indirect it might help through indirect mechanisms, but that it's not going to mechanisms, but that it's not going to mechanisms, but that it's not going to solve the problem. solve the problem. solve the problem. Okay, well thanks for entertaining that Okay, well thanks for entertaining that Okay, well thanks for entertaining that little cul-de-sac that I created. cul-de-sac that I created. cul-de-sac that I created. CRISPR. Tell us the story of CRISPR Tell us the story of CRISPR Tell us the story of CRISPR because I think CRISPR is one of those because I think CRISPR is one of those because I think CRISPR is one of those funny things in biology and medicine funny things in biology and medicine funny things in biology and medicine that almost everybody has heard about that almost everybody has heard about that almost everybody has heard about in the general population. Most people in the general population. Most people in the general population. Most people know it has something to do with know it has something to do with know it has something to do with changing genes, but it's sort of like changing genes, but it's sort of like changing genes, but it's sort of like AI. Yeah. It's here, Yeah. It's here, Yeah. It's here, it's powerful, it scares certain people, it's powerful, it scares certain people, it's powerful, it scares certain people, it excites other people, it excites other people, it excites other people, but most people don't know how it works but most people don't know how it works but most people don't know how it works because there's really no incentive to, because there's really no incentive to, because there's really no incentive to, but I think the story of CRISPR is but I think the story of CRISPR is but I think the story of CRISPR is actually also a story about actually also a story about actually also a story about how science works and that's important, how science works and that's important, how science works and that's important, too. I think it's exactly true. I think too. I think it's exactly true. I think too. I think it's exactly true. I think it is it is it is a perfect illustration of something a perfect illustration of something a perfect illustration of something where a discovery happened with it no where a discovery happened with it no where a discovery happened with it no one was planning but changed biology. one was planning but changed biology. one was planning but changed biology. Um Let me tell you the story in two Let me tell you the story in two Let me tell you the story in two separate arcs. One arc is the arc of separate arcs. One arc is the arc of separate arcs. One arc is the arc of understanding DNA. You know, it's good understanding DNA. You know, it's good understanding DNA. You know, it's good if you go back to Watson and Crick, it's if you go back to Watson and Crick, it's if you go back to Watson and Crick, it's understanding the double helix, to understanding the double helix, to understanding the double helix, to understand the structure of DNA understand the structure of DNA understand the structure of DNA sequences. That matures as we've learned sequences. That matures as we've learned sequences. That matures as we've learned how to sequence, to understand the to be how to sequence, to understand the to be how to sequence, to understand the to be able to measure a row of ATs and Cs and able to measure a row of ATs and Cs and able to measure a row of ATs and Cs and Gs that in whatever combination they are Gs that in whatever combination they are Gs that in whatever combination they are will start to be the building blocks for will start to be the building blocks for will start to be the building blocks for programming which proteins get made programming which proteins get made programming which proteins get made inside a cell. inside a cell. inside a cell. And then around 2000, we get to the And then around 2000, we get to the And then around 2000, we get to the first draft of the human genome, which first draft of the human genome, which first draft of the human genome, which is this multi-billion dollar project is this multi-billion dollar project is this multi-billion dollar project across the world to come up with a draft across the world to come up with a draft across the world to come up with a draft of one human genome sequence. of one human genome sequence. of one human genome sequence. Milestone for biology and medicine. Milestone for biology and medicine. Milestone for biology and medicine. And then see DNA sequencing technologies And then see DNA sequencing technologies And then see DNA sequencing technologies continue to improve and cost comes down. continue to improve and cost comes down. continue to improve and cost comes down. We're getting to the point where we can We're getting to the point where we can We're getting to the point where we can start to measure start to measure start to measure big chunks of our DNA at increasingly big chunks of our DNA at increasingly big chunks of our DNA at increasingly affordable costs and people were affordable costs and people were affordable costs and people were starting to understand the differences starting to understand the differences starting to understand the differences between people with DNA at the level of between people with DNA at the level of between people with DNA at the level of at least statistics. Okay, people with at least statistics. Okay, people with at least statistics. Okay, people with this disease are more likely to this disease are more likely to this disease are more likely to have this gene than that. But have this gene than that. But have this gene than that. But we're getting to some limit of what we we're getting to some limit of what we we're getting to some limit of what we can do just by sequencing DNA. All of a can do just by sequencing DNA. All of a can do just by sequencing DNA. All of a sudden you you're observing the DNA sudden you you're observing the DNA sudden you you're observing the DNA sequence that's in someone's cells, but sequence that's in someone's cells, but sequence that's in someone's cells, but you don't really know what those effects you don't really know what those effects you don't really know what those effects are. Just as the sequencing world is Just as the sequencing world is Just as the sequencing world is maturing, we're desperately looking for a tool to we're desperately looking for a tool to we're desperately looking for a tool to say, "Well, now we want to as we have say, "Well, now we want to as we have say, "Well, now we want to as we have all the sequences, we want to be able to all the sequences, we want to be able to all the sequences, we want to be able to see what happens if you change the see what happens if you change the see what happens if you change the sequence." And people were stumbling around looking And people were stumbling around looking And people were stumbling around looking for different tools. different tools. different tools. There there was There was a range of There there was There was a range of There there was There was a range of these things. There were zinc fingers. these things. There were zinc fingers. these things. There were zinc fingers. The people lentivirus was another one The people lentivirus was another one The people lentivirus was another one that we just talked about that we just talked about that we just talked about that with different degrees of efficiency and with different degrees of efficiency and with different degrees of efficiency and people were trying to be able to people were trying to be able to people were trying to be able to change DNA sequences in cells and it had change DNA sequences in cells and it had change DNA sequences in cells and it had been a long-standing effort. been a long-standing effort. been a long-standing effort. Out of nowhere emerges CRISPR as the Out of nowhere emerges CRISPR as the Out of nowhere emerges CRISPR as the answer to this problem. CRISPR was being answer to this problem. CRISPR was being answer to this problem. CRISPR was being studied as studied as studied as an interesting and unusual set of DNA interesting and unusual set of DNA interesting and unusual set of DNA sequences that were found in certain sequences that were found in certain sequences that were found in certain types of bacteria. types of bacteria. types of bacteria. There were these repeated sequences and There were these repeated sequences and There were these repeated sequences and no one knew what they were. And people no one knew what they were. And people no one knew what they were. And people out of real basic curiosity about what out of real basic curiosity about what out of real basic curiosity about what was happening in bacteria started was happening in bacteria started was happening in bacteria started studying these repeat sequences and what studying these repeat sequences and what studying these repeat sequences and what they were doing. And little by little by they were doing. And little by little by they were doing. And little by little by little it was worked out that these repeat it was worked out that these repeat it was worked out that these repeat sequences actually formed the repeat sequences actually formed the repeat sequences actually formed the basis of a kind of immune system for basis of a kind of immune system for basis of a kind of immune system for bacteria. Mhm. bacteria. Mhm. bacteria. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Now, we talked about the human immune &gt;&gt; Now, we talked about the human immune &gt;&gt; Now, we talked about the human immune system. Bacteria are just an individual system. Bacteria are just an individual system. Bacteria are just an individual cell, but they're also susceptible to cell, but they're also susceptible to cell, but they're also susceptible to infections, which is a sort of a strange infections, which is a sort of a strange infections, which is a sort of a strange idea. Bacteria cause infections in us, idea. Bacteria cause infections in us, idea. Bacteria cause infections in us, but there's this arms race between but there's this arms race between but there's this arms race between organisms, right? organisms, right? organisms, right? &gt;&gt; Everyone's trying to kill everyone else. &gt;&gt; Everyone's trying to kill everyone else. &gt;&gt; Everyone's trying to kill everyone else. And so bacteria are constantly being And so bacteria are constantly being And so bacteria are constantly being bombarded by bombarded by bombarded by certain types of viruses. They're called certain types of viruses. They're called certain types of viruses. They're called bacteriophage viruses. And they've bacteriophage viruses. And they've bacteriophage viruses. And they've evolved a series of evolved a series of evolved a series of bacteria have evolved a series of bacteria have evolved a series of bacteria have evolved a series of defense mechanisms to protect themselves defense mechanisms to protect themselves defense mechanisms to protect themselves from these viruses. from these viruses. from these viruses. CRISPR turns out to be a bacterial CRISPR turns out to be a bacterial CRISPR turns out to be a bacterial defense mechanism against viruses. defense mechanism against viruses. defense mechanism against viruses. Which is kind of amazing that this that Which is kind of amazing that this that Which is kind of amazing that this that this thing that has entered into popular this thing that has entered into popular this thing that has entered into popular culture is a bacteria protection against culture is a bacteria protection against culture is a bacteria protection against bacteriophage. Now, why has this caught the world of Now, why has this caught the world of Now, why has this caught the world of biology by storm? biology by storm? biology by storm? Well, what was realized was that the way Well, what was realized was that the way Well, what was realized was that the way that CRISPR works to protect that CRISPR works to protect that CRISPR works to protect against itself against itself against itself uh to protect bacteria from viruses is that to protect bacteria from viruses is that to protect bacteria from viruses is that it can recognize particular sequences of it can recognize particular sequences of it can recognize particular sequences of DNA, which are virus sequences, and just DNA, which are virus sequences, and just DNA, which are virus sequences, and just discern discriminate whether it's a discern discriminate whether it's a discern discriminate whether it's a virus sequence or its own bacteria virus sequence or its own bacteria virus sequence or its own bacteria sequence. And it actually does that by scanning And it actually does that by scanning And it actually does that by scanning across the DNA and finding something across the DNA and finding something across the DNA and finding something that's recognized as a virus target that's recognized as a virus target that's recognized as a virus target and not a bacteria target. And when it and not a bacteria target. And when it and not a bacteria target. And when it finds it, finds it, finds it, it makes a cut. it makes a cut. it makes a cut. Okay? Now, this sounds technical, obscure, but Now, this sounds technical, obscure, but Now, this sounds technical, obscure, but what was recognized, and this became the what was recognized, and this became the what was recognized, and this became the basis for a Nobel Prize of basis for a Nobel Prize of basis for a Nobel Prize of with Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle with Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle with Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier, many people around the Charpentier, many people around the Charpentier, many people around the world have contributed to this field, um world have contributed to this field, um world have contributed to this field, um what was realized was that this could be what was realized was that this could be what was realized was that this could be repurposed as a tool. If we take it out of as a tool. If we take it out of as a tool. If we take it out of bacteria, we could actually exploit this bacteria, we could actually exploit this bacteria, we could actually exploit this with this CRISPR system that had evolved with this CRISPR system that had evolved with this CRISPR system that had evolved to protect bacteria. to protect bacteria. to protect bacteria. And the same rules that allowed bacteria And the same rules that allowed bacteria And the same rules that allowed bacteria to scan across DNA and find a virus to scan across DNA and find a virus to scan across DNA and find a virus sequence and cut it, could be used to sequence and cut it, could be used to sequence and cut it, could be used to scan across any DNA and cut at a scan across any DNA and cut at a scan across any DNA and cut at a particular sequence. particular sequence. particular sequence. That's the power of CRISPR. Now, why do That's the power of CRISPR. Now, why do That's the power of CRISPR. Now, why do we care so much about being able to cut we care so much about being able to cut we care so much about being able to cut a particular sequence? If you can cut, a particular sequence? If you can cut, a particular sequence? If you can cut, you can also start pasting. You can cut you can also start pasting. You can cut you can also start pasting. You can cut out genes that are limiting the that are out genes that are limiting the that are out genes that are limiting the that are you don't you don't want to be in a you don't you don't want to be in a you don't you don't want to be in a cell. You can start pasting in sequences cell. You can start pasting in sequences cell. You can start pasting in sequences to replace mutations that cause disease. to replace mutations that cause disease. to replace mutations that cause disease. We can start pasting in big sequences We can start pasting in big sequences We can start pasting in big sequences like the sequence for CARs or other like the sequence for CARs or other like the sequence for CARs or other types of things that will make T cells types of things that will make T cells types of things that will make T cells more powerful. So, more powerful. So, more powerful. So, and this is I'm focused on T cells, and this is I'm focused on T cells, and this is I'm focused on T cells, but this is in now in every aspect of but this is in now in every aspect of but this is in now in every aspect of biology. People are studying this in biology. People are studying this in biology. People are studying this in plants and to make crops that will be plants and to make crops that will be plants and to make crops that will be drought resistant. People are studying drought resistant. People are studying drought resistant. People are studying this in every organ system to this in every organ system to this in every organ system to understand every type of disease and to understand every type of disease and to understand every type of disease and to build new types of molecular build new types of molecular build new types of molecular medicines. There's one other feature of CRISPR There's one other feature of CRISPR There's one other feature of CRISPR that's really important in this that's really important in this that's really important in this story. It's not just that this CRISPR can cut It's not just that this CRISPR can cut It's not just that this CRISPR can cut at a specific sequence that it's evolved at a specific sequence that it's evolved at a specific sequence that it's evolved to cut at virus sequences. It's the way to cut at virus sequences. It's the way to cut at virus sequences. It's the way that it cuts that has made it really that it cuts that has made it really that it cuts that has made it really catch on in a way that none of these catch on in a way that none of these catch on in a way that none of these earlier technologies do. earlier technologies do. earlier technologies do. So, CRISPR, if you think of it as a So, CRISPR, if you think of it as a So, CRISPR, if you think of it as a it's an enzyme that can cut DNA. it's an enzyme that can cut DNA. it's an enzyme that can cut DNA. And it can cut essentially almost any And it can cut essentially almost any And it can cut essentially almost any sequence of DNA. So, how does it decide sequence of DNA. So, how does it decide sequence of DNA. So, how does it decide which sequence to cut? which sequence to cut? which sequence to cut? It does it by actually pairing with an It does it by actually pairing with an It does it by actually pairing with an RNA molecule. So, CRISPR RNA molecule. So, CRISPR RNA molecule. So, CRISPR uh sometimes called Cas9, which is a sometimes called Cas9, which is a sometimes called Cas9, which is a particular type of CRISPR system particular type of CRISPR system particular type of CRISPR system um is a is a combination of a protein, is a is a combination of a protein, is a is a combination of a protein, which is a scissor, which is a scissor, which is a scissor, and then an RNA that sticks to it. and then an RNA that sticks to it. and then an RNA that sticks to it. And the RNA is what actually programs And the RNA is what actually programs And the RNA is what actually programs where that scissor will cut. where that scissor will cut. where that scissor will cut. Okay, so this and what's so special Okay, so this and what's so special Okay, so this and what's so special about that is that we actually know with about that is that we actually know with about that is that we actually know with perfect near-perfect precision perfect near-perfect precision perfect near-perfect precision the rules of how an RNA will recognize the rules of how an RNA will recognize the rules of how an RNA will recognize any DNA sequence. any DNA sequence. any DNA sequence. There's a complementarity where There's a complementarity where There's a complementarity where you can match up and know you can match up and know you can match up and know exactly which RNA you want to design. exactly which RNA you want to design. exactly which RNA you want to design. So, you can now cut DNA sequences at So, you can now cut DNA sequences at So, you can now cut DNA sequences at will. And it's gotten to the point where now And it's gotten to the point where now And it's gotten to the point where now if we want to cut a piece of DNA, we if we want to cut a piece of DNA, we if we want to cut a piece of DNA, we order a piece of RNA off the internet. order a piece of RNA off the internet. order a piece of RNA off the internet. It shows up in the lab in a matter It shows up in the lab in a matter It shows up in the lab in a matter of days. We mix it with Cas9 protein, of days. We mix it with Cas9 protein, of days. We mix it with Cas9 protein, and then that's going into the cells the and then that's going into the cells the and then that's going into the cells the next day, and we're able to introduce a next day, and we're able to introduce a next day, and we're able to introduce a cut into any DNA sequence. So, now you cut into any DNA sequence. So, now you cut into any DNA sequence. So, now you go back to the genome sequence that was go back to the genome sequence that was go back to the genome sequence that was came out in 2010, and all of a sudden came out in 2010, and all of a sudden came out in 2010, and all of a sudden you can go on the internet, pick a place you can go on the internet, pick a place you can go on the internet, pick a place in the genome that you're interested in the genome that you're interested in the genome that you're interested in studying, order a piece of RNA, make studying, order a piece of RNA, make studying, order a piece of RNA, make your targeted CRISPR molecule, and your targeted CRISPR molecule, and your targeted CRISPR molecule, and make a cut or cut and a paste at that make a cut or cut and a paste at that make a cut or cut and a paste at that particular site. particular site. particular site. And then in a very tangible way, read And then in a very tangible way, read And then in a very tangible way, read out the consequences. You're going into out the consequences. You're going into out the consequences. You're going into the source code of DNA inside of a cell, the source code of DNA inside of a cell, the source code of DNA inside of a cell, and you can when you make that change, and you can when you make that change, and you can when you make that change, you can say what happens to the you can say what happens to the you can say what happens to the cell? Does it is it a stronger cell? Does it is it a stronger cell? Does it is it a stronger response? Is it a different response? Is it a different response? Is it a different response? We can test it in test tubes. We can We can test it in test tubes. We can We can test it in test tubes. We can test it in models of disease. And test it in models of disease. And test it in models of disease. And then as we learn the rules, we can then as we learn the rules, we can then as we learn the rules, we can actually take those CRISPR modified actually take those CRISPR modified actually take those CRISPR modified cells all the way and infuse them into cells all the way and infuse them into cells all the way and infuse them into patients. Incredible, and thank you for that Incredible, and thank you for that Incredible, and thank you for that incredibly clear and detailed um incredibly clear and detailed um incredibly clear and detailed um explanation of the CRISPR-Cas9 system. explanation of the CRISPR-Cas9 system. explanation of the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Uh a couple of questions. How precise is Uh a couple of questions. How precise is Uh a couple of questions. How precise is the cut? Are you damaging adjacent the cut? Are you damaging adjacent the cut? Are you damaging adjacent nucleotides? Or can you home in exactly nucleotides? Or can you home in exactly nucleotides? Or can you home in exactly on the site that you want to cut? And on the site that you want to cut? And on the site that you want to cut? And then if you the related question is if then if you the related question is if then if you the related question is if you're going to introduce you're going to introduce you're going to introduce a gene sequence there, um a gene sequence there, um a gene sequence there, um how do you ensure that there aren't how do you ensure that there aren't how do you ensure that there aren't downstream effects? I mean, I think that downstream effects? I mean, I think that downstream effects? I mean, I think that what you're getting at with both these what you're getting at with both these what you're getting at with both these questions are unintended consequences. questions are unintended consequences. questions are unintended consequences. And that's always present, right? I And that's always present, right? I And that's always present, right? I think this has been a major concerted think this has been a major concerted think this has been a major concerted effort for the field of CRISPR. How do effort for the field of CRISPR. How do effort for the field of CRISPR. How do you get more and more precise? And it's you get more and more precise? And it's you get more and more precise? And it's come a long way, come a long way, come a long way, but nothing's perfect, right? So, I but nothing's perfect, right? So, I but nothing's perfect, right? So, I think we've done a lot and the field has think we've done a lot and the field has think we've done a lot and the field has done a lot of work to test off-targets, done a lot of work to test off-targets, done a lot of work to test off-targets, right? If you're programming a to cut on right? If you're programming a to cut on right? If you're programming a to cut on one place on chromosome six, do you one place on chromosome six, do you one place on chromosome six, do you actually evidently accidentally ever cut actually evidently accidentally ever cut actually evidently accidentally ever cut anywhere else? And there's a range anywhere else? And there's a range anywhere else? And there's a range sometimes some sequences are a little sometimes some sequences are a little sometimes some sequences are a little bit more promiscuous than others, but bit more promiscuous than others, but bit more promiscuous than others, but we've gotten quite good at getting more we've gotten quite good at getting more we've gotten quite good at getting more and more precise to say, "Okay, we're and more precise to say, "Okay, we're and more precise to say, "Okay, we're making these high-fidelity cuts that at making these high-fidelity cuts that at making these high-fidelity cuts that at one place." at one place." at one place." There are There are There are still the secondary risks of still the secondary risks of still the secondary risks of bystander effects. Okay, you make a cut, bystander effects. Okay, you make a cut, bystander effects. Okay, you make a cut, what does the DNA get chewed back and at what does the DNA get chewed back and at what does the DNA get chewed back and at the neighboring part? There's been in the neighboring part? There's been in the neighboring part? There's been in some extreme cases pieces of chromosomes some extreme cases pieces of chromosomes some extreme cases pieces of chromosomes actually falling off. actually falling off. actually falling off. I All these things can happen. I All these things can happen. I All these things can happen. and I think and I think and I think what we're kind of at a place in the what we're kind of at a place in the what we're kind of at a place in the field where now we're thinking about for field where now we're thinking about for field where now we're thinking about for each disease of risk benefit of Okay, each disease of risk benefit of Okay, each disease of risk benefit of Okay, there's going to be There's always a there's going to be There's always a there's going to be There's always a risk for any medicine of some unintended risk for any medicine of some unintended risk for any medicine of some unintended consequences. We have to be on the consequences. We have to be on the consequences. We have to be on the lookout for them. We have to know what lookout for them. We have to know what lookout for them. We have to know what they are. Most cells, as we said, what they are. Most cells, as we said, what they are. Most cells, as we said, that get a mutation that get a mutation that get a mutation don't have a problem. They just die off. don't have a problem. They just die off. don't have a problem. They just die off. So, if you have an unintended So, if you have an unintended So, if you have an unintended consequence, most will die, but there is consequence, most will die, but there is consequence, most will die, but there is always the risk of the unintended always the risk of the unintended always the risk of the unintended consequences. And I think as a field we consequences. And I think as a field we consequences. And I think as a field we have to be humble about that. have to be humble about that. have to be humble about that. That said, the CRISPR world is That said, the CRISPR world is That said, the CRISPR world is not static. And what I took what I the not static. And what I took what I the not static. And what I took what I the story I told you was like the building story I told you was like the building story I told you was like the building block of CRISPR. It's a protein scissor block of CRISPR. It's a protein scissor block of CRISPR. It's a protein scissor that can be targeted to any piece of DNA that can be targeted to any piece of DNA that can be targeted to any piece of DNA with an RNA molecule. with an RNA molecule. with an RNA molecule. People are appropriately thinking, "Well, the are appropriately thinking, "Well, the are appropriately thinking, "Well, the scissors can cause damage. scissors can cause damage. scissors can cause damage. Maybe that Maybe that Maybe that CRISPR molecule should actually be that CRISPR molecule should actually be that CRISPR molecule should actually be reengineered not to be a scissor, but to reengineered not to be a scissor, but to reengineered not to be a scissor, but to do other things." And now people have do other things." And now people have do other things." And now people have started engineering it to say, "Well, started engineering it to say, "Well, started engineering it to say, "Well, let's not make it a scissor. Let's make let's not make it a scissor. Let's make let's not make it a scissor. Let's make it a thing that just introduces more it a thing that just introduces more it a thing that just introduces more predictable mutation at a site." David predictable mutation at a site." David predictable mutation at a site." David Liu at Harvard has created these things Liu at Harvard has created these things Liu at Harvard has created these things called CRISPR base editors that doesn't called CRISPR base editors that doesn't called CRISPR base editors that doesn't introduce a double-stranded break, but introduce a double-stranded break, but introduce a double-stranded break, but actually changes nucleotides in a more actually changes nucleotides in a more actually changes nucleotides in a more predictable way at that site by predictable way at that site by predictable way at that site by recruiting a recruiting a recruiting a deaminase domain, something that will deaminase domain, something that will deaminase domain, something that will change DNA nucleotides when it's change DNA nucleotides when it's change DNA nucleotides when it's recruited to particular place. And you recruited to particular place. And you recruited to particular place. And you use CRISPR just to recruit that enzyme use CRISPR just to recruit that enzyme use CRISPR just to recruit that enzyme that makes that mutation at a targeted that makes that mutation at a targeted that makes that mutation at a targeted place. Other people have actually place. Other people have actually place. Other people have actually started using epigenetic enzymes. The started using epigenetic enzymes. The started using epigenetic enzymes. The DNA doesn't just get enacted by DNA doesn't just get enacted by DNA doesn't just get enacted by DNA sequences, but can actually pieces of it sequences, but can actually pieces of it sequences, but can actually pieces of it can be active or inactive. And this is can be active or inactive. And this is can be active or inactive. And this is called epigenetics, where there can be a called epigenetics, where there can be a called epigenetics, where there can be a stable program of things getting turned stable program of things getting turned stable program of things getting turned on or off without any change in the A's on or off without any change in the A's on or off without any change in the A's and T's and C's and G's. And now we and T's and C's and G's. And now we and T's and C's and G's. And now we and other others are using CRISPR-based other others are using CRISPR-based other others are using CRISPR-based epigenetic editing. It's called epi epigenetic editing. It's called epi epigenetic editing. It's called epi editing, where we don't make any cut in editing, where we don't make any cut in editing, where we don't make any cut in the genome, but we just turn on or off. the genome, but we just turn on or off. the genome, but we just turn on or off. And it's in a large part to think about And it's in a large part to think about And it's in a large part to think about mitigating some of these risks that mitigating some of these risks that mitigating some of these risks that might come with the scissor function. might come with the scissor function. might come with the scissor function. Instead, all of a sudden we're thinking Instead, all of a sudden we're thinking Instead, all of a sudden we're thinking about we're using the same building about we're using the same building about we're using the same building block of recruiting an enzyme to a block of recruiting an enzyme to a block of recruiting an enzyme to a particular place in the DNA code, but particular place in the DNA code, but particular place in the DNA code, but using the full set of things that we using the full set of things that we using the full set of things that we might do at that DNA site to program might do at that DNA site to program might do at that DNA site to program cells in the most precise possible way. cells in the most precise possible way. cells in the most precise possible way. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting Element has a bunch of great tasting Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try flavor. So, if you'd like to try flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to Element, you can go to Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. I'm curious to claim a free sample pack. I'm curious to claim a free sample pack. I'm curious about getting about getting about getting CRISPR into the cells of interest. CRISPR into the cells of interest. CRISPR into the cells of interest. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, the lentivirus example &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, the lentivirus example &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, the lentivirus example that you gave before, um that you gave before, um that you gave before, um my understanding is it involved my understanding is it involved my understanding is it involved harvesting some T cells, um introducing harvesting some T cells, um introducing harvesting some T cells, um introducing the lentivirus with the lentivirus with the lentivirus with the you know, the with the cargo that you know, the with the cargo that you know, the with the cargo that you want, putting that back into want, putting that back into want, putting that back into circulation, and the T cells know where circulation, and the T cells know where circulation, and the T cells know where to go and know what to do. Uh for a lot to go and know what to do. Uh for a lot to go and know what to do. Uh for a lot of cell types like neurons in the brain, of cell types like neurons in the brain, of cell types like neurons in the brain, uh liver cells, pancreatic cells, uh liver cells, pancreatic cells, uh liver cells, pancreatic cells, um I could imagine a surgery where you I could imagine a surgery where you I could imagine a surgery where you inject directly into those organs, but inject directly into those organs, but inject directly into those organs, but uh wouldn't it be wonderful if you could uh wouldn't it be wonderful if you could uh wouldn't it be wonderful if you could um get the cells of interest you know, get the cells of interest you know, get the cells of interest you know, without having to be so invasive. Um so, without having to be so invasive. Um so, without having to be so invasive. Um so, what's being done there in terms of what's being done there in terms of what's being done there in terms of trafficking um CRISPR to appropriate cell types or and CRISPR to appropriate cell types or and CRISPR to appropriate cell types or and or organs? And then that uh sort of or organs? And then that uh sort of or organs? And then that uh sort of seeds another question that I'll seeds another question that I'll seeds another question that I'll hold off on about whether should we hold off on about whether should we hold off on about whether should we should be banking uh cells or uh should be banking uh cells or uh should be banking uh cells or uh for what's coming? First of all, I just for what's coming? First of all, I just for what's coming? First of all, I just want to pause This is This is want to pause This is This is want to pause This is This is great. I love this conversation. I do, great. I love this conversation. I do, great. I love this conversation. I do, too. I mean, you're taking us to the too. I mean, you're taking us to the too. I mean, you're taking us to the I don't like the phrase bleeding edge. I don't like the phrase bleeding edge. I don't like the phrase bleeding edge. It sounds violent, but you're taking us It sounds violent, but you're taking us It sounds violent, but you're taking us to the cutting edge of molecular biology to the cutting edge of molecular biology to the cutting edge of molecular biology and medicine, and we are peering over and medicine, and we are peering over and medicine, and we are peering over into what's next. Like what your into what's next. Like what your into what's next. Like what your children and my children and our children and my children and our children and my children and our probably our parents also will uh be probably our parents also will uh be probably our parents also will uh be able to benefit from in the next 10 able to benefit from in the next 10 able to benefit from in the next 10 years, maybe sooner. Yeah, we're really years, maybe sooner. Yeah, we're really years, maybe sooner. Yeah, we're really talking about things that are happening talking about things that are happening talking about things that are happening now and happening at an accelerating now and happening at an accelerating now and happening at an accelerating rate. So, you asked part of what just rate. So, you asked part of what just rate. So, you asked part of what just got made me have that reaction. See, I got made me have that reaction. See, I got made me have that reaction. See, I think you asked one of the key questions think you asked one of the key questions think you asked one of the key questions for this field of for this field of for this field of how is this being delivered into cells? how is this being delivered into cells? how is this being delivered into cells? So, I told you let me go backwards, So, I told you let me go backwards, So, I told you let me go backwards, and then I'll go forward. and then I'll go forward. and then I'll go forward. I told you that in 2012, I told you that in 2012, I told you that in 2012, I sort of was sitting there thinking I sort of was sitting there thinking I sort of was sitting there thinking about I wanted to study T cells, the about I wanted to study T cells, the about I wanted to study T cells, the genetic control of T cells. I saw the genetic control of T cells. I saw the genetic control of T cells. I saw the power of CAR-T cells. I saw the power of power of CAR-T cells. I saw the power of power of CAR-T cells. I saw the power of CRISPR, which at that time was being CRISPR, which at that time was being CRISPR, which at that time was being only used in highly artificial, only used in highly artificial, only used in highly artificial, immortalized cell lines that grow easily immortalized cell lines that grow easily immortalized cell lines that grow easily in the in the lab. And it just wasn't in the in the lab. And it just wasn't in the in the lab. And it just wasn't clear that there would be a way to get clear that there would be a way to get clear that there would be a way to get CRISPR to work in real T cells that you CRISPR to work in real T cells that you CRISPR to work in real T cells that you would take out of a human blood sample would take out of a human blood sample would take out of a human blood sample that are not immortalized, that can only that are not immortalized, that can only that are not immortalized, that can only stay in a dish for a short amount of stay in a dish for a short amount of stay in a dish for a short amount of time, and still retain their function. time, and still retain their function. time, and still retain their function. And I put a I sort of And I put a I sort of And I put a I sort of tripled down on this is what my lab was tripled down on this is what my lab was tripled down on this is what my lab was going to do. We were going to figure out going to do. We were going to figure out going to do. We were going to figure out a way. And we went through a long list a way. And we went through a long list a way. And we went through a long list of different ways that we might deliver, of different ways that we might deliver, of different ways that we might deliver, and it wasn't obvious. and it wasn't obvious. and it wasn't obvious. Actually, a key collaboration early in my career a key collaboration early in my career a key collaboration early in my career was another serendipitous run-in with I met another serendipitous run-in with I met another serendipitous run-in with I met Jennifer Doudna through some persistence Jennifer Doudna through some persistence Jennifer Doudna through some persistence on my own. And Jennifer Doudna and I sat on my own. And Jennifer Doudna and I sat on my own. And Jennifer Doudna and I sat down and started thinking about how down and started thinking about how down and started thinking about how could we team up to take her expertise could we team up to take her expertise could we team up to take her expertise in CRISPR biochemistry and get it to in CRISPR biochemistry and get it to in CRISPR biochemistry and get it to work in T cells. work in T cells. work in T cells. We settled on this thing that We settled on this thing that We settled on this thing that was not at the top of my list of things was not at the top of my list of things was not at the top of my list of things that would work, but ended opening up that would work, but ended opening up that would work, but ended opening up the field. We actually purified the field. We actually purified the field. We actually purified the CRISPR protein. So, we had protein and CRISPR protein. So, we had protein and CRISPR protein. So, we had protein and RNA that would we could we could make in RNA that would we could we could make in RNA that would we could we could make in a test tube. Now, we now we order it off a test tube. Now, we now we order it off a test tube. Now, we now we order it off the internet. the internet. the internet. We can mix them together, and we could We can mix them together, and we could We can mix them together, and we could make these protein RNA complexes, and we make these protein RNA complexes, and we make these protein RNA complexes, and we could suspend that in liquid. could suspend that in liquid. could suspend that in liquid. And then what we did is we actually And then what we did is we actually And then what we did is we actually incubated T cells from a blood sample in incubated T cells from a blood sample in incubated T cells from a blood sample in that liquid. that liquid. that liquid. And then the question was, how do you And then the question was, how do you And then the question was, how do you get these protein RNA complexes into the get these protein RNA complexes into the get these protein RNA complexes into the cells? And we used this trick that's cells? And we used this trick that's cells? And we used this trick that's been around for a long time. No one even been around for a long time. No one even been around for a long time. No one even as long as it's been around, as long as it's been around, as long as it's been around, sounds magical, and no one quite sounds magical, and no one quite sounds magical, and no one quite understands how it works. We put these understands how it works. We put these understands how it works. We put these cells into a device cells into a device cells into a device that gives a small electrical current to that gives a small electrical current to that gives a small electrical current to the T cells. the T cells. the T cells. &gt;&gt; Electroporation. Oh, &gt;&gt; Electroporation. Oh, &gt;&gt; Electroporation. Oh, man. I man. I man. I like during my graduate career, I like during my graduate career, I like during my graduate career, I electroporated a lot of electroporated a lot of electroporated a lot of Well, I can just say it now cuz I don't Well, I can just say it now cuz I don't Well, I can just say it now cuz I don't do it anymore. Um electroporated a lot do it anymore. Um electroporated a lot do it anymore. Um electroporated a lot of brains of intact animals. of brains of intact animals. of brains of intact animals. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You inject DNA. It's &gt;&gt; Yeah. You inject DNA. It's &gt;&gt; Yeah. You inject DNA. It's floating around in the floating around in the floating around in the in the local tissue. You pass some in the local tissue. You pass some in the local tissue. You pass some square wave current. square wave current. square wave current. &gt;&gt; Yep. And the assumption is that it &gt;&gt; Yep. And the assumption is that it &gt;&gt; Yep. And the assumption is that it creates little transient pores in the creates little transient pores in the creates little transient pores in the cell membrane. cell membrane. cell membrane. And so it gets in and sometimes you end And so it gets in and sometimes you end And so it gets in and sometimes you end up with four cells up with four cells up with four cells transfected and sometimes you end up transfected and sometimes you end up transfected and sometimes you end up with 40,000 cells transfected. It's a with 40,000 cells transfected. It's a with 40,000 cells transfected. It's a wildly useful technique and but it's a wildly useful technique and but it's a wildly useful technique and but it's a little bit hit or miss. That's perfect little bit hit or miss. That's perfect little bit hit or miss. That's perfect description. And so we description. And so we description. And so we my first post doc in my lab, Catherine my first post doc in my lab, Catherine my first post doc in my lab, Catherine Schumann, sat there and tested different Schumann, sat there and tested different Schumann, sat there and tested different electroporation conditions altering electroporation conditions altering electroporation conditions altering these little pulse codes that these little pulse codes that these little pulse codes that &gt;&gt; pulse, one short pulse, one long pulse. &gt;&gt; pulse, one short pulse, one long pulse. &gt;&gt; pulse, one short pulse, one long pulse. You're taking me back to my graduate and You're taking me back to my graduate and You're taking me back to my graduate and to some extent my post doc years. and to some extent my post doc years. and to some extent my post doc years. It's unclear for given tissues, for It's unclear for given tissues, for It's unclear for given tissues, for given sequences, what's going to go into given sequences, what's going to go into given sequences, what's going to go into cells, what's going to cells, what's going to cells, what's going to not kill the cells. We we're walking not kill the cells. We we're walking not kill the cells. We we're walking this tightrope of how do you make it this tightrope of how do you make it this tightrope of how do you make it this porous big enough that CRISPR will this porous big enough that CRISPR will this porous big enough that CRISPR will get in but that the cells don't die. get in but that the cells don't die. get in but that the cells don't die. And we did it, you know, and we did it And we did it, you know, and we did it And we did it, you know, and we did it and we've optimized this and we've optimized this and we've optimized this and it was one of those things you when it was one of those things you when it was one of those things you when it happens you see it and you just happens you see it and you just happens you see it and you just realize it's binary. Like all of a sudden it's binary. Like all of a sudden it's binary. Like all of a sudden you're editing DNA inside of T you're editing DNA inside of T you're editing DNA inside of T cells and you know, we got our foot in cells and you know, we got our foot in cells and you know, we got our foot in the door with some level of efficiency. the door with some level of efficiency. the door with some level of efficiency. We've gone through the roof. This is now We've gone through the roof. This is now We've gone through the roof. This is now used by labs widely and it's incredibly used by labs widely and it's incredibly used by labs widely and it's incredibly efficient and efficient and efficient and some cells die but overwhelmingly you some cells die but overwhelmingly you some cells die but overwhelmingly you end up with cells that are gene end up with cells that are gene end up with cells that are gene edited. She figured out the protocol. edited. She figured out the protocol. edited. She figured out the protocol. &gt;&gt; Yeah, she really did and she's been &gt;&gt; Yeah, she really did and she's been &gt;&gt; Yeah, she really did and she's been optimized and then another grad student optimized and then another grad student optimized and then another grad student in my lab came in, this guy, amazing in my lab came in, this guy, amazing in my lab came in, this guy, amazing grad student, Theo Roth, and realized grad student, Theo Roth, and realized grad student, Theo Roth, and realized that he didn't have to stop there that he didn't have to stop there that he didn't have to stop there that we thought we were limited to just we thought we were limited to just we thought we were limited to just putting CRISPR in these very small putting CRISPR in these very small putting CRISPR in these very small pieces of DNA called oligonucleotides pieces of DNA called oligonucleotides pieces of DNA called oligonucleotides that were just change a couple of that were just change a couple of that were just change a couple of nucleotides at a time. Our mindset was nucleotides at a time. Our mindset was nucleotides at a time. Our mindset was like maybe we can fix a mutation, an like maybe we can fix a mutation, an like maybe we can fix a mutation, an individual mutation. Theo said, "Let's individual mutation. Theo said, "Let's individual mutation. Theo said, "Let's not stop there. Let's put big piece of not stop there. Let's put big piece of not stop there. Let's put big piece of DNA in." DNA in." DNA in." And we've pushed this boundary of being And we've pushed this boundary of being And we've pushed this boundary of being able to say, "Let's pick a site, make a able to say, "Let's pick a site, make a able to say, "Let's pick a site, make a cut, and introduce hundreds or up to cut, and introduce hundreds or up to cut, and introduce hundreds or up to thousands of different nucleotides to be thousands of different nucleotides to be thousands of different nucleotides to be able to really write a piece of DNA code able to really write a piece of DNA code able to really write a piece of DNA code that doesn't even have to exist in that doesn't even have to exist in that doesn't even have to exist in nature, but then we have the precision nature, but then we have the precision nature, but then we have the precision using CRISPR to put it into a particular using CRISPR to put it into a particular using CRISPR to put it into a particular place in the DNA. place in the DNA. place in the DNA. We started a company when that when that We started a company when that when that We started a company when that when that technology worked, a company called technology worked, a company called technology worked, a company called Arsenal BioSciences that's now Arsenal BioSciences that's now Arsenal BioSciences that's now in clinical trials. It's actually it's in clinical trials. It's actually it's in clinical trials. It's actually it's in its clinic third clinical trial right in its clinic third clinical trial right in its clinic third clinical trial right now for solid tumors. It's in a clinical now for solid tumors. It's in a clinical now for solid tumors. It's in a clinical trial for prostate cancer that's about trial for prostate cancer that's about trial for prostate cancer that's about to start enrolling patients. to start enrolling patients. to start enrolling patients. And that company can now do this at And that company can now do this at And that company can now do this at industrial scale. It takes patient industrial scale. It takes patient industrial scale. It takes patient cells, electroporates them, and has now cells, electroporates them, and has now cells, electroporates them, and has now written long piece of like 10 10,000 written long piece of like 10 10,000 written long piece of like 10 10,000 nucleotides of DNA code that put in a nucleotides of DNA code that put in a nucleotides of DNA code that put in a sequence of a combination of different sequence of a combination of different sequence of a combination of different receptors including a CAR receptors including a CAR receptors including a CAR and additional gene enhancements that and additional gene enhancements that and additional gene enhancements that will make these T cells more powerful will make these T cells more powerful will make these T cells more powerful and in a tumor microenvironment. and in a tumor microenvironment. and in a tumor microenvironment. &gt;&gt; And then they go into the bloodstream, &gt;&gt; And then they go into the bloodstream, &gt;&gt; And then they go into the bloodstream, they navigate to the prostate, and they navigate to the prostate, and they navigate to the prostate, and they start fighting the cancer cells, and I start fighting the cancer cells, and I start fighting the cancer cells, and I imagine you can also put It sounds like imagine you can also put It sounds like imagine you can also put It sounds like you're putting some you're putting some you're putting some kind of resilience genes in there as kind of resilience genes in there as kind of resilience genes in there as well. To bolster the healthy cells. To well. To bolster the healthy cells. To well. To bolster the healthy cells. To bolster the T cells that carry bolster the T cells that carry bolster the T cells that carry these receptors to make them persist these receptors to make them persist these receptors to make them persist longer and be able to Exactly. Awesome. longer and be able to Exactly. Awesome. longer and be able to Exactly. Awesome. That's happening, and you know, That's happening, and you know, That's happening, and you know, that the way that happens is that the way that happens is that the way that happens is that a patient will be selected, will go in a patient will be selected, will go in a patient will be selected, will go in for a blood donation, give a rather for a blood donation, give a rather for a blood donation, give a rather large blood donation, but those cells large blood donation, but those cells large blood donation, but those cells are then shipped to a facility that are then shipped to a facility that are then shipped to a facility that Arsenal maintains. Arsenal maintains. Arsenal maintains. The electroporation happens in the The electroporation happens in the The electroporation happens in the centralized facilities. The cells get centralized facilities. The cells get centralized facilities. The cells get grown up for a couple of days and grown up for a couple of days and grown up for a couple of days and tested. They get frozen down and then tested. They get frozen down and then tested. They get frozen down and then sent back to the patient where they're sent back to the patient where they're sent back to the patient where they're the cells are then thawed, and they get the cells are then thawed, and they get the cells are then thawed, and they get it's the equivalent of a blood it's the equivalent of a blood it's the equivalent of a blood transfusion. Now, their own cells have transfusion. Now, their own cells have transfusion. Now, their own cells have been supercharged to allow them to been supercharged to allow them to been supercharged to allow them to recognize cancer, but also to have the recognize cancer, but also to have the recognize cancer, but also to have the as you said added resilience, added as you said added resilience, added as you said added resilience, added strength in that battle against cancer. strength in that battle against cancer. strength in that battle against cancer. The cells that have been modified by the The cells that have been modified by the The cells that have been modified by the CRISPR Cas9, they're sitting in this CRISPR Cas9, they're sitting in this CRISPR Cas9, they're sitting in this bag. Um, bag. Um, bag. Um, they get infused. they get infused. they get infused. Are they Are they Are they designed is the CRISPR designed to designed is the CRISPR designed to designed is the CRISPR designed to only go after the prostate cancer cells? only go after the prostate cancer cells? only go after the prostate cancer cells? Um, or is there some version of this Um, or is there some version of this Um, or is there some version of this where you can inoculate against a number where you can inoculate against a number where you can inoculate against a number of different cancers? In other words, of different cancers? In other words, of different cancers? In other words, if I'm understanding correctly, if there if I'm understanding correctly, if there if I'm understanding correctly, if there are sort of um, canonical are sort of um, canonical are sort of um, canonical mutation sequences &gt;&gt; Yeah. that occur in all cancer cells. &gt;&gt; Yeah. that occur in all cancer cells. &gt;&gt; Yeah. that occur in all cancer cells. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is there a version of this where I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is there a version of this where I &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is there a version of this where I give some blood? Yeah. give some blood? Yeah. give some blood? Yeah. You or a company, probably company, You or a company, probably company, You or a company, probably company, electroporates them with uh, the CRISPR electroporates them with uh, the CRISPR electroporates them with uh, the CRISPR Cas9 system, Cas9 system, Cas9 system, brings in resil- resilience uh, genes brings in resil- resilience uh, genes brings in resil- resilience uh, genes for the T cells from my T cells, um, for the T cells from my T cells, um, for the T cells from my T cells, um, plus some attack genes, right? So, they're going attack genes, right? So, they're going attack genes, right? So, they're going to destroy the cancer cells, and then I to destroy the cancer cells, and then I to destroy the cancer cells, and then I get an infusion of these when I turn, get an infusion of these when I turn, get an infusion of these when I turn, well, I'm 50 now, so like 52, and then well, I'm 50 now, so like 52, and then well, I'm 50 now, so like 52, and then it protects against all cancers that it protects against all cancers that it protects against all cancers that probably are forming at multiple sites probably are forming at multiple sites probably are forming at multiple sites throughout my body, little mutations throughout my body, little mutations throughout my body, little mutations here, little mutations there. Hopefully, here, little mutations there. Hopefully, here, little mutations there. Hopefully, they don't, you know, proliferate, but they don't, you know, proliferate, but they don't, you know, proliferate, but is there a way to just short-circuit is there a way to just short-circuit is there a way to just short-circuit cancer body-wide? I think that's a hope cancer body-wide? I think that's a hope cancer body-wide? I think that's a hope that all of us have to some extent. I that all of us have to some extent. I that all of us have to some extent. I think these technologies get proven out think these technologies get proven out think these technologies get proven out in patients who where the risk-benefit in patients who where the risk-benefit in patients who where the risk-benefit of the unproven technology of the unproven technology of the unproven technology is tolerated. And, you know, I think is tolerated. And, you know, I think is tolerated. And, you know, I think that in reality that in reality that in reality that means that patients who have that means that patients who have that means that patients who have exhausted other treatment opportunities exhausted other treatment opportunities exhausted other treatment opportunities get treated, and often those are the get treated, and often those are the get treated, and often those are the sickest patients. And, I think there's sickest patients. And, I think there's sickest patients. And, I think there's good reasons for ethics for that that's good reasons for ethics for that that's good reasons for ethics for that that's where we start. where we start. where we start. But, our hope is that these technologies But, our hope is that these technologies But, our hope is that these technologies eventually will be proven to be safe, eventually will be proven to be safe, eventually will be proven to be safe, because they'll get more and more because they'll get more and more because they'll get more and more precise. I hope the cost would go down, precise. I hope the cost would go down, precise. I hope the cost would go down, and I don't know, you know, you talk and I don't know, you know, you talk and I don't know, you know, you talk about the other extreme of doing it about the other extreme of doing it about the other extreme of doing it preventatively, but at least we should preventatively, but at least we should preventatively, but at least we should start marching earlier and earlier in start marching earlier and earlier in start marching earlier and earlier in the course of diagnosis. And the hope is the course of diagnosis. And the hope is the course of diagnosis. And the hope is that, you know, they'll be that, you know, they'll be that, you know, they'll be we're already seeing improved tools for we're already seeing improved tools for we're already seeing improved tools for early diagnosis of cancer where we're early diagnosis of cancer where we're early diagnosis of cancer where we're detecting the earlier signs of cancer. detecting the earlier signs of cancer. detecting the earlier signs of cancer. It'd be nice if we have the ability to It'd be nice if we have the ability to It'd be nice if we have the ability to start treating those early cancers that start treating those early cancers that start treating those early cancers that might be the ones that are the most might be the ones that are the most might be the ones that are the most responsive to the immune system. responsive to the immune system. responsive to the immune system. And then beyond that, preventative would And then beyond that, preventative would And then beyond that, preventative would be even better. be even better. be even better. Um I think to get there, if we really want I think to get there, if we really want I think to get there, if we really want to scale up, to scale up, to scale up, I think we also have to think about you I think we also have to think about you I think we also have to think about you sort of going back to your last question sort of going back to your last question sort of going back to your last question about delivery, about delivery, about delivery, maybe it's not always going to be these maybe it's not always going to be these maybe it's not always going to be these cells getting shipped to a centralized cells getting shipped to a centralized cells getting shipped to a centralized factory and electroporated. factory and electroporated. factory and electroporated. Um although that's been incredibly Um although that's been incredibly Um although that's been incredibly powerful and it's not stopping now. powerful and it's not stopping now. powerful and it's not stopping now. We're actually starting academically in We're actually starting academically in We're actually starting academically in my in an institute that I run, the my in an institute that I run, the my in an institute that I run, the Gladstone UCSF Institute of Genomic Gladstone UCSF Institute of Genomic Gladstone UCSF Institute of Genomic Immunology. We're starting a Immunology. We're starting a Immunology. We're starting a philanthropically funded CRISPR trial philanthropically funded CRISPR trial philanthropically funded CRISPR trial for multiple myeloma where we're using a for multiple myeloma where we're using a for multiple myeloma where we're using a different genetic program. So, we different genetic program. So, we different genetic program. So, we there's a huge number of diseases where there's a huge number of diseases where there's a huge number of diseases where we are thinking about what can we do we are thinking about what can we do we are thinking about what can we do with existing technologies. with existing technologies. with existing technologies. We're also starting to look for ways We're also starting to look for ways We're also starting to look for ways that the that the deliveries of the that the that the deliveries of the that the that the deliveries of the future will happen. And future will happen. And future will happen. And different people are coming up with different people are coming up with different people are coming up with different solutions, but one emerging different solutions, but one emerging different solutions, but one emerging trend is that rather than taking the trend is that rather than taking the trend is that rather than taking the cells out of the body cells out of the body cells out of the body and then exposing them to CRISPR and in and then exposing them to CRISPR and in and then exposing them to CRISPR and in these targeted ways with these targeted ways with these targeted ways with electroporation, what if we could put CRISPR into the what if we could put CRISPR into the what if we could put CRISPR into the body and just send it and address it body and just send it and address it body and just send it and address it just to the cells that we want to just to the cells that we want to just to the cells that we want to modify. We're interested in the T cells. modify. We're interested in the T cells. modify. We're interested in the T cells. Someone else might be interested in Someone else might be interested in Someone else might be interested in modifying the lung or the heart or neurons, right? the lung or the heart or neurons, right? the lung or the heart or neurons, right? For different diseases. For different diseases. For different diseases. Um and that is a field that is now Um and that is a field that is now Um and that is a field that is now exploding. Thinking about technologies. exploding. Thinking about technologies. exploding. Thinking about technologies. It's another area where there's just It's another area where there's just It's another area where there's just tools that tools that tools that are happening so fast. are happening so fast. are happening so fast. &gt;&gt; You know, when I was a postdoc, there &gt;&gt; You know, when I was a postdoc, there &gt;&gt; You know, when I was a postdoc, there was a it was all about, it seemed, for a was a it was all about, it seemed, for a was a it was all about, it seemed, for a few years, like different ways to get few years, like different ways to get few years, like different ways to get genes into cells. Um so, there's genes into cells. Um so, there's genes into cells. Um so, there's electroporation, there are lentiviruses, electroporation, there are lentiviruses, electroporation, there are lentiviruses, there are adenoviruses, there are um Yeah. Dramatically. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. Dramatically. Yeah. So, all of these things have gone under So, all of these things have gone under So, all of these things have gone under rapid progress. The virus Let's talk rapid progress. The virus Let's talk rapid progress. The virus Let's talk about the viruses. We talked about the viruses. We talked about the viruses. We talked about viruses as a tool to as a shuttle of viruses as a tool to as a shuttle of viruses as a tool to as a shuttle of DNA. They naturally, each one will have some They naturally, each one will have some They naturally, each one will have some range of what cells it would infect. range of what cells it would infect. range of what cells it would infect. This is for a virus that's This is This is for a virus that's This is This is for a virus that's This is called tropism. What is What cells are called tropism. What is What cells are called tropism. What is What cells are susceptible to infection with any virus? susceptible to infection with any virus? susceptible to infection with any virus? Those would be the cells that you'd be Those would be the cells that you'd be Those would be the cells that you'd be able to deliver genetic material to with able to deliver genetic material to with able to deliver genetic material to with an engineered virus. an engineered virus. an engineered virus. People have really advanced engineered People have really advanced engineered People have really advanced engineered tropism, engineering what cells a virus tropism, engineering what cells a virus tropism, engineering what cells a virus will deliver material to. And that can will deliver material to. And that can will deliver material to. And that can be dialed in quite precisely now in a be dialed in quite precisely now in a be dialed in quite precisely now in a number of different ways. So, people are number of different ways. So, people are number of different ways. So, people are working on engineered viruses that working on engineered viruses that working on engineered viruses that try There's still problems that trying try There's still problems that trying try There's still problems that trying to make sure that they don't trigger to make sure that they don't trigger to make sure that they don't trigger immune responses, but they're getting immune responses, but they're getting immune responses, but they're getting more and more precise, both viruses and more and more precise, both viruses and more and more precise, both viruses and things that have virus-like properties things that have virus-like properties things that have virus-like properties that are sometimes called virus-like that are sometimes called virus-like that are sometimes called virus-like particles that are essentially viruses particles that are essentially viruses particles that are essentially viruses that can just deliver either DNA or that can just deliver either DNA or that can just deliver either DNA or protein to a cell that's specified by protein to a cell that's specified by protein to a cell that's specified by what that virus tropism is. what that virus tropism is. what that virus tropism is. And that and people are working on And that and people are working on And that and people are working on engineering these tropisms with a lot of engineering these tropisms with a lot of engineering these tropisms with a lot of technologies. So Cuz you could put drugs technologies. So Cuz you could put drugs technologies. So Cuz you could put drugs in them, too. I mean, we talk about, you in them, too. I mean, we talk about, you in them, too. I mean, we talk about, you know, like SSRIs have all these side know, like SSRIs have all these side know, like SSRIs have all these side effects. Well, that's because you're effects. Well, that's because you're effects. Well, that's because you're getting serotonin, getting serotonin, getting serotonin, uh, you know, increases at locations you uh, you know, increases at locations you uh, you know, increases at locations you don't want it. Like that you could don't want it. Like that you could don't want it. Like that you could imagine only getting drugs to certain imagine only getting drugs to certain imagine only getting drugs to certain cells. So it's super To me, it's cells. So it's super To me, it's cells. So it's super To me, it's super exciting and just seems so super exciting and just seems so super exciting and just seems so fundamental. So I'm relieved to hear fundamental. So I'm relieved to hear fundamental. So I'm relieved to hear that there's progress being that there's progress being that there's progress being made. Anything that can be genetically made. Anything that can be genetically made. Anything that can be genetically encoded, you can start imagining these encoded, you can start imagining these encoded, you can start imagining these types of targeting. Now, you asked about types of targeting. Now, you asked about types of targeting. Now, you asked about lipid liposomes. Mhm. Now, liposomes lipid liposomes. Mhm. Now, liposomes lipid liposomes. Mhm. Now, liposomes have kind of come up with a our new name have kind of come up with a our new name have kind of come up with a our new name is lipid nanoparticles. Lipid is lipid nanoparticles. Lipid is lipid nanoparticles. Lipid nanoparticles. I thought it rolls off nanoparticles. I thought it rolls off nanoparticles. I thought it rolls off the tongue nicely. And you know, if we the tongue nicely. And you know, if we the tongue nicely. And you know, if we do with the abbreviation we use is LNPs, do with the abbreviation we use is LNPs, do with the abbreviation we use is LNPs, but a billion people around the world have a billion people around the world have a billion people around the world have now been injected with LNPs. LNPs are now been injected with LNPs. LNPs are now been injected with LNPs. LNPs are the technology that delivered mRNA the technology that delivered mRNA the technology that delivered mRNA vaccines. Ah, okay. vaccines. Ah, okay. vaccines. Ah, okay. That that'll raise some eyebrows that, That that'll raise some eyebrows that, That that'll raise some eyebrows that, you know, yeah. No, we're going to talk you know, yeah. No, we're going to talk you know, yeah. No, we're going to talk about vaccines. Listen, we're going about vaccines. Listen, we're going about vaccines. Listen, we're going every We're we're going into it all every We're we're going into it all every We're we're going into it all today. They were liposome bound. These today. They were liposome bound. These today. They were liposome bound. These essentially these are lipids that can essentially these are lipids that can essentially these are lipids that can deliver genetic material to cells. And deliver genetic material to cells. And deliver genetic material to cells. And this was done locally for the COVID this was done locally for the COVID this was done locally for the COVID vaccine, but people are now engineering vaccine, but people are now engineering vaccine, but people are now engineering them with the targeting molecules that them with the targeting molecules that them with the targeting molecules that you described so that they go to you described so that they go to you described so that they go to particular cells. If you inject them particular cells. If you inject them particular cells. If you inject them into the body, lipid nanoparticles into the body, lipid nanoparticles into the body, lipid nanoparticles naturally tend to go to the liver. So naturally tend to go to the liver. So naturally tend to go to the liver. So people are using these already to cure people are using these already to cure people are using these already to cure genetic diseases that where the genetic diseases that where the genetic diseases that where the genetic burden is affecting the cells in the burden is affecting the cells in the burden is affecting the cells in the liver because you can deliver CRISPR to liver because you can deliver CRISPR to liver because you can deliver CRISPR to cells in the liver cells in the liver cells in the liver pretty robustly with these. pretty robustly with these. pretty robustly with these. I have my strong view on the COVID I have my strong view on the COVID I have my strong view on the COVID vaccine. I think it was a miracle that vaccine. I think it was a miracle that vaccine. I think it was a miracle that we were able to develop something on a we were able to develop something on a we were able to develop something on a short timeline to address a pandemic short timeline to address a pandemic short timeline to address a pandemic that was that was that was killing but killing people. killing but killing people. killing but killing people. But, I understand there's controversy. I understand there's controversy. I understand there's controversy. Leaving that aside, Leaving that aside, Leaving that aside, lipid nanoparticles are it's amazing lipid nanoparticles are it's amazing lipid nanoparticles are it's amazing that we were able to do this. That we that we were able to do this. That we that we were able to do this. That we took something that was an idea took something that was an idea took something that was an idea Most people thought it would be an Most people thought it would be an Most people thought it would be an obscure technical thing like you talked obscure technical thing like you talked obscure technical thing like you talked about like it was people would have about like it was people would have about like it was people would have would have never work. All of a sudden would have never work. All of a sudden would have never work. All of a sudden it could be manufactured at scale, could it could be manufactured at scale, could it could be manufactured at scale, could deliver a synthetic piece of mRNA to deliver a synthetic piece of mRNA to deliver a synthetic piece of mRNA to give a temporary instruction to cells to give a temporary instruction to cells to give a temporary instruction to cells to make a protein to protect us. make a protein to protect us. make a protein to protect us. And whether that's for COVID or for And whether that's for COVID or for And whether that's for COVID or for other things, all of a sudden we're other things, all of a sudden we're other things, all of a sudden we're again I just keep coming back to this again I just keep coming back to this again I just keep coming back to this theme where there's more and more ways theme where there's more and more ways theme where there's more and more ways that we can not only understand biology that we can not only understand biology that we can not only understand biology but that we can intervene in it to treat but that we can intervene in it to treat but that we can intervene in it to treat disease. And so now we're talking about disease. And so now we're talking about disease. And so now we're talking about something totally different. We're something totally different. We're something totally different. We're talking about delivering CRISPR, which talking about delivering CRISPR, which talking about delivering CRISPR, which is not the an mRNA vaccine but we're is not the an mRNA vaccine but we're is not the an mRNA vaccine but we're talking about how would we get CRISPR talking about how would we get CRISPR talking about how would we get CRISPR into cells or how would we get extra into cells or how would we get extra into cells or how would we get extra pieces of genetic material which might pieces of genetic material which might pieces of genetic material which might be an mRNA so be an mRNA so be an mRNA so into a T cell. into a T cell. into a T cell. All of this can now be done even beyond All of this can now be done even beyond All of this can now be done even beyond the vaccine world with the same kind of the vaccine world with the same kind of the vaccine world with the same kind of building blocks of technologies like building blocks of technologies like building blocks of technologies like lipid nanoparticles. lipid nanoparticles. lipid nanoparticles. Actually there's a company out of the Actually there's a company out of the Actually there's a company out of the University of Pennsylvania that did University of Pennsylvania that did University of Pennsylvania that did actually developed recently a technology to make developed recently a technology to make developed recently a technology to make lipid nanoparticles that could be lipid nanoparticles that could be lipid nanoparticles that could be injected into the bloodstream. Think of injected into the bloodstream. Think of injected into the bloodstream. Think of them as these little fat bubbles exactly them as these little fat bubbles exactly them as these little fat bubbles exactly as you said. But in them they as you said. But in them they as you said. But in them they included in a protein that would included in a protein that would included in a protein that would recognize something on the surface of T recognize something on the surface of T recognize something on the surface of T cells so that as these lipid bubbles cells so that as these lipid bubbles cells so that as these lipid bubbles were going through the blood they would were going through the blood they would were going through the blood they would stick preferentially to T cells and stick preferentially to T cells and stick preferentially to T cells and deliver mRNA to T cells. And you could deliver mRNA to T cells. And you could deliver mRNA to T cells. And you could actually put in an mRNA into T cells actually put in an mRNA into T cells actually put in an mRNA into T cells that would temporarily make that would temporarily make that would temporarily make a gene that it would encode a gene that it would encode a gene that it would encode a CAR, these artificial receptors a CAR, these artificial receptors a CAR, these artificial receptors against cancer. And they've done this against cancer. And they've done this against cancer. And they've done this now in testing in a number of models. now in testing in a number of models. now in testing in a number of models. They can actually make these CAR-T cells They can actually make these CAR-T cells They can actually make these CAR-T cells by injecting lipid by injecting lipid by injecting lipid nanoparticles into the body without ever nanoparticles into the body without ever nanoparticles into the body without ever taking the T cells out of the taking the T cells out of the taking the T cells out of the bloodstream. And I think we're going to bloodstream. And I think we're going to bloodstream. And I think we're going to see more and more things like that. The more and more things like that. The more and more things like that. The pharma industry is all of a sudden pharma industry is all of a sudden pharma industry is all of a sudden saying, "Okay, there's more ways that we saying, "Okay, there's more ways that we saying, "Okay, there's more ways that we can make drugs. Things don't have to can make drugs. Things don't have to can make drugs. Things don't have to just be pills anymore. They can be just be pills anymore. They can be just be pills anymore. They can be engineered proteins or lipid engineered proteins or lipid engineered proteins or lipid nanoparticles or viruses or engineered nanoparticles or viruses or engineered nanoparticles or viruses or engineered cells. Whatever is going to be most cells. Whatever is going to be most cells. Whatever is going to be most effective at getting to the root cause effective at getting to the root cause effective at getting to the root cause of disease." of disease." of disease." I want to just talk about the COVID I want to just talk about the COVID I want to just talk about the COVID vaccine briefly vaccine briefly vaccine briefly because in my role as a public health because in my role as a public health because in my role as a public health educator, I was exposed to a lot of voices. I was exposed to a lot of voices. I was exposed to a lot of voices. Um and I can't speak for everybody, Um and I can't speak for everybody, Um and I can't speak for everybody, certainly, but I think that certainly, but I think that certainly, but I think that at least three of the things that caused at least three of the things that caused at least three of the things that caused a lot of divide around the mRNA a lot of divide around the mRNA a lot of divide around the mRNA vaccines were first of all, um vaccines were first of all, um vaccines were first of all, um the difference between mandates versus the difference between mandates versus the difference between mandates versus optionality. We don't have to go there, but I think We don't have to go there, but I think We don't have to go there, but I think that was a that was a major that was a that was a major that was a that was a major player, right? People, especially player, right? People, especially player, right? People, especially Americans, don't like to be told what to Americans, don't like to be told what to Americans, don't like to be told what to do. That's just a I've noticed that. Okay. That's just a I've noticed that. Okay. That's just a I've noticed that. Okay. Second of all, Second of all, Second of all, it was closely related to it was closely related to it was closely related to notions of the shutdown, which notions of the shutdown, which notions of the shutdown, which differentially impacted people. differentially impacted people. differentially impacted people. Um and that's an understatement, right? and that's an understatement, right? and that's an understatement, right? Some people maintained paychecks. Some people maintained paychecks. Some people maintained paychecks. Some people didn't. Some people could work. people didn't. Some people could work. people didn't. Some people could work. Some people couldn't. So, there was Some people couldn't. So, there was Some people couldn't. So, there was that. I just didn't I'm not trying to uh that. I just didn't I'm not trying to uh that. I just didn't I'm not trying to uh you know, you know, you know, soften anything here, but I think that soften anything here, but I think that soften anything here, but I think that the vaccines were nested in a the vaccines were nested in a the vaccines were nested in a bunch of other issues. bunch of other issues. bunch of other issues. Um again, at least three. This is not Um again, at least three. This is not Um again, at least three. This is not exhaustive. And then the other one, and exhaustive. And then the other one, and exhaustive. And then the other one, and I actually had this concern myself, I actually had this concern myself, I actually had this concern myself, which was which was which was how is it that it gets turned off? how is it that it gets turned off? how is it that it gets turned off? Right? Like I can imagine a situation Right? Like I can imagine a situation Right? Like I can imagine a situation where I would want to put an mRNA where I would want to put an mRNA where I would want to put an mRNA into me into me into me to do something biologically, to do something biologically, to do something biologically, but then I don't want it to continue to but then I don't want it to continue to but then I don't want it to continue to do that after a period of time. do that after a period of time. do that after a period of time. So, what in the design of that vaccine So, what in the design of that vaccine So, what in the design of that vaccine allowed it to be targeted to the cells allowed it to be targeted to the cells allowed it to be targeted to the cells of interest and then not continue to of interest and then not continue to of interest and then not continue to express in all other cells in express in all other cells in express in all other cells in perpetuity? I answer the specific perpetuity? I answer the specific perpetuity? I answer the specific question, but I think the context that question, but I think the context that question, but I think the context that you give is also really important part you give is also really important part you give is also really important part of this. Now, I would take 1 second to of this. Now, I would take 1 second to of this. Now, I would take 1 second to talk about this. talk about this. talk about this. I think to answer your first I think to answer your first I think to answer your first question, we talked about DNA as the sort of we talked about DNA as the sort of we talked about DNA as the sort of source code. We talked about proteins as source code. We talked about proteins as source code. We talked about proteins as what the DNA is ultimately encoding. what the DNA is ultimately encoding. what the DNA is ultimately encoding. Let's just talk for a second about what Let's just talk for a second about what Let's just talk for a second about what mRNA is. mRNA is the sort of temporary mRNA is. mRNA is the sort of temporary mRNA is. mRNA is the sort of temporary intermediate between those things. intermediate between those things. intermediate between those things. DNA will get what's called transcribed DNA will get what's called transcribed DNA will get what's called transcribed into mRNA, which is a another nucleic into mRNA, which is a another nucleic into mRNA, which is a another nucleic acid, but doesn't stick around acid, but doesn't stick around acid, but doesn't stick around permanently. It is the temporary permanently. It is the temporary permanently. It is the temporary instruction, which will then instruction, which will then instruction, which will then go to the ribosome and become the go to the ribosome and become the go to the ribosome and become the template the template for a template the template for a template the template for a particular protein. particular protein. particular protein. The idea of an mRNA vaccine is that The idea of an mRNA vaccine is that The idea of an mRNA vaccine is that you're using this temporary template, so you're using this temporary template, so you're using this temporary template, so that the cells that will take this up will the cells that will take this up will the cells that will take this up will make proteins from this temporary make proteins from this temporary make proteins from this temporary template for some period of time. Now, template for some period of time. Now, template for some period of time. Now, there could be some I you can always there could be some I you can always there could be some I you can always imagine the extreme outliers of ways imagine the extreme outliers of ways imagine the extreme outliers of ways that this could last longer or not, but that this could last longer or not, but that this could last longer or not, but fundamentally this is you're fundamentally this is you're fundamentally this is you're putting in an mRNA that putting in an mRNA that putting in an mRNA that gives a temporary instruction to cell to gives a temporary instruction to cell to gives a temporary instruction to cell to make a small part of the COVID vaccine. make a small part of the COVID vaccine. make a small part of the COVID vaccine. Now, of the COVID virus, a very small part, of the COVID virus, a very small part, of the COVID virus, a very small part, right? Now, just by comparison, if you right? Now, just by comparison, if you right? Now, just by comparison, if you get infected with COVID, you're also get infected with COVID, you're also get infected with COVID, you're also going to get COVID mRNA is transcribed going to get COVID mRNA is transcribed going to get COVID mRNA is transcribed in your cells. And, you know, the in your cells. And, you know, the in your cells. And, you know, the that so that so that so you there's we're talking about genetic you there's we're talking about genetic you there's we're talking about genetic material making mRNA either way, whether material making mRNA either way, whether material making mRNA either way, whether it's the mRNA from the COVID or a it's the mRNA from the COVID or a it's the mRNA from the COVID or a designed small part of that COVID designed small part of that COVID designed small part of that COVID vaccine that if of that COVID genome vaccine that if of that COVID genome vaccine that if of that COVID genome that we're using as a vaccine. So, I that we're using as a vaccine. So, I that we're using as a vaccine. So, I think it's important to think about the think it's important to think about the think it's important to think about the risks in the context of the virus versus risks in the context of the virus versus risks in the context of the virus versus what we're doing with a with a vaccine. what we're doing with a with a vaccine. what we're doing with a with a vaccine. So, I got the COVID vaccine So, I got the COVID vaccine So, I got the COVID vaccine enthusiastically and I and I actually I enthusiastically and I and I actually I enthusiastically and I and I actually I think overwhelmingly my I mean I mean I think overwhelmingly my I mean I mean I think overwhelmingly my I mean I mean I know overwhelmingly my immunology know overwhelmingly my immunology know overwhelmingly my immunology colleagues did the same. In people who colleagues did the same. In people who colleagues did the same. In people who live in this world of immunology, a live in this world of immunology, a live in this world of immunology, a great enthusiasm that this could be done great enthusiasm that this could be done great enthusiasm that this could be done and built. and built. and built. Now, what that doesn't answer what you said what that doesn't answer what you said what that doesn't answer what you said about the cultural phenomenon. about the cultural phenomenon. about the cultural phenomenon. I'm talking just as a person, not as an I'm talking just as a person, not as an I'm talking just as a person, not as an immunologist, but I think we probably immunologist, but I think we probably immunologist, but I think we probably haven't done enough to talk about the haven't done enough to talk about the haven't done enough to talk about the trauma that we went through as a nation trauma that we went through as a nation trauma that we went through as a nation during COVID during COVID during COVID of being fractured by people dying on one being fractured by people dying on one being fractured by people dying on one hand and all the negative consequences hand and all the negative consequences hand and all the negative consequences as you said of shutdown, shutdown of as you said of shutdown, shutdown of as you said of shutdown, shutdown of economic life, shutdown of social life. economic life, shutdown of social life. economic life, shutdown of social life. I think it was a period of major I think it was a period of major I think it was a period of major dislocation and we're still feeling the dislocation and we're still feeling the dislocation and we're still feeling the trauma and trauma and trauma and the people's different relationships the people's different relationships the people's different relationships with things like vaccine, but of science with things like vaccine, but of science with things like vaccine, but of science even more generally, were dislodged or even more generally, were dislodged or even more generally, were dislodged or accentuated by this trauma that I think accentuated by this trauma that I think accentuated by this trauma that I think we all collectively went through and we all collectively went through and we all collectively went through and we don't talk enough about. don't talk enough about. don't talk enough about. Um I'll just say just give one anecdote. I'll just say just give one anecdote. I'll just say just give one anecdote. Well, I spent a lot of time isolated Well, I spent a lot of time isolated Well, I spent a lot of time isolated during COVID during COVID during COVID and was disheartened by the fact that on and was disheartened by the fact that on and was disheartened by the fact that on one hand I was watching the sort of one hand I was watching the sort of one hand I was watching the sort of scientific like speed race scientific like speed race scientific like speed race that was, you know, actually I think one that was, you know, actually I think one that was, you know, actually I think one of the one of the highlights of the one of the highlights of the one of the highlights of the first Trump administration, the first Trump administration, the first Trump administration, Operation Warp Speed, to Operation Warp Speed, to Operation Warp Speed, to streamline and get coordination on to streamline and get coordination on to streamline and get coordination on both on the science and the both on the science and the both on the science and the regulatory side to get vaccines approved regulatory side to get vaccines approved regulatory side to get vaccines approved in an extraordinary timeline taking in an extraordinary timeline taking in an extraordinary timeline taking advantage of a number of technologies advantage of a number of technologies advantage of a number of technologies and making them all. So, I was and making them all. So, I was and making them all. So, I was watching this science unfold with watching this science unfold with watching this science unfold with some optimism, but also watching some optimism, but also watching some optimism, but also watching the trust in science being eroded. I the trust in science being eroded. I the trust in science being eroded. I developed a side hobby, um which is developed a side hobby, um which is developed a side hobby, um which is I've been I've just gone back I've been I've been I've just gone back I've been I've been I've just gone back I've been reading I've been reading presidential reading I've been reading presidential reading I've been reading presidential biographies sequentially. I biographies sequentially. I biographies sequentially. I This is This is This is just a side This is This is This is just a side This is This is This is just a side hobby. Now, hobby. Now, hobby. Now, in this in reading of in thinking about in this in reading of in thinking about in this in reading of in thinking about this sort of frustration with how this sort of frustration with how this sort of frustration with how science was sort of tearing things science was sort of tearing things science was sort of tearing things apart, I found this sort of strange apart, I found this sort of strange apart, I found this sort of strange relief in reading about early American relief in reading about early American relief in reading about early American history. In 1793, In 1793, In 1793, there was a yellow fever epidemic in there was a yellow fever epidemic in there was a yellow fever epidemic in Philadelphia. in Philadelphia. in Philadelphia. And actually the early parties that were And actually the early parties that were And actually the early parties that were forming, the Federalists and the Democrats, the Federalists and the Democrats, the Federalists and the Democrats, actually took like wildly dissenting actually took like wildly dissenting actually took like wildly dissenting views of how to deal with an epidemic. views of how to deal with an epidemic. views of how to deal with an epidemic. They had different views of what They had different views of what They had different views of what caused it with whether it was outside caused it with whether it was outside caused it with whether it was outside contagion or those or sanitation. And contagion or those or sanitation. And contagion or those or sanitation. And the Democrats at that at that time, the Democrats at that at that time, the Democrats at that at that time, the Jeffersonian Democrats, were in the Jeffersonian Democrats, were in the Jeffersonian Democrats, were in favor of like really extreme favor of like really extreme favor of like really extreme bloodletting techniques. And the And the bloodletting techniques. And the And the bloodletting techniques. And the And the Hamiltonians the Federalists had Hamiltonians the Federalists had Hamiltonians the Federalists had a had a totally different set of a had a totally different set of a had a totally different set of techniques of techniques of techniques of baths and more gentle treatments. baths and more gentle treatments. baths and more gentle treatments. And they just couldn't see eye to eye. And they just couldn't see eye to eye. And they just couldn't see eye to eye. Why am I saying all this? I think it's Why am I saying all this? I think it's Why am I saying all this? I think it's not new territory that in that not new territory that in that not new territory that in that these discussions of how we deal with these discussions of how we deal with these discussions of how we deal with infections, which are inherently infections, which are inherently infections, which are inherently societal diseases, unearth the societal diseases, unearth the societal diseases, unearth the societal tensions and we deal with them in tensions and we deal with them in tensions and we deal with them in different ways and we come at to them different ways and we come at to them different ways and we come at to them from different perspectives. And there from different perspectives. And there from different perspectives. And there there's a lot of things that are there's a lot of things that are there's a lot of things that are simultaneously being balanced in any simultaneously being balanced in any simultaneously being balanced in any decision of how we deal with thinking decision of how we deal with thinking decision of how we deal with thinking about the trade-offs that we're willing about the trade-offs that we're willing about the trade-offs that we're willing to make in the face of an of a to make in the face of an of a to make in the face of an of a pandemic or an epidemic. pandemic or an epidemic. pandemic or an epidemic. I really appreciate that, and I'm also I really appreciate that, and I'm also I really appreciate that, and I'm also impressed that you're reading these impressed that you're reading these impressed that you're reading these biographies. How do you biographies. How do you biographies. How do you know which biography to select because know which biography to select because know which biography to select because there are many of them, and there are many of them, and there are many of them, and unfortunately Walter Isaacson hasn't unfortunately Walter Isaacson hasn't unfortunately Walter Isaacson hasn't written them all. I love his books. So, written them all. I love his books. So, written them all. I love his books. So, how do you select how do you select how do you select the author of each biography? the author of each biography? the author of each biography? &gt;&gt; a This is a &gt;&gt; a This is a &gt;&gt; a This is a This is a project that I spend a lot This is a project that I spend a lot This is a project that I spend a lot of time each one I go through a period of time each one I go through a period of time each one I go through a period of indecision about which one I Okay. I of indecision about which one I Okay. I of indecision about which one I Okay. I should read. I should read. I should read. &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. I can share my list. I'm not I'm &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. I can share my list. I'm not I'm &gt;&gt; Uh-huh. I can share my list. I'm not I'm not done yet and this has been over not done yet and this has been over not done yet and this has been over several years. I've been I'm now up to several years. I've been I'm now up to several years. I've been I'm now up to World War II. You should do a podcast World War II. You should do a podcast World War II. You should do a podcast someday. Just know in your copious someday. Just know in your copious someday. Just know in your copious amounts of spare time, not as a husband, amounts of spare time, not as a husband, amounts of spare time, not as a husband, father, running a giant lab, etc., and father, running a giant lab, etc., and father, running a giant lab, etc., and physician, uh you could do a podcast and physician, uh you could do a podcast and physician, uh you could do a podcast and teach us what you learned. Anyway, and teach us what you learned. Anyway, and teach us what you learned. Anyway, awesome. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year I became a Function member Last year I became a Function member Last year I became a Function member after searching for the most after searching for the most after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics and tests for PFAS or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and supplementing with NAC and N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. I should say by taking a detoxification. I should say by taking a detoxification. I should say by taking a second Function test, that approach second Function test, that approach second Function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is worked. Comprehensive blood testing is worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There are so many vitally important. There are so many vitally important. There are so many things related to your mental and things related to your mental and things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. I have a question related to I have a question related to I have a question related to technologies to technologies to technologies to killing or altering cells that we didn't killing or altering cells that we didn't killing or altering cells that we didn't cover, but since we uh we've touched on cover, but since we uh we've touched on cover, but since we uh we've touched on a number of them, the uh lip lipid a number of them, the uh lip lipid a number of them, the uh lip lipid nanoparticles, um lentiviruses, since we're um lentiviruses, since we're um lentiviruses, since we're um in a previous lifetime, in a previous lifetime, in a previous lifetime, I used uh in my experiments and I was I used uh in my experiments and I was I used uh in my experiments and I was excited by immunotoxins. excited by immunotoxins. excited by immunotoxins. So, an antibody against you generally So, an antibody against you generally So, an antibody against you generally need a cell surface protein, and then need a cell surface protein, and then need a cell surface protein, and then you attach to it. In our case, we you attach to it. In our case, we you attach to it. In our case, we use saporin toxin, which uh I think is use saporin toxin, which uh I think is use saporin toxin, which uh I think is most infamous uh because it was put on most infamous uh because it was put on most infamous uh because it was put on the tip of an umbrella and used to the tip of an umbrella and used to the tip of an umbrella and used to assassinate somebody on a bridge assassinate somebody on a bridge assassinate somebody on a bridge someplace in some sort of uh someplace in some sort of uh someplace in some sort of uh international spy warfare in the last 20 international spy warfare in the last 20 international spy warfare in the last 20 years or so. A saporin will kill you if years or so. A saporin will kill you if years or so. A saporin will kill you if it goes systemic, but the idea there is it goes systemic, but the idea there is it goes systemic, but the idea there is that you take the saporin toxin and you that you take the saporin toxin and you that you take the saporin toxin and you tether it to an antibody that then finds tether it to an antibody that then finds tether it to an antibody that then finds a cell surface protein and then kills a cell surface protein and then kills a cell surface protein and then kills that cell and only cell. And it works that cell and only cell. And it works that cell and only cell. And it works remarkably well in experimental remarkably well in experimental remarkably well in experimental conditions if certain things are right. conditions if certain things are right. conditions if certain things are right. It doesn't always have the specificity It doesn't always have the specificity It doesn't always have the specificity you would like or the thoroughness. you would like or the thoroughness. you would like or the thoroughness. Um has that been tried in cancer um Um has that been tried in cancer um Um has that been tried in cancer um directing toxins towards uh cancer directing toxins towards uh cancer directing toxins towards uh cancer cells? The short answer is yes. It's a cells? The short answer is yes. It's a cells? The short answer is yes. It's a it's a really it's a really it's a really interesting area. And and it and what interesting area. And and it and what interesting area. And and it and what that toxin is that toxin is that toxin is can almost be thought of as like modular can almost be thought of as like modular can almost be thought of as like modular that you can put a put a different that you can put a put a different that you can put a put a different that you can think of it as two components, you can think of it as two components, you can think of it as two components, right? You have a targeting component. right? You have a targeting component. right? You have a targeting component. You have in the in antibodies a natural You have in the in antibodies a natural You have in the in antibodies a natural one of where the antibody is evolved to one of where the antibody is evolved to one of where the antibody is evolved to recognize one particular type of recognize one particular type of recognize one particular type of protein. That can be the thing that targets of That can be the thing that targets of That can be the thing that targets of something on the surface of cancer something on the surface of cancer something on the surface of cancer cells. Um people have then people have then people have then developed what's called antibody drug developed what's called antibody drug developed what's called antibody drug conjugates where basically a drug or a conjugates where basically a drug or a conjugates where basically a drug or a talk something that's going to kill the talk something that's going to kill the talk something that's going to kill the cell gets appended to that antibody and cell gets appended to that antibody and cell gets appended to that antibody and so it's selectively delivered. You don't so it's selectively delivered. You don't so it's selectively delivered. You don't have to deliver the drug at systemic have to deliver the drug at systemic have to deliver the drug at systemic doses but you can actually increase the doses but you can actually increase the doses but you can actually increase the local concentration by delivering it local concentration by delivering it local concentration by delivering it preferentially to the cancer cells that preferentially to the cancer cells that preferentially to the cancer cells that will be recognized by that antibody. will be recognized by that antibody. will be recognized by that antibody. Doesn't have to be drugs. People are Doesn't have to be drugs. People are Doesn't have to be drugs. People are thinking about other things. We were thinking about other things. We were thinking about other things. We were one people are now trying to attach one people are now trying to attach one people are now trying to attach uh radioactive isotopes. There's radio radioactive isotopes. There's radio radioactive isotopes. There's radio ligand therapies that they can be ligand therapies that they can be ligand therapies that they can be attached to these things. Um and I think attached to these things. Um and I think attached to these things. Um and I think in an extreme that's essentially what in an extreme that's essentially what in an extreme that's essentially what we're doing with these T-cell therapies, we're doing with these T-cell therapies, we're doing with these T-cell therapies, too. Mhm. We're also using the when too. Mhm. We're also using the when too. Mhm. We're also using the when I I've talked about this CAR, the I I've talked about this CAR, the I I've talked about this CAR, the chimeric antigen receptor, the outside chimeric antigen receptor, the outside chimeric antigen receptor, the outside of it that is the center that's being of it that is the center that's being of it that is the center that's being used is also an a part of an antibody. used is also an a part of an antibody. used is also an a part of an antibody. And so essentially what we're doing is And so essentially what we're doing is And so essentially what we're doing is now using the antibody to target but now using the antibody to target but now using the antibody to target but instead of drag dragging along a drug, instead of drag dragging along a drug, instead of drag dragging along a drug, it's dragging along a cell. Mhm. And so it's dragging along a cell. Mhm. And so it's dragging along a cell. Mhm. And so when that's engaged, the T-cell is there when that's engaged, the T-cell is there when that's engaged, the T-cell is there and the T-cell becomes the killing and the T-cell becomes the killing and the T-cell becomes the killing module but the cell not only the module but the cell not only the module but the cell not only the T-cell not only kills the cancer cell T-cell not only kills the cancer cell T-cell not only kills the cancer cell but could potentially be used to amplify but could potentially be used to amplify but could potentially be used to amplify that response, could recruit re-release that response, could recruit re-release that response, could recruit re-release things and recruit other things. So I things and recruit other things. So I things and recruit other things. So I think this general way of thinking about think this general way of thinking about think this general way of thinking about designing things designing things designing things um to drag something to a cancer site is to drag something to a cancer site is to drag something to a cancer site is something that people are thinking a lot something that people are thinking a lot something that people are thinking a lot about. There's even another flavor of this that There's even another flavor of this that There's even another flavor of this that are called T-cell engagers. So I talked are called T-cell engagers. So I talked are called T-cell engagers. So I talked about okay, we can genetically put an about okay, we can genetically put an about okay, we can genetically put an antibody fragment on a T-cell and use antibody fragment on a T-cell and use antibody fragment on a T-cell and use that to direct a T-cell to a cancer. that to direct a T-cell to a cancer. that to direct a T-cell to a cancer. People are also making antibodies that People are also making antibodies that People are also making antibodies that are antibodies on both ends. are antibodies on both ends. are antibodies on both ends. Okay, so this is sometimes Okay, so this is sometimes Okay, so this is sometimes I think this is a proprietary term, but I think this is a proprietary term, but I think this is a proprietary term, but it can be called a bispecific or a bite. it can be called a bispecific or a bite. it can be called a bispecific or a bite. The bite is a proprietary term, The bite is a proprietary term, The bite is a proprietary term, but basically these are two-headed but basically these are two-headed but basically these are two-headed antibodies. One side will recognize a antibodies. One side will recognize a antibodies. One side will recognize a cancer cell and the other side will cancer cell and the other side will cancer cell and the other side will recognize a T cell and essentially bring recognize a T cell and essentially bring recognize a T cell and essentially bring these things together so that you get these things together so that you get these things together so that you get the T cell action locally to the cancer the T cell action locally to the cancer the T cell action locally to the cancer cell without having to do any genetic cell without having to do any genetic cell without having to do any genetic modification to the T cell. You actually modification to the T cell. You actually modification to the T cell. You actually just take advantage of T cells that are just take advantage of T cells that are just take advantage of T cells that are already in the body. So all of these already in the body. So all of these already in the body. So all of these things are now under very active things are now under very active things are now under very active developments and some of them are developments and some of them are developments and some of them are approved, others are still in approved, others are still in approved, others are still in development. Very cool. development. Very cool. development. Very cool. I'm sure people are catching on to this, I'm sure people are catching on to this, I'm sure people are catching on to this, but basically if you can understand the but basically if you can understand the but basically if you can understand the structure of things including very structure of things including very structure of things including very small things, you can Lego them and you small things, you can Lego them and you small things, you can Lego them and you can um put all sorts of interesting cargos and put all sorts of interesting cargos and put all sorts of interesting cargos and play matchmaker between cells and um uh play matchmaker between cells and um uh play matchmaker between cells and um uh it's kind of infinite what you can it's kind of infinite what you can it's kind of infinite what you can do um once you start to do um once you start to do um once you start to understand things at that scale. That's understand things at that scale. That's understand things at that scale. That's really what it's about. really what it's about. really what it's about. &gt;&gt; I'll push it one step further. I'm &gt;&gt; I'll push it one step further. I'm &gt;&gt; I'll push it one step further. I'm actually uh helping to organize a cancer uh helping to organize a cancer uh helping to organize a cancer immunotherapy conference here in LA. immunotherapy conference here in LA. immunotherapy conference here in LA. I'm simultaneously here for this I'm simultaneously here for this I'm simultaneously here for this and for that. I was at the conference and for that. I was at the conference and for that. I was at the conference yesterday and there was a talk by Amgen, yesterday and there was a talk by Amgen, yesterday and there was a talk by Amgen, big pharma company. I should disclose big pharma company. I should disclose big pharma company. I should disclose I'm an advisor to Amgen, but this I'm an advisor to Amgen, but this I'm an advisor to Amgen, but this talk was and Amgen's been one of this talk was and Amgen's been one of this talk was and Amgen's been one of the leaders in these bites. I think they the leaders in these bites. I think they the leaders in these bites. I think they actually trademarked this idea of actually trademarked this idea of actually trademarked this idea of bispecific T cell engager. Um bispecific T cell engager. Um bispecific T cell engager. Um these are antibody fragments, these are antibody fragments, these are antibody fragments, but uh one of the leaders at Amgen but uh one of the leaders at Amgen but uh one of the leaders at Amgen talked yesterday about how looking talked yesterday about how looking talked yesterday about how looking forward, these aren't being used as just forward, these aren't being used as just forward, these aren't being used as just traditional antibodies that come out of traditional antibodies that come out of traditional antibodies that come out of animals, but they're actually being of animals, but they're actually being of animals, but they're actually being used as AI designed a engagers of any used as AI designed a engagers of any used as AI designed a engagers of any target you want. So, essentially now target you want. So, essentially now target you want. So, essentially now it's getting to the point where if you it's getting to the point where if you it's getting to the point where if you know that something's on the surface of know that something's on the surface of know that something's on the surface of a cancer cell, a cancer cell, a cancer cell, people are increasingly using AI models people are increasingly using AI models people are increasingly using AI models to design a synthetic protein that to design a synthetic protein that to design a synthetic protein that doesn't even exist in nature that is doesn't even exist in nature that is doesn't even exist in nature that is designed to designed to designed to recognize and stick to something on the recognize and stick to something on the recognize and stick to something on the surface of cancer cell. And that could surface of cancer cell. And that could surface of cancer cell. And that could be a one of these Lego blocks for these be a one of these Lego blocks for these be a one of these Lego blocks for these modular multi multi-faceted in T cell modular multi multi-faceted in T cell modular multi multi-faceted in T cell engagers or drug engagers or any of engagers or drug engagers or any of engagers or drug engagers or any of these other things. So, these other things. So, these other things. So, this is another area where the cross-talk is another area where the cross-talk is another area where the cross-talk between experimental capabilities and between experimental capabilities and between experimental capabilities and computational exper- capabilities computational exper- capabilities computational exper- capabilities is further accelerating what's possible. is further accelerating what's possible. is further accelerating what's possible. Incredible. Um would you mind if I asked a couple of Um would you mind if I asked a couple of Um would you mind if I asked a couple of questions about the kind of science questions about the kind of science questions about the kind of science sociology and ethics around CRISPR? No, sociology and ethics around CRISPR? No, sociology and ethics around CRISPR? No, I would love it. I'll keep this brief. I would love it. I'll keep this brief. I would love it. I'll keep this brief. Um a few years back uh we all learned, Um a few years back uh we all learned, Um a few years back uh we all learned, meaning the entire world learned, that meaning the entire world learned, that meaning the entire world learned, that uh a scientist in China had done a uh a scientist in China had done a uh a scientist in China had done a CRISPR Cas experiment on CRISPR Cas experiment on CRISPR Cas experiment on babies. Yeah. I don't know when he did babies. Yeah. I don't know when he did babies. Yeah. I don't know when he did the modification. My guess is it was in the modification. My guess is it was in the modification. My guess is it was in utero. You'll tell us what exactly he utero. You'll tell us what exactly he utero. You'll tell us what exactly he did. This hit close to home for me did. This hit close to home for me did. This hit close to home for me because he and I were postdocs at the because he and I were postdocs at the because he and I were postdocs at the same time at Stanford, different labs. same time at Stanford, different labs. same time at Stanford, different labs. And the way it the news hit the world And the way it the news hit the world And the way it the news hit the world was very interesting. One of the things was very interesting. One of the things was very interesting. One of the things I benefit from now as a podcaster, not I benefit from now as a podcaster, not I benefit from now as a podcaster, not just a professor, is that I can talk just a professor, is that I can talk just a professor, is that I can talk about the stuff that perhaps about the stuff that perhaps about the stuff that perhaps pure professors wouldn't be willing to. pure professors wouldn't be willing to. pure professors wouldn't be willing to. Um so, I'll say it. It was very Um so, I'll say it. It was very Um so, I'll say it. It was very interesting because the world kind of interesting because the world kind of interesting because the world kind of braced, but didn't make a decision as to whether but didn't make a decision as to whether but didn't make a decision as to whether or not they were upset that he had done or not they were upset that he had done or not they were upset that he had done this. Like put him in front of an ethics Like put him in front of an ethics Like put him in front of an ethics board, maybe even throw him in a cell, board, maybe even throw him in a cell, board, maybe even throw him in a cell, or give him a Nobel Prize. It was like or give him a Nobel Prize. It was like or give him a Nobel Prize. It was like there was this kind of moment where no there was this kind of moment where no there was this kind of moment where no one really knew what to do. Yeah. Like one really knew what to do. Yeah. Like one really knew what to do. Yeah. Like do you reward him? Do you punish him? Do do you reward him? Do you punish him? Do do you reward him? Do you punish him? Do you do nothing? you do nothing? you do nothing? And it circulated back to Stanford And it circulated back to Stanford And it circulated back to Stanford because there was a question of, you know, what there was a question of, you know, what there was a question of, you know, what he had learned at Stanford, what was he had learned at Stanford, what was he had learned at Stanford, what was done at Stanford, and the stance, as done at Stanford, and the stance, as done at Stanford, and the stance, as I recall, was everyone just kind of I recall, was everyone just kind of I recall, was everyone just kind of waited to see how the world treated him. waited to see how the world treated him. waited to see how the world treated him. This is not a disparagement of any of my This is not a disparagement of any of my This is not a disparagement of any of my colleagues. I think we didn't understand colleagues. I think we didn't understand colleagues. I think we didn't understand how to react to this. And then the how to react to this. And then the how to react to this. And then the decision was quickly made decision was quickly made decision was quickly made at large that he had done a bad thing. at large that he had done a bad thing. at large that he had done a bad thing. And that's kind of the last we ever And that's kind of the last we ever And that's kind of the last we ever heard about him or those kids. The heard about him or those kids. The heard about him or those kids. The Chinese government condemned it Chinese government condemned it Chinese government condemned it publicly. Uh I think they said he was going to be Uh I think they said he was going to be Uh I think they said he was going to be punished, but it wasn't clear if he was punished, but it wasn't clear if he was punished, but it wasn't clear if he was going to be punished by being put in a going to be punished by being put in a going to be punished by being put in a jail cell, being fined, or um given a jail cell, being fined, or um given a jail cell, being fined, or um given a larger laboratory and more resources. It larger laboratory and more resources. It larger laboratory and more resources. It was very unclear. It's was very unclear. It's was very unclear. It's playing God at some level, Yeah. playing God at some level, Yeah. playing God at some level, Yeah. &gt;&gt; right? It's not the same as deciding to &gt;&gt; right? It's not the same as deciding to &gt;&gt; right? It's not the same as deciding to not implant some embryos that were not implant some embryos that were not implant some embryos that were created through IVF because they carry created through IVF because they carry created through IVF because they carry an extra chromosome. It's different than an extra chromosome. It's different than an extra chromosome. It's different than that. It's taking healthy children that. It's taking healthy children that. It's taking healthy children in this case and making a change to try in this case and making a change to try in this case and making a change to try and make them, quote and quote, super and make them, quote and quote, super and make them, quote and quote, super people. So, I would love your thoughts on that So, I would love your thoughts on that So, I would love your thoughts on that particular instance, your particular instance, your particular instance, your awareness, if any, that um CRISPR in awareness, if any, that um CRISPR in awareness, if any, that um CRISPR in otherwise healthy humans has continued, otherwise healthy humans has continued, otherwise healthy humans has continued, and where you think this is all going. and where you think this is all going. and where you think this is all going. Yeah, I think you captured a lot of that Yeah, I think you captured a lot of that Yeah, I think you captured a lot of that moment. Uh I'm moment. Uh I'm moment. Uh I'm I wasn't there, but there was a I wasn't there, but there was a I wasn't there, but there was a international CRISPR conference that was international CRISPR conference that was international CRISPR conference that was being held, I believe, in Hong Kong at being held, I believe, in Hong Kong at being held, I believe, in Hong Kong at the time. And the scientist um got the time. And the scientist um got the time. And the scientist um got up and announced with in extraordinary up and announced with in extraordinary up and announced with in extraordinary pride in one of these sessions in pride in one of these sessions in pride in one of these sessions in this conference that he had done it. He this conference that he had done it. He this conference that he had done it. He had done had done had done genetic modification of embryos. And my genetic modification of embryos. And my genetic modification of embryos. And my understanding of what had happened understanding of what had happened understanding of what had happened was that there were two twins um who was that there were two twins um who was that there were two twins um who were there were there was were parents were there were there was were parents were there were there was were parents who wanted to have kids who wanted to have kids who wanted to have kids and the father was HIV positive. and the father was HIV positive. and the father was HIV positive. And the modifications that they decided And the modifications that they decided And the modifications that they decided to try to make were to try to make were to try to make were to delete a gene delete a gene delete a gene that is if it if it's deleted that is if it if it's deleted that is if it if it's deleted can confer resistance to HIV. can confer resistance to HIV. can confer resistance to HIV. This is a gene called CCR5. There's This is a gene called CCR5. There's This is a gene called CCR5. There's people who naturally have a certain people who naturally have a certain people who naturally have a certain mutation in this at some frequency and mutation in this at some frequency and mutation in this at some frequency and mutations in this gene confer resistance mutations in this gene confer resistance mutations in this gene confer resistance to HIV if they're naturally occurring. to HIV if they're naturally occurring. to HIV if they're naturally occurring. So that was the supposed rationale. So that was the supposed rationale. So that was the supposed rationale. &gt;&gt; was a disease &gt;&gt; was a disease &gt;&gt; was a disease aspect to it. Okay, I wasn't aware of aspect to it. Okay, I wasn't aware of aspect to it. Okay, I wasn't aware of that. Thank you for that clarification. that. Thank you for that clarification. that. Thank you for that clarification. It was a prophylaxis against this It was a prophylaxis against this It was a prophylaxis against this potential risk of HIV. Now, potential risk of HIV. Now, potential risk of HIV. Now, there were a lot of troublesome features there were a lot of troublesome features there were a lot of troublesome features from what I understand. First of all, from what I understand. First of all, from what I understand. First of all, there's state-of-the-art methods to reduce the state-of-the-art methods to reduce the state-of-the-art methods to reduce the risk of HIV if through sperm washing and risk of HIV if through sperm washing and risk of HIV if through sperm washing and things that can be done that would from things that can be done that would from things that can be done that would from my understanding essentially reduce the my understanding essentially reduce the my understanding essentially reduce the risk to near zero of transmission risk to near zero of transmission risk to near zero of transmission from a father to an embryo. So I think from a father to an embryo. So I think from a father to an embryo. So I think it was a bit of a manufactured need, but it was a bit of a manufactured need, but it was a bit of a manufactured need, but there was the supposed justification. there was the supposed justification. there was the supposed justification. Second of all, Second of all, Second of all, it was done it was done it was done so they actually ended up generating two so they actually ended up generating two so they actually ended up generating two twins and my understanding of how it was twins and my understanding of how it was twins and my understanding of how it was done and I don't think that this was ever and I don't think that this was ever and I don't think that this was ever published. There was some publicity published. There was some publicity published. There was some publicity that was released so I'm sort of piecing that was released so I'm sort of piecing that was released so I'm sort of piecing this together from what was this together from what was this together from what was public at that time, but I don't think public at that time, but I don't think public at that time, but I don't think any journal ever published this in any journal ever published this in any journal ever published this in any peer-reviewed context. peer-reviewed context. peer-reviewed context. They did this They did this They did this in concert with essentially IVF in concert with essentially IVF in concert with essentially IVF techniques. So they were fertilizing techniques. So they were fertilizing techniques. So they were fertilizing embryos with this with this father's embryos with this with this father's embryos with this with this father's sperm and the mother's the mother's sperm and the mother's the mother's sperm and the mother's the mother's eggs. They created multiple embryos and eggs. They created multiple embryos and eggs. They created multiple embryos and then they delivered CRISPR into these then they delivered CRISPR into these then they delivered CRISPR into these embryos and trying to create mutations embryos and trying to create mutations embryos and trying to create mutations in the CCR5 gene. in the CCR5 gene. in the CCR5 gene. There was some variability. It was There was some variability. It was There was some variability. It was pretty early in days of CRISPR, and as I pretty early in days of CRISPR, and as I pretty early in days of CRISPR, and as I said, there's an unpredictability of said, there's an unpredictability of said, there's an unpredictability of what happens when you make a what happens when you make a what happens when you make a double-stranded break in the genome. So, double-stranded break in the genome. So, double-stranded break in the genome. So, it was a stretch to say, "Okay, they it was a stretch to say, "Okay, they it was a stretch to say, "Okay, they didn't exactly get the mutations they didn't exactly get the mutations they didn't exactly get the mutations that they wanted." But, they proceeded that they wanted." But, they proceeded that they wanted." But, they proceeded nonetheless to implant these embryos. nonetheless to implant these embryos. nonetheless to implant these embryos. And I know less about this, but there And I know less about this, but there And I know less about this, but there were also serious concerns about the way were also serious concerns about the way were also serious concerns about the way that consent was done on this. Like, how that consent was done on this. Like, how that consent was done on this. Like, how much was informed about the much was informed about the much was informed about the what the actual benefits would be to what the actual benefits would be to what the actual benefits would be to these patients. these patients. these patients. My understanding is that he got up, and My understanding is that he got up, and My understanding is that he got up, and I don't wasn't in the room, but I do I don't wasn't in the room, but I do I don't wasn't in the room, but I do think that there was some degree of think that there was some degree of think that there was some degree of immediate horror that this was being immediate horror that this was being immediate horror that this was being announced and that it was unfolding announced and that it was unfolding announced and that it was unfolding in this way and that it hadn't been in this way and that it hadn't been in this way and that it hadn't been considered. It was It was not ready. considered. It was It was not ready. considered. It was It was not ready. In the wake of that, the Chinese In the wake of that, the Chinese In the wake of that, the Chinese government then announced that they were government then announced that they were government then announced that they were going to punish this, and I don't know going to punish this, and I don't know going to punish this, and I don't know the details, but I believe that he the details, but I believe that he the details, but I believe that he underwent some period of house arrest. underwent some period of house arrest. underwent some period of house arrest. Okay, he did he was punished. I Okay, he did he was punished. I Okay, he did he was punished. I believe so. After believe so. After believe so. After I think after there was some degree of I think after there was some degree of I think after there was some degree of scientific outrage at this conference. scientific outrage at this conference. scientific outrage at this conference. &gt;&gt; was this pause moment that lasted maybe &gt;&gt; was this pause moment that lasted maybe &gt;&gt; was this pause moment that lasted maybe a week or two. Um a week or two. Um a week or two. Um Okay, well, you're clarifying a lot of Okay, well, you're clarifying a lot of Okay, well, you're clarifying a lot of the detail important details. the detail important details. the detail important details. &gt;&gt; But, my understanding &gt;&gt; But, my understanding &gt;&gt; But, my understanding again is that he's now free and I think he's is that he's now free and I think he's is that he's now free and I think he's restarting a lab. I don't think in he's restarting a lab. I don't think in he's restarting a lab. I don't think in China, I think somewhere else. China, I think somewhere else. China, I think somewhere else. Um so, the story might not be over yet. Um so, the story might not be over yet. Um so, the story might not be over yet. &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, that's my understanding of &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, that's my understanding of &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, that's my understanding of the facts. the facts. the facts. Let me I'll tell you now what I think. Let me I'll tell you now what I think. Let me I'll tell you now what I think. &gt;&gt; Yeah, please. &gt;&gt; Yeah, please. &gt;&gt; Yeah, please. I actually have a pretty hard-line I actually have a pretty hard-line I actually have a pretty hard-line position on this, which I'm not sure all position on this, which I'm not sure all position on this, which I'm not sure all my colleagues would agree with, but my colleagues would agree with, but my colleagues would agree with, but I think that we should have a line in I think that we should have a line in I think that we should have a line in the sand where we do not introduce the sand where we do not introduce the sand where we do not introduce genetic edits that will be passed on to genetic edits that will be passed on to genetic edits that will be passed on to the next generation. the next generation. the next generation. Mhm. You know, I told you I Mhm. You know, I told you I Mhm. You know, I told you I dedicated my life now to creating CRISPR dedicated my life now to creating CRISPR dedicated my life now to creating CRISPR technologies to engineer individual technologies to engineer individual technologies to engineer individual cells in the immune system. But, these cells in the immune system. But, these cells in the immune system. But, these are what we call somatic edits. These are what we call somatic edits. These are what we call somatic edits. These are making edits to the DNA in are making edits to the DNA in are making edits to the DNA in individual cells, where those genetic individual cells, where those genetic individual cells, where those genetic consequences will be passed on to the consequences will be passed on to the consequences will be passed on to the daughter cells, but not to the next daughter cells, but not to the next daughter cells, but not to the next generation of human, because those edit generation of human, because those edit generation of human, because those edit We're not making genetic edits in sperm We're not making genetic edits in sperm We're not making genetic edits in sperm or in eggs. or in eggs. or in eggs. If you do it in an embryo, all of a If you do it in an embryo, all of a If you do it in an embryo, all of a sudden every cell in the developing sudden every cell in the developing sudden every cell in the developing embryo will have it, including embryo will have it, including embryo will have it, including sperm and egg. And now you've not only sperm and egg. And now you've not only sperm and egg. And now you've not only made a genetic change to treat a made a genetic change to treat a made a genetic change to treat a disease, or in this case to prevent a disease, or in this case to prevent a disease, or in this case to prevent a disease, as you said in some cases it'll disease, as you said in some cases it'll disease, as you said in some cases it'll be imagined to make an enhancement. be imagined to make an enhancement. be imagined to make an enhancement. People have talked about, you know, People have talked about, you know, People have talked about, you know, maybe you want to add you We know genes maybe you want to add you We know genes maybe you want to add you We know genes that would make people be more muscular, that would make people be more muscular, that would make people be more muscular, or will there be a rush to, you know, Or or will there be a rush to, you know, Or or will there be a rush to, you know, Or enhanced memory. I mean, many years ago enhanced memory. I mean, many years ago enhanced memory. I mean, many years ago there was a paper I mean, it had some there was a paper I mean, it had some there was a paper I mean, it had some issues with replication down the line, issues with replication down the line, issues with replication down the line, but where I think it was Joe Chen at but where I think it was Joe Chen at but where I think it was Joe Chen at Princeton introduced maybe a mutant or an extra introduced maybe a mutant or an extra introduced maybe a mutant or an extra I've got I forget now, it's been a I've got I forget now, it's been a I've got I forget now, it's been a while. Um In case in point, I clearly don't have In case in point, I clearly don't have In case in point, I clearly don't have this receptor this receptor this receptor to the NMDA receptor, which is involved to the NMDA receptor, which is involved to the NMDA receptor, which is involved in plasticity in a subregion of the in plasticity in a subregion of the in plasticity in a subregion of the hippocampus. The idea was they were hippocampus. The idea was they were hippocampus. The idea was they were trying to make super smart mice. trying to make super smart mice. trying to make super smart mice. &gt;&gt; I remember that when that made quite a &gt;&gt; I remember that when that made quite a &gt;&gt; I remember that when that made quite a splash at the time, right? splash at the time, right? splash at the time, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. I forget where that went. I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah. I forget where that went. I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah. I forget where that went. I mean, maybe Joe followed up on that, I don't maybe Joe followed up on that, I don't maybe Joe followed up on that, I don't know. But, know. But, know. But, but that would be the sort of thing that but that would be the sort of thing that but that would be the sort of thing that people are both excited about and people are both excited about and people are both excited about and concerned about. You know, could you concerned about. You know, could you concerned about. You know, could you confer your offspring with better um confer your offspring with better um confer your offspring with better um memory genes. memory genes. memory genes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, of course, we have no idea if &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, of course, we have no idea if &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, of course, we have no idea if that's a good or a bad thing. Forgetting that's a good or a bad thing. Forgetting that's a good or a bad thing. Forgetting certain things is very useful as well. certain things is very useful as well. certain things is very useful as well. &gt;&gt; I completely agree with you. And I &gt;&gt; I completely agree with you. And I &gt;&gt; I completely agree with you. And I think the point you made is a key one think the point you made is a key one think the point you made is a key one that we do have a world We do live in a we do have a world We do live in a we do have a world We do live in a world where people do IVF, and we do world where people do IVF, and we do world where people do IVF, and we do preimplantation genetic testing, and we preimplantation genetic testing, and we preimplantation genetic testing, and we select in people People have the option select in people People have the option select in people People have the option to select not implant embryos that have to select not implant embryos that have to select not implant embryos that have certain mutations. That's already a certain mutations. That's already a certain mutations. That's already a level of like avoiding disease in a level of like avoiding disease in a level of like avoiding disease in a next generation if there's a severe next generation if there's a severe next generation if there's a severe mutation. I think it's I think it's I think it's not it's a qualitatively different not it's a qualitatively different not it's a qualitatively different step to then not just select but to step to then not just select but to step to then not just select but to actually make a genetic change. All of a actually make a genetic change. All of a actually make a genetic change. All of a sudden now you're really hampered you're sudden now you're really hampered you're sudden now you're really hampered you're you have the ability to you have the ability to you have the ability to make some kind of mass-produced genetic edit some kind of mass-produced genetic edit some kind of mass-produced genetic edit in many embryos. I worry a lot about in many embryos. I worry a lot about in many embryos. I worry a lot about what this means for what this means for what this means for our offspring if they are designed our offspring if they are designed our offspring if they are designed rather than just born by chance. I rather than just born by chance. I rather than just born by chance. I worry about fads. You know, when worry about fads. You know, when worry about fads. You know, when you think about like the Pinterest you think about like the Pinterest you think about like the Pinterest culture that we live in where people see culture that we live in where people see culture that we live in where people see something on Pinterest and want to something on Pinterest and want to something on Pinterest and want to follow on. I worry deeply about losing follow on. I worry deeply about losing follow on. I worry deeply about losing human diversity if we see fads in what human diversity if we see fads in what human diversity if we see fads in what genes are popular for our offspring and genes are popular for our offspring and genes are popular for our offspring and people can order those in people can order those in people can order those in concert with IVF. And I don't think we concert with IVF. And I don't think we concert with IVF. And I don't think we gain enough gain enough gain enough to come close to what we would lose to come close to what we would lose to come close to what we would lose as a society if we embark on that as a society if we embark on that as a society if we embark on that journey of editing offspring. journey of editing offspring. journey of editing offspring. Appreciate the clear stance and Appreciate the clear stance and Appreciate the clear stance and answer. As long as we're there, I'd love answer. As long as we're there, I'd love answer. As long as we're there, I'd love your thoughts on some of the newer your thoughts on some of the newer your thoughts on some of the newer technologies that are only available to those that are only available to those that are only available to those that can afford them. So that's an important can afford them. So that's an important can afford them. So that's an important caveat for deep sequencing embryos from caveat for deep sequencing embryos from caveat for deep sequencing embryos from IVF. So typically with IVF, check to see IVF. So typically with IVF, check to see IVF. So typically with IVF, check to see that they're chromosomally normal, that they're chromosomally normal, that they're chromosomally normal, that they're euploid as they say, and they'll they're euploid as they say, and they'll they're euploid as they say, and they'll do some sequencing of the parents, do some sequencing of the parents, do some sequencing of the parents, maybe of the of the embryos as well for maybe of the of the embryos as well for maybe of the of the embryos as well for certain mutations. But there's this certain mutations. But there's this certain mutations. But there's this whole other whole other whole other industry now. I believe a company in the industry now. I believe a company in the industry now. I believe a company in the Bay Area, Orchid, um is probably the Bay Area, Orchid, um is probably the Bay Area, Orchid, um is probably the most popular one or well-known one where most popular one or well-known one where most popular one or well-known one where if you pay a certain amount of money, if you pay a certain amount of money, if you pay a certain amount of money, they'll deep sequence. If you pay more, they'll deep sequence. If you pay more, they'll deep sequence. If you pay more, they'll deeper sequence. deeper sequence. deeper sequence. And so you're getting some additional And so you're getting some additional And so you're getting some additional readout of potential disease genes. And readout of potential disease genes. And readout of potential disease genes. And and I've looked at that technology and I've looked at that technology and I've looked at that technology and they're very clear that they're at some they're very clear that they're at some they're very clear that they're at some point they can't draw a causal point they can't draw a causal point they can't draw a causal relationship between say like a relationship between say like a relationship between say like a neuroligin mutation and autism, but neuroligin mutation and autism, but neuroligin mutation and autism, but there are these implications based on there are these implications based on there are these implications based on the animal data or and so it starts the animal data or and so it starts the animal data or and so it starts to become this to become this to become this it's not gene editing, it's not gene editing, it's not gene editing, but it is deeper and deeper but it is deeper and deeper but it is deeper and deeper gene sequencing based selection of gene sequencing based selection of gene sequencing based selection of embryos. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. First of all, I'm sympathetic to the First of all, I'm sympathetic to the First of all, I'm sympathetic to the idea of all right, like we want to idea of all right, like we want to idea of all right, like we want to protect our kids from protect our kids from protect our kids from suffering and from disease, right? And I suffering and from disease, right? And I suffering and from disease, right? And I understand the idea of doing understand the idea of doing understand the idea of doing pre-implantation genetic testing if you pre-implantation genetic testing if you pre-implantation genetic testing if you want to avoid a mutation or a want to avoid a mutation or a want to avoid a mutation or a chromosomal abnormality that would chromosomal abnormality that would chromosomal abnormality that would really impair lifespan or quality of really impair lifespan or quality of really impair lifespan or quality of life for your offspring. life for your offspring. life for your offspring. I the impulse that we know that's this I the impulse that we know that's this I the impulse that we know that's this sort of straightforward chromosomal this sort of straightforward chromosomal this sort of straightforward chromosomal testing that's done at from the first testing that's done at from the first testing that's done at from the first level of level of level of does will miss a lot of mutations. So does will miss a lot of mutations. So does will miss a lot of mutations. So people I understand the idea of trying people I understand the idea of trying people I understand the idea of trying to fill that in with more deep to fill that in with more deep to fill that in with more deep sequencing or comprehensive sequencing or comprehensive sequencing or comprehensive sequencing of the genome. of the genome. of the genome. The problem is there are some mutations The problem is there are some mutations The problem is there are some mutations that if we know if we see them, we will that if we know if we see them, we will that if we know if we see them, we will know that they can be cause severe know that they can be cause severe know that they can be cause severe disease. But there's a lot that are become But there's a lot that are become But there's a lot that are become probabilistic and statistical and I probabilistic and statistical and I probabilistic and statistical and I think we're over promising what can be think we're over promising what can be think we're over promising what can be delivered. So all of a sudden you're using an So all of a sudden you're using an So all of a sudden you're using an algorithm to determine algorithm to determine algorithm to determine which embryos are more desirable than which embryos are more desirable than which embryos are more desirable than others. And I think the fact is And I think the fact is And I think the fact is there's just so it's not an access there's just so it's not an access there's just so it's not an access that actually exists. There aren't that actually exists. There aren't that actually exists. There aren't categorically more desirable or less categorically more desirable or less categorically more desirable or less desirable. Like we want diverse desirable. Like we want diverse desirable. Like we want diverse people who for and people who for and people who for and you know, how successful you're going to you know, how successful you're going to you know, how successful you're going to be is a interplay of like how your genes be is a interplay of like how your genes be is a interplay of like how your genes come around and influence your come around and influence your come around and influence your community, your environment. Those community, your environment. Those community, your environment. Those are unknowable are unknowable are unknowable from just looking at a DNA sequence from just looking at a DNA sequence from just looking at a DNA sequence alone. So, I think that there's So, I think that there's So, I think that there's it introduces a false access. it introduces a false access. it introduces a false access. There's another book that I would I There's another book that I would I There's another book that I would I would recommend here that I read years would recommend here that I read years would recommend here that I read years ago and I actually I'm probably overdue ago and I actually I'm probably overdue ago and I actually I'm probably overdue to go back and reread this. This to go back and reread this. This to go back and reread this. This predates CRISPR technology, but there's predates CRISPR technology, but there's predates CRISPR technology, but there's a Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel who a Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel who a Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel who years ago wrote a short book called The years ago wrote a short book called The years ago wrote a short book called The Case Against Perfection. Case Against Perfection. Case Against Perfection. And it's a really beautiful meditation And it's a really beautiful meditation And it's a really beautiful meditation on what's lost when we enter into this on what's lost when we enter into this on what's lost when we enter into this illusion of thinking that we can illusion of thinking that we can illusion of thinking that we can engineer towards some access of engineer towards some access of engineer towards some access of perfection rather than embracing the perfection rather than embracing the perfection rather than embracing the beauty of chance and happenstance beauty of chance and happenstance beauty of chance and happenstance which is like a part of our relationship which is like a part of our relationship which is like a part of our relationship with our kids, with ourselves of with our kids, with ourselves of with our kids, with ourselves of thinking of okay, this is this is the thinking of okay, this is this is the thinking of okay, this is this is the human experience of you're a product of human experience of you're a product of human experience of you're a product of some degree of chance and some degree of chance and some degree of chance and circumstance. I'll definitely check out the book. Um I'll definitely check out the book. Um I'll definitely check out the book. Um I know the whole point of life is not I know the whole point of life is not I know the whole point of life is not to be a {quote} high performer, but I to be a {quote} high performer, but I to be a {quote} high performer, but I I'll just say as an example, I'll just say as an example, I'll just say as an example, um I know of no single very successful I know of no single very successful I know of no single very successful person that doesn't have some person that doesn't have some person that doesn't have some thing about themselves that um thing about themselves that um thing about themselves that um that initially they disliked or felt that initially they disliked or felt that initially they disliked or felt that they had to overcome which led them that they had to overcome which led them that they had to overcome which led them to pursue certain things hopefully in a to pursue certain things hopefully in a to pursue certain things hopefully in a healthy way um healthy way um healthy way um and that they eventually came to embrace and that they eventually came to embrace and that they eventually came to embrace and is now and is now and is now and are now grateful for. I know of no and are now grateful for. I know of no and are now grateful for. I know of no exception to that. It's just kind of it exception to that. It's just kind of it exception to that. It's just kind of it it's of the story of humans in many it's of the story of humans in many it's of the story of humans in many ways. It's a story of humans. In fact, It's a story of humans. In fact, It's a story of humans. In fact, uh people who perhaps are told that they're people who perhaps are told that they're people who perhaps are told that they're perfect in every dimension their entire perfect in every dimension their entire perfect in every dimension their entire lives, um they I can only imagine the amount of um they I can only imagine the amount of um they I can only imagine the amount of pressure they must feel. In fact, before pressure they must feel. In fact, before pressure they must feel. In fact, before today's discussion we were talking about today's discussion we were talking about today's discussion we were talking about people that we knew that perhaps had people that we knew that perhaps had people that we knew that perhaps had been told that and some of the fragility been told that and some of the fragility been told that and some of the fragility that can introduce to the psyche. I that can introduce to the psyche. I that can introduce to the psyche. I think that's really well said. I think I think that's really well said. I think I think that's really well said. I think it goes in both ways. I think things it goes in both ways. I think things it goes in both ways. I think things that we think are hardships or that we think are hardships or that we think are hardships or disabilities often end up being the disabilities often end up being the disabilities often end up being the things that make us who we are and things that make us who we are and things that make us who we are and you know, make us more sympathetic, and you know, make us more sympathetic, and you know, make us more sympathetic, give us add a depth as humans. And the give us add a depth as humans. And the give us add a depth as humans. And the things that we think are the things that things that we think are the things that things that we think are the things that make us perfect are the things that are make us perfect are the things that are make us perfect are the things that are really holding us back or creating all really holding us back or creating all really holding us back or creating all sorts of false ideas that limit us. I sorts of false ideas that limit us. I sorts of false ideas that limit us. I couldn't agree more. couldn't agree more. couldn't agree more. I'd love to know I'd love to know I'd love to know what right now you're most excited about what right now you're most excited about what right now you're most excited about for your own intellectual enrichment and for your own intellectual enrichment and for your own intellectual enrichment and in your lab and like what you really in your lab and like what you really in your lab and like what you really feel is like the thing that has the feel is like the thing that has the feel is like the thing that has the most electricity for you. And and if most electricity for you. And and if most electricity for you. And and if you're willing to also give us a hint of you're willing to also give us a hint of you're willing to also give us a hint of what's just what's just what's just right over the edge in terms of what you right over the edge in terms of what you right over the edge in terms of what you think will be the next big therapeutic think will be the next big therapeutic think will be the next big therapeutic breakthrough um that we can look forward breakthrough um that we can look forward breakthrough um that we can look forward to. Thanks for asking that. So, I'm to. Thanks for asking that. So, I'm to. Thanks for asking that. So, I'm going to give a little bit of a long and going to give a little bit of a long and going to give a little bit of a long and meandering answer to that. meandering answer to that. meandering answer to that. &gt;&gt; when it comes to me, you don't have to &gt;&gt; when it comes to me, you don't have to &gt;&gt; when it comes to me, you don't have to succinct is not something that's sort of succinct is not something that's sort of succinct is not something that's sort of like exists in my neural circuitry, like exists in my neural circuitry, like exists in my neural circuitry, although I try. So, I see this although I try. So, I see this although I try. So, I see this moment. I talked about clinical trials moment. I talked about clinical trials moment. I talked about clinical trials where that are already filling me with hope. I that are already filling me with hope. I that are already filling me with hope. I talked about talked about talked about a biotech trial that I'm associated with a biotech trial that I'm associated with a biotech trial that I'm associated with for prostate cancer. I talked about an for prostate cancer. I talked about an for prostate cancer. I talked about an academic trial that I put a lot of work academic trial that I put a lot of work academic trial that I put a lot of work in with my colleagues over many years to in with my colleagues over many years to in with my colleagues over many years to open for multiple myeloma. And we have a open for multiple myeloma. And we have a open for multiple myeloma. And we have a pipeline that we're developing. pipeline that we're developing. pipeline that we're developing. We didn't even talk today but you we We didn't even talk today but you we We didn't even talk today but you we haven't fully talked yet about the idea haven't fully talked yet about the idea haven't fully talked yet about the idea of CAR-T cells for autoimmunity. We left of CAR-T cells for autoimmunity. We left of CAR-T cells for autoimmunity. We left that open a little bit, but that's an that open a little bit, but that's an that open a little bit, but that's an amazing moment that we're at right now amazing moment that we're at right now amazing moment that we're at right now that the same CAR-T cells that are being that the same CAR-T cells that are being that the same CAR-T cells that are being used to get rid of B cell leukemias are used to get rid of B cell leukemias are used to get rid of B cell leukemias are also getting rid of B cells which are also getting rid of B cells which are also getting rid of B cells which are contributing to autoimmune disease. So, contributing to autoimmune disease. So, contributing to autoimmune disease. So, without making any change, people are without making any change, people are without making any change, people are already starting to see incredible already starting to see incredible already starting to see incredible responses in the early trials for lupus responses in the early trials for lupus responses in the early trials for lupus and other for diseases with T cells and other for diseases with T cells and other for diseases with T cells engineered to eliminate B cells. engineered to eliminate B cells. engineered to eliminate B cells. Fantastic. Could you just mention a few Fantastic. Could you just mention a few Fantastic. Could you just mention a few other disease targets? I know a few other disease targets? I know a few other disease targets? I know a few people with fibromyalgia. people with fibromyalgia. people with fibromyalgia. Um they suffer tremendously. Um they suffer tremendously. Um they suffer tremendously. &gt;&gt; Fibromyalgia is a disease that we just &gt;&gt; Fibromyalgia is a disease that we just &gt;&gt; Fibromyalgia is a disease that we just don't understand. Like that is that is don't understand. Like that is that is don't understand. Like that is that is to talk about understudied diseases. I to talk about understudied diseases. I to talk about understudied diseases. I think fibromyalgia is something that think fibromyalgia is something that think fibromyalgia is something that will gets bucketed in a certain way and will gets bucketed in a certain way and will gets bucketed in a certain way and we just have not figured out what we just have not figured out what we just have not figured out what is what it really is what causes is what it really is what causes is what it really is what causes it. And so my that is its own it. And so my that is its own it. And so my that is its own thing. But for autoimmune diseases, thing. But for autoimmune diseases, thing. But for autoimmune diseases, these are diseases where we do know that these are diseases where we do know that these are diseases where we do know that there are immune cells going after our there are immune cells going after our there are immune cells going after our own tissue in various ways. Lupus, own tissue in various ways. Lupus, own tissue in various ways. Lupus, people are talking about various people are talking about various people are talking about various engineered T cell trials for rheumatoid engineered T cell trials for rheumatoid engineered T cell trials for rheumatoid arthritis, for childhood diabetes, for arthritis, for childhood diabetes, for arthritis, for childhood diabetes, for multiple sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, um and on and on. Um but those are a um and on and on. Um but those are a um and on and on. Um but those are a number that people are thinking about number that people are thinking about number that people are thinking about different types of immunotherapies, different types of immunotherapies, different types of immunotherapies, including gene edited T cells to including gene edited T cells to including gene edited T cells to treat these autoimmune diseases. So, treat these autoimmune diseases. So, treat these autoimmune diseases. So, I'm already I guess what I'm saying is I'm already I guess what I'm saying is I'm already I guess what I'm saying is excited about the near future of things excited about the near future of things excited about the near future of things that have come out of that have come out of that have come out of decades of lab work from decades of lab work from decades of lab work from labs around the world already starting labs around the world already starting labs around the world already starting to be assembled into things that are to be assembled into things that are to be assembled into things that are advancing through clinical pipelines. advancing through clinical pipelines. advancing through clinical pipelines. But the next wave of what's coming up behind the next wave of what's coming up behind the next wave of what's coming up behind that is just as exciting if not more. So, I just as exciting if not more. So, I just as exciting if not more. So, I think that one of the things that makes think that one of the things that makes think that one of the things that makes me feel like I have one of the great me feel like I have one of the great me feel like I have one of the great jobs out there is I there's about 30 jobs out there is I there's about 30 jobs out there is I there's about 30 people in my lab. people in my lab. people in my lab. I get the joy of ideas bubbling up. They I get the joy of ideas bubbling up. They I get the joy of ideas bubbling up. They don't The ideas in the lab don't come don't The ideas in the lab don't come don't The ideas in the lab don't come top down from me. They come from grad top down from me. They come from grad top down from me. They come from grad students and postdocs who have come students and postdocs who have come students and postdocs who have come filled with energy to bring their own filled with energy to bring their own filled with energy to bring their own ideas and progress is being made through ideas and progress is being made through ideas and progress is being made through this conversation of people in the lab this conversation of people in the lab this conversation of people in the lab reading papers, going to conferences, reading papers, going to conferences, reading papers, going to conferences, talking late at night in the lab, and talking late at night in the lab, and talking late at night in the lab, and I can't believe the surprises that are I can't believe the surprises that are I can't believe the surprises that are that are coming. that are coming. that are coming. So, I'll go I want to give you a couple So, I'll go I want to give you a couple So, I'll go I want to give you a couple of these. of these. of these. So, I just So, I just So, I just look looking backwards to 2000 look looking backwards to 2000 look looking backwards to 2000 13, 2014, we were struggling to see if 13, 2014, we were struggling to see if 13, 2014, we were struggling to see if we could get CRISPR into with we could get CRISPR into with we could get CRISPR into with electroporation to make one cut in a T electroporation to make one cut in a T electroporation to make one cut in a T cell, we could barely do it. Now, cell, we could barely do it. Now, cell, we could barely do it. Now, if a grad student comes into my lab, if a grad student comes into my lab, if a grad student comes into my lab, within a month or two, they can within a month or two, they can within a month or two, they can routinely do a CRISPR experiment where we do a CRISPR experiment where we do a CRISPR experiment where we do CRISPR where we deliver a set of thousands up where we deliver a set of thousands up where we deliver a set of thousands up to tens of thousands or hundreds of to tens of thousands or hundreds of to tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of different CRISPRs into a thousands of different CRISPRs into a thousands of different CRISPRs into a population of T cells from a blood population of T cells from a blood population of T cells from a blood sample. So, each cell will get a sample. So, each cell will get a sample. So, each cell will get a different CRISPR modification, and then different CRISPR modification, and then different CRISPR modification, and then we can essentially race these cells we can essentially race these cells we can essentially race these cells against each other. So, we can put them against each other. So, we can put them against each other. So, we can put them into a tumor environment and see which into a tumor environment and see which into a tumor environment and see which ones continue to grow, which ones have ones continue to grow, which ones have ones continue to grow, which ones have markers that seem like they're going to markers that seem like they're going to markers that seem like they're going to be favorable in giving them be favorable in giving them be favorable in giving them characteristics that are going to be characteristics that are going to be characteristics that are going to be strong against cancer. So, we are able strong against cancer. So, we are able strong against cancer. So, we are able to do the to do the to do the type of genetics that was possible the type of genetics that was possible the type of genetics that was possible in fruit flies, in fruit flies, in fruit flies, but unimaginable in human cells, we're but unimaginable in human cells, we're but unimaginable in human cells, we're doing directly in the human cells that doing directly in the human cells that doing directly in the human cells that will be the therapies of the future. will be the therapies of the future. will be the therapies of the future. We're directly learning what are the We're directly learning what are the We're directly learning what are the genetic modifications that will make T genetic modifications that will make T genetic modifications that will make T cells do exactly what we want. cells do exactly what we want. cells do exactly what we want. And one of the things that we just made And one of the things that we just made And one of the things that we just made publicly available is that publicly available is that publicly available is that we used to do these experiments and race we used to do these experiments and race we used to do these experiments and race these cells against each other and read these cells against each other and read these cells against each other and read it see race them against each other for one see race them against each other for one see race them against each other for one characteristic, which ones would start characteristic, which ones would start characteristic, which ones would start to make to make to make one cytokine. I talked about these one cytokine. I talked about these one cytokine. I talked about these signals that immune cells can make. signals that immune cells can make. signals that immune cells can make. Now, what we can do is Now, what we can do is Now, what we can do is we can we can we can for each genetic modification, we can do for each genetic modification, we can do for each genetic modification, we can do a complete measurement of the state of a complete measurement of the state of a complete measurement of the state of each individual cell. each individual cell. each individual cell. We this is a technology called We this is a technology called We this is a technology called single-cell RNA sequencing. So, we single-cell RNA sequencing. So, we single-cell RNA sequencing. So, we measure now simultaneously all of the measure now simultaneously all of the measure now simultaneously all of the RNA that's in that cell telling us the RNA that's in that cell telling us the RNA that's in that cell telling us giving us a snapshot of what that cell giving us a snapshot of what that cell giving us a snapshot of what that cell is now able to do. is now able to do. is now able to do. And we can also simultaneously measure And we can also simultaneously measure And we can also simultaneously measure which CRISPR was put into that cell. And which CRISPR was put into that cell. And which CRISPR was put into that cell. And so now if we can essentially inactivate so now if we can essentially inactivate so now if we can essentially inactivate every gene in the genome in T cells and every gene in the genome in T cells and every gene in the genome in T cells and read out the consequences on the overall read out the consequences on the overall read out the consequences on the overall state of the cells. state of the cells. state of the cells. And this is technology that was And this is technology that was And this is technology that was developed by a number of labs around the developed by a number of labs around the developed by a number of labs around the world. We've now deployed this at a world. We've now deployed this at a world. We've now deployed this at a massive scale directly in primary human massive scale directly in primary human massive scale directly in primary human immune cells. We just released 22 immune cells. We just released 22 immune cells. We just released 22 million cells where each one has a million cells where each one has a million cells where each one has a different CRISPR gene inactivated and we different CRISPR gene inactivated and we different CRISPR gene inactivated and we get a map of this and I think of this get a map of this and I think of this get a map of this and I think of this not just what we're doing in T cells, not just what we're doing in T cells, not just what we're doing in T cells, but what other labs are doing around the but what other labs are doing around the but what other labs are doing around the world using CRISPR to read out the world using CRISPR to read out the world using CRISPR to read out the consequence of every gene consequence of every gene consequence of every gene in different cell types in different in different cell types in different in different cell types in different conditions as a sequel to the genome conditions as a sequel to the genome conditions as a sequel to the genome project. You know, we talked about the genome You know, we talked about the genome You know, we talked about the genome giving us this draft of the DNA giving us this draft of the DNA giving us this draft of the DNA sequence. Now we can actually read out sequence. Now we can actually read out sequence. Now we can actually read out the function of every gene and see how the function of every gene and see how the function of every gene and see how each gene contributes to the behavior of each gene contributes to the behavior of each gene contributes to the behavior of every cell. every cell. every cell. And this is being used with the in as a And this is being used with the in as a And this is being used with the in as a basis for massive computational basis for massive computational basis for massive computational analysis. It's providing us a real analysis. It's providing us a real analysis. It's providing us a real road map of how cells are wired that road map of how cells are wired that road map of how cells are wired that will be the instruction manual for the will be the instruction manual for the will be the instruction manual for the next generation of T cell next generation of T cell next generation of T cell immunotherapies. That the lessons that immunotherapies. That the lessons that immunotherapies. That the lessons that we learn about how every gene behaves we learn about how every gene behaves we learn about how every gene behaves are now going to be actionable and these are now going to be actionable and these are now going to be actionable and these are going to be genes that we tune or are going to be genes that we tune or are going to be genes that we tune or epigenetically edit or inactivate or add epigenetically edit or inactivate or add epigenetically edit or inactivate or add to genes to genes to genes that we will now have a recipe book for that we will now have a recipe book for that we will now have a recipe book for what we want an immune cell to do. what we want an immune cell to do. what we want an immune cell to do. What do we want it to recognize? What do What do we want it to recognize? What do What do we want it to recognize? What do we Where do we want it to go? And we'll we Where do we want it to go? And we'll we Where do we want it to go? And we'll have a cheat sheet that tells us, "Okay, have a cheat sheet that tells us, "Okay, have a cheat sheet that tells us, "Okay, here's what here's what we should be here's what here's what we should be here's what here's what we should be adding or subtracting from that cell adding or subtracting from that cell adding or subtracting from that cell genetically to endow it with the powers genetically to endow it with the powers genetically to endow it with the powers that will give it precision and that will give it precision and that will give it precision and endurance against some disease that we endurance against some disease that we endurance against some disease that we want to go after." want to go after." want to go after." Amazing. I mean, truly amazing. Um Amazing. I mean, truly amazing. Um Amazing. I mean, truly amazing. Um should I be banking T cells? Well, I should I be banking T cells? Well, I should I be banking T cells? Well, I think the good news is that think the good news is that think the good news is that That's a good I never know what the That's a good I never know what the That's a good I never know what the answer is this. answer is this. answer is this. I was going to say the good news is that I was going to say the good news is that I was going to say the good news is that we largely have T cells. Now, there we largely have T cells. Now, there we largely have T cells. Now, there are there exceptions to that? are there exceptions to that? are there exceptions to that? Yes, you know, there are patients who Yes, you know, there are patients who Yes, you know, there are patients who are getting treated for certain types of are getting treated for certain types of are getting treated for certain types of cancer and the chemotherapy that cancer and the chemotherapy that cancer and the chemotherapy that they're getting to place their T cells. they're getting to place their T cells. they're getting to place their T cells. I It's hard to know. You there you know, I It's hard to know. You there you know, I It's hard to know. You there you know, I guess I don't I can't say that there guess I don't I can't say that there guess I don't I can't say that there would never be a use, but I think there would never be a use, but I think there would never be a use, but I think we're getting better and better at being we're getting better and better at being we're getting better and better at being able to take whatever T cells are there able to take whatever T cells are there able to take whatever T cells are there and I hope reactivate them re-endow and I hope reactivate them re-endow and I hope reactivate them re-endow them with powers. them with powers. them with powers. I would be disappointed if in the future I would be disappointed if in the future I would be disappointed if in the future we would need to go back and take the we would need to go back and take the we would need to go back and take the banked T cells and not be able to banked T cells and not be able to banked T cells and not be able to re-engineer cells that are already re-engineer cells that are already re-engineer cells that are already there. Are there edge cases where it there. Are there edge cases where it there. Are there edge cases where it might be, but it's not something that I might be, but it's not something that I might be, but it's not something that I would tell people to go out and do. I would tell people to go out and do. I would tell people to go out and do. I it's not something I'm doing. I Yeah, I it's not something I'm doing. I Yeah, I it's not something I'm doing. I Yeah, I would only do it if you told me to. Uh a would only do it if you told me to. Uh a would only do it if you told me to. Uh a colleague of yours um Yamanaka Yeah. won colleague of yours um Yamanaka Yeah. won colleague of yours um Yamanaka Yeah. won a Nobel Prize for essentially showing a Nobel Prize for essentially showing a Nobel Prize for essentially showing that you can take a skin cell, put it in that you can take a skin cell, put it in that you can take a skin cell, put it in a dish, give it Yamanaka factors as it a dish, give it Yamanaka factors as it a dish, give it Yamanaka factors as it were for in some cases only three were for in some cases only three were for in some cases only three transcription factors and essentially transcription factors and essentially transcription factors and essentially revert that cell to a stem cell and then revert that cell to a stem cell and then revert that cell to a stem cell and then give it some other transcription factors give it some other transcription factors give it some other transcription factors and turn it into I don't know a neuron and turn it into I don't know a neuron and turn it into I don't know a neuron or a pancreatic cell. or a pancreatic cell. or a pancreatic cell. Should we be banking Should we be banking Should we be banking fibroblasts and putting them into that fibroblasts and putting them into that fibroblasts and putting them into that ready state, ready state, ready state, um reverting them to the stem cell um reverting them to the stem cell um reverting them to the stem cell state? In my mind I always thought well, state? In my mind I always thought well, state? In my mind I always thought well, if I ever need more cells of a given if I ever need more cells of a given if I ever need more cells of a given organ, I can always organ, I can always organ, I can always assuming I'm alive, they assuming I'm alive, they assuming I'm alive, they you know, they can take a skin cell and you know, they can take a skin cell and you know, they can take a skin cell and they can do all that, but I could they can do all that, but I could they can do all that, but I could imagine that there would be use for a cell bank, that there would be use for a cell bank, that there would be use for a cell bank, not a tissue bank, where there are a not a tissue bank, where there are a not a tissue bank, where there are a bunch of these pluripotent bunch of these pluripotent bunch of these pluripotent &gt;&gt; Yeah. Huberman, in my case, Marson in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Huberman, in my case, Marson in &gt;&gt; Yeah. Huberman, in my case, Marson in your case, obviously, uh cells that if your case, obviously, uh cells that if your case, obviously, uh cells that if uh you know, God forbid I needed a bunch uh you know, God forbid I needed a bunch uh you know, God forbid I needed a bunch of pancreatic islet cells, boom, they of pancreatic islet cells, boom, they of pancreatic islet cells, boom, they could have those within a week. This could have those within a week. This could have those within a week. This field is so is something that's been field is so is something that's been field is so is something that's been amazing to watch. It's There's been amazing to watch. It's There's been amazing to watch. It's There's been ups and downs of it of this induced ups and downs of it of this induced ups and downs of it of this induced pluripotent stem cell field that Shinya pluripotent stem cell field that Shinya pluripotent stem cell field that Shinya Yamanaka opened up. Yamanaka opened up. Yamanaka opened up. Um one of the interesting areas is actually one of the interesting areas is actually one of the interesting areas is actually imagining how these IPS cells could be imagining how these IPS cells could be imagining how these IPS cells could be made into T cells, which would made into T cells, which would made into T cells, which would essentially create a limitless supply of essentially create a limitless supply of essentially create a limitless supply of T cells which T cells which T cells which &gt;&gt; I was thinking. You know, I don't You &gt;&gt; I was thinking. You know, I don't You &gt;&gt; I was thinking. You know, I don't You don't have to even draw blood. Exactly, don't have to even draw blood. Exactly, don't have to even draw blood. Exactly, which would negate the need for banking which would negate the need for banking which would negate the need for banking if you had your So, I don't know if you had your So, I don't know if you had your So, I don't know if again, it's probably not it's something again, it's probably not it's something again, it's probably not it's something that I would be cost-effective for that I would be cost-effective for that I would be cost-effective for everyone to have their IPS cells everyone to have their IPS cells everyone to have their IPS cells are ready to go. are ready to go. are ready to go. I understand from in conversation from I understand from in conversation from I understand from in conversation from with Shinya Yamanaka that one from with Shinya Yamanaka that one from with Shinya Yamanaka that one of the things that he's been involved of the things that he's been involved of the things that he's been involved with is actually building sort of a bank with is actually building sort of a bank with is actually building sort of a bank of IPS cells that would be compatible of IPS cells that would be compatible of IPS cells that would be compatible immune compatible with broad sets of immune compatible with broad sets of immune compatible with broad sets of different people so that it could different people so that it could different people so that it could essentially be used as a transplant essentially be used as a transplant essentially be used as a transplant bank, which would might be a way to be bank, which would might be a way to be bank, which would might be a way to be like an intermediate step that there like an intermediate step that there like an intermediate step that there would be IPS cells of available that would be IPS cells of available that would be IPS cells of available that could be transplanted with various could be transplanted with various could be transplanted with various degrees of ease into different people. degrees of ease into different people. degrees of ease into different people. And then I do think that And then I do think that And then I do think that I hope it gets easier and easier to make I hope it gets easier and easier to make I hope it gets easier and easier to make IPS cells that are matched to any IPS cells that are matched to any IPS cells that are matched to any patient when they're needed. So, but I patient when they're needed. So, but I patient when they're needed. So, but I mean again, like this these different threads again, like this these different threads again, like this these different threads of things of being able to make endless of things of being able to make endless of things of being able to make endless supplies of any cell, direct them to any supplies of any cell, direct them to any supplies of any cell, direct them to any tissue type, and then being able to tissue type, and then being able to tissue type, and then being able to program them with the language of program them with the language of program them with the language of CRISPR. Actually, I It's worth some CRISPR. Actually, I It's worth some CRISPR. Actually, I It's worth some moment. I In 2020, I moved my lab moment. I In 2020, I moved my lab moment. I In 2020, I moved my lab from the main branch of UCSF to from the main branch of UCSF to from the main branch of UCSF to a separate research institute in San a separate research institute in San a separate research institute in San Francisco called the Gladstone Francisco called the Gladstone Francisco called the Gladstone Institutes. It's a nonprofit research institute. My It's a nonprofit research institute. My It's a nonprofit research institute. My grad students still come from UCSF, grad students still come from UCSF, grad students still come from UCSF, uh University of California, San uh University of California, San uh University of California, San Francisco, but my lab's at Gladstone. Francisco, but my lab's at Gladstone. Francisco, but my lab's at Gladstone. And one of the reasons that I moved my And one of the reasons that I moved my And one of the reasons that I moved my lab to Gladstone was a conversation when lab to Gladstone was a conversation when lab to Gladstone was a conversation when they when they were recruiting me, they when they were recruiting me, they when they were recruiting me, they brought me into the president's office. brought me into the president's office. brought me into the president's office. And in the president of Gladstone's And in the president of Gladstone's And in the president of Gladstone's office was Shinya Yamanaka who maintains office was Shinya Yamanaka who maintains office was Shinya Yamanaka who maintains a lab at Gladstone and Jennifer Doudna a lab at Gladstone and Jennifer Doudna a lab at Gladstone and Jennifer Doudna who also maintains a lab at Gladstone. who also maintains a lab at Gladstone. who also maintains a lab at Gladstone. You had to say yes. They're very clever. You had to say yes. They're very clever. You had to say yes. They're very clever. They had some psychologist in front of They had some psychologist in front of They had some psychologist in front of you. They got your number, so to speak. I They got your number, so to speak. I They got your number, so to speak. I describe this and I think this not just describe this and I think this not just describe this and I think this not just a cliche. I actually remember kind of a cliche. I actually remember kind of a cliche. I actually remember kind of like that feeling of hair sticking up on like that feeling of hair sticking up on like that feeling of hair sticking up on the back of your head of like the back of your head of like the back of your head of like oh, all of a sudden these are the oh, all of a sudden these are the oh, all of a sudden these are the technologies that they these two humans technologies that they these two humans technologies that they these two humans have made possible and others, but have made possible and others, but have made possible and others, but we can now program that what the we can now program that what the we can now program that what the epigenetic state of a cell is thanks to epigenetic state of a cell is thanks to epigenetic state of a cell is thanks to the Yamanaka factors. You can dial the Yamanaka factors. You can dial the Yamanaka factors. You can dial between skin and embryo and then between skin and embryo and then between skin and embryo and then back to anything else. And then not only back to anything else. And then not only back to anything else. And then not only epigenetically program a cell, but take epigenetically program a cell, but take epigenetically program a cell, but take the power of CRISPR and genetically the power of CRISPR and genetically the power of CRISPR and genetically program. And when you put these things program. And when you put these things program. And when you put these things together, all of a sudden we have this together, all of a sudden we have this together, all of a sudden we have this ability to imagine ability to imagine ability to imagine programmable cells that we can dial in programmable cells that we can dial in programmable cells that we can dial in and direct their behavior to either and direct their behavior to either and direct their behavior to either regenerate or to in the case of the regenerate or to in the case of the regenerate or to in the case of the immune system survey the immune the body immune system survey the immune the body immune system survey the immune the body and get to the root cause of disease. and get to the root cause of disease. and get to the root cause of disease. And I my imagination still lies at that I my imagination still lies at that I my imagination still lies at that intersection of what's possible when we intersection of what's possible when we intersection of what's possible when we combine that with immunology. combine that with immunology. combine that with immunology. I love it. I might one question I don't I love it. I might one question I don't I love it. I might one question I don't expect you to answer, but your expect you to answer, but your expect you to answer, but your enthusiasm for this is tangible. I'm enthusiasm for this is tangible. I'm enthusiasm for this is tangible. I'm excited. I know people listening are and excited. I know people listening are and excited. I know people listening are and the question is how do you sleep at the question is how do you sleep at the question is how do you sleep at night? Like this so exciting. Like the night? Like this so exciting. Like the night? Like this so exciting. Like the tools are they're here. tools are they're here. tools are they're here. Um and mostly I want to say thank you. Thank mostly I want to say thank you. Thank mostly I want to say thank you. Thank you for coming here today and giving us you for coming here today and giving us you for coming here today and giving us a absolute master class on the immune a absolute master class on the immune a absolute master class on the immune system, on cancer, system, on cancer, system, on cancer, on the technologies to improve the on the technologies to improve the on the technologies to improve the immune system, combat autoimmune immune system, combat autoimmune immune system, combat autoimmune diseases. I mean we got into diseases. I mean we got into diseases. I mean we got into molecular with some considerable degree molecular with some considerable degree molecular with some considerable degree of depth and thanks to you is incredibly of depth and thanks to you is incredibly of depth and thanks to you is incredibly clear. I know people learned a ton. I clear. I know people learned a ton. I clear. I know people learned a ton. I know I learned a ton and I'm super know I learned a ton and I'm super know I learned a ton and I'm super excited about what you're doing. Also excited about what you're doing. Also excited about what you're doing. Also just the just the just the heart and soul. There are no other the heart and soul. There are no other the heart and soul. There are no other words really. words really. words really. Um, I think those are apt. The heart Um, I think those are apt. The heart Um, I think those are apt. The heart and soul that you put into your work is and soul that you put into your work is and soul that you put into your work is so clear so clear so clear um, and you are definitely in the right um, and you are definitely in the right um, and you are definitely in the right job. So just uh, one request is that you job. So just uh, one request is that you job. So just uh, one request is that you come back and talk to us again um, come back and talk to us again um, come back and talk to us again um, when the next advancements are made. when the next advancements are made. when the next advancements are made. We'd love to have you back. We'd love to have you back. We'd love to have you back. &gt;&gt; I'd be honored and I just I just really &gt;&gt; I'd be honored and I just I just really &gt;&gt; I'd be honored and I just I just really want to thank you. There are not enough want to thank you. There are not enough want to thank you. There are not enough forums that are dedicated really to the forums that are dedicated really to the forums that are dedicated really to the depth to talk about science. depth to talk about science. depth to talk about science. The so much of the joy of science is The so much of the joy of science is The so much of the joy of science is in the details and you do such a great in the details and you do such a great in the details and you do such a great job of letting those details really come job of letting those details really come job of letting those details really come through and sharing them broadly. So through and sharing them broadly. So through and sharing them broadly. So it's an honor to be here. Oh well, thank it's an honor to be here. Oh well, thank it's an honor to be here. Oh well, thank you. Um, it's a labor of love and I've you. Um, it's a labor of love and I've you. Um, it's a labor of love and I've loved this. So come back again. Thanks. loved this. So come back again. Thanks. loved this. So come back again. Thanks. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Alex Marson. To discussion with Dr. Alex Marson. To discussion with Dr. Alex Marson. To learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, cost way to support us. In addition, cost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star you can leave us up to a five star you can leave us up to a five star review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an Operating It's entitled Protocols, an Operating It's entitled Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries, as well as what we call summaries, as well as what we call summaries, as well as what we call protocols in the form of protocols in the form of protocols in the form of one-to-three-page PDFs that cover one-to-three-page PDFs that cover one-to-three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your everything from how to optimize your everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, sleep, how to optimize dopamine, sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a deliberate cold exposure. We have a deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that foundational fitness protocol that foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and covers cardiovascular training and covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. not share your email with anybody. not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Alex Marson. today's discussion with Dr. Alex Marson. today's discussion with Dr. Alex Marson. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.