Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an ask me anything or AMA episode, which is ask me anything or AMA episode, which is ask me anything or AMA episode, which is part of our premium subscriber content. part of our premium subscriber content. part of our premium subscriber content. Our premium channel was launched in Our premium channel was launched in Our premium channel was launched in order to raise support for the standard order to raise support for the standard order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which Huberman Lab podcast channel, which Huberman Lab podcast channel, which still comes out once a week every Monday still comes out once a week every Monday still comes out once a week every Monday and of course is zero cost to consumer. and of course is zero cost to consumer. and of course is zero cost to consumer. The premium channel is also designed to The premium channel is also designed to The premium channel is also designed to support exciting research being done at support exciting research being done at support exciting research being done at major universities like Stanford and major universities like Stanford and major universities like Stanford and elsewhere. Research that's done on elsewhere. Research that's done on elsewhere. Research that's done on humans that should lead to protocols for humans that should lead to protocols for humans that should lead to protocols for mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance in the near future. performance in the near future. performance in the near future. If you'd like to check out the premium If you'd like to check out the premium If you'd like to check out the premium channel subscription model, you can go channel subscription model, you can go channel subscription model, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium and there you can subscribe for $10 a and there you can subscribe for $10 a and there you can subscribe for $10 a month or $100 a year. We also have a month or $100 a year. We also have a month or $100 a year. We also have a lifetime subscriber option. For those of lifetime subscriber option. For those of lifetime subscriber option. For those of you that are already Huberman Lab you that are already Huberman Lab you that are already Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers and you're podcast premium subscribers and you're podcast premium subscribers and you're watching and or hearing this, please go watching and or hearing this, please go watching and or hearing this, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium podcast feed. and download the premium podcast feed. and download the premium podcast feed. And for those of you that are not And for those of you that are not And for those of you that are not already Huberman Lab premium podcast already Huberman Lab premium podcast already Huberman Lab premium podcast subscribers, you will be able to hear subscribers, you will be able to hear subscribers, you will be able to hear the first 15 minutes or so of this the first 15 minutes or so of this the first 15 minutes or so of this episode and hopefully that will allow episode and hopefully that will allow episode and hopefully that will allow you to discern whether or not you would you to discern whether or not you would you to discern whether or not you would like to become a premium subscriber. like to become a premium subscriber. like to become a premium subscriber. Without further ado, let's get to Without further ado, let's get to Without further ado, let's get to answering your questions and as always I answering your questions and as always I answering your questions and as always I will strive to be as accurate as will strive to be as accurate as will strive to be as accurate as possible, as thorough as possible, and possible, as thorough as possible, and possible, as thorough as possible, and yet as concise as possible. Our first yet as concise as possible. Our first yet as concise as possible. Our first question is about motivation, in question is about motivation, in question is about motivation, in particular how to maintain motivation particular how to maintain motivation particular how to maintain motivation over long periods of time. This was a over long periods of time. This was a over long periods of time. This was a question asked by Martin Zokov. He question asked by Martin Zokov. He question asked by Martin Zokov. He wrote, "I alternate between periods of wrote, "I alternate between periods of wrote, "I alternate between periods of two different states that vary from a two different states that vary from a two different states that vary from a few weeks to a couple of months. few weeks to a couple of months. few weeks to a couple of months. I have extremely high motivation in one I have extremely high motivation in one I have extremely high motivation in one state where I can do multiple things, state where I can do multiple things, state where I can do multiple things, side projects, making music, as well as side projects, making music, as well as side projects, making music, as well as my main things, or really low my main things, or really low my main things, or really low motivational states where I can barely motivational states where I can barely motivational states where I can barely do anything and I only look for do anything and I only look for do anything and I only look for short-term entertainment." I'm guessing short-term entertainment." I'm guessing short-term entertainment." I'm guessing short term entertainment comes in the short term entertainment comes in the short term entertainment comes in the form of video games, social media, and form of video games, social media, and form of video games, social media, and just kind of doing generally just kind of doing generally just kind of doing generally unproductive things as we all do from unproductive things as we all do from unproductive things as we all do from time to time. He goes on to write, "What time to time. He goes on to write, "What time to time. He goes on to write, "What would be the best set of protocols to would be the best set of protocols to would be the best set of protocols to normalize those extremes into a more normalize those extremes into a more normalize those extremes into a more stable and consistent state?" Well, stable and consistent state?" Well, stable and consistent state?" Well, first off, this is an excellent first off, this is an excellent first off, this is an excellent question. I say that because it's a question. I say that because it's a question. I say that because it's a question that I hear a lot, and I think question that I hear a lot, and I think question that I hear a lot, and I think that many people are interested in that many people are interested in that many people are interested in knowing how motivated they ought to knowing how motivated they ought to knowing how motivated they ought to feel, and I think a lot of people also feel, and I think a lot of people also feel, and I think a lot of people also feel a lot less motivated than they feel a lot less motivated than they feel a lot less motivated than they would like. Now, here the question was would like. Now, here the question was would like. Now, here the question was specifically about how to not go from specifically about how to not go from specifically about how to not go from these extremes of days or weeks of high these extremes of days or weeks of high these extremes of days or weeks of high motivation to days or weeks of low motivation to days or weeks of low motivation to days or weeks of low motivation, but before we do that, we motivation, but before we do that, we motivation, but before we do that, we need to take a step back and acknowledge need to take a step back and acknowledge need to take a step back and acknowledge that just as with anxiety or happiness that just as with anxiety or happiness that just as with anxiety or happiness or sadness, or sadness, or sadness, we as human beings don't have an we as human beings don't have an we as human beings don't have an objective window into how other people objective window into how other people objective window into how other people experience motivation. In fact, most of experience motivation. In fact, most of experience motivation. In fact, most of the time we don't even realize how we the time we don't even realize how we the time we don't even realize how we experience motivation. We just know experience motivation. We just know experience motivation. We just know whether or not we feel a high barrier or whether or not we feel a high barrier or whether or not we feel a high barrier or a low barrier to leaning into work and a low barrier to leaning into work and a low barrier to leaning into work and getting things done. In fact, I have a getting things done. In fact, I have a getting things done. In fact, I have a good friend who did many years in the good friend who did many years in the good friend who did many years in the special operations community and then special operations community and then special operations community and then went on to the finance community and went on to the finance community and went on to the finance community and then now works in health and wellness then now works in health and wellness then now works in health and wellness community. He has a great kind of mental community. He has a great kind of mental community. He has a great kind of mental image for all of us to adopt. It's image for all of us to adopt. It's image for all of us to adopt. It's certainly one that I've adopted, which certainly one that I've adopted, which certainly one that I've adopted, which is for anything in our life, we can either for anything in our life, we can either for anything in our life, we can either be back on our heels, flat-footed, or be back on our heels, flat-footed, or be back on our heels, flat-footed, or forward center of mass. Back on our forward center of mass. Back on our forward center of mass. Back on our heels meaning really struggling, heels meaning really struggling, heels meaning really struggling, flat-footed meaning that we're doing flat-footed meaning that we're doing flat-footed meaning that we're doing okay, or forward center of mass meaning okay, or forward center of mass meaning okay, or forward center of mass meaning that we feel as if we're that we feel as if we're that we feel as if we're really tackling things and that we are really tackling things and that we are really tackling things and that we are in control of our environment, or at in control of our environment, or at in control of our environment, or at least to some degree. You know, so I least to some degree. You know, so I least to some degree. You know, so I place that imagery in your mind because place that imagery in your mind because place that imagery in your mind because I'll return to it a little bit later in I'll return to it a little bit later in I'll return to it a little bit later in the question when we get into some of the question when we get into some of the question when we get into some of the underlying circuitry and tools. In the underlying circuitry and tools. In the underlying circuitry and tools. In the meantime, I want to remind everybody the meantime, I want to remind everybody the meantime, I want to remind everybody what the basis of motivation is. Uh what the basis of motivation is. Uh what the basis of motivation is. Uh there are many neurochemicals and neural there are many neurochemicals and neural there are many neurochemicals and neural circuits involved in what we call circuits involved in what we call circuits involved in what we call motivation, but essential theme of the neuroscience but essential theme of the neuroscience but essential theme of the neuroscience of motivation is that the neuromodulator of motivation is that the neuromodulator of motivation is that the neuromodulator dopamine is involved. Now, dopamine does dopamine is involved. Now, dopamine does dopamine is involved. Now, dopamine does other things besides control motivation. other things besides control motivation. other things besides control motivation. In fact, it controls light adaptation in In fact, it controls light adaptation in In fact, it controls light adaptation in the retina, the retina, the retina, uh that is your eye. It controls a uh that is your eye. It controls a uh that is your eye. It controls a number of different things in terms of number of different things in terms of number of different things in terms of movement. It controls all sorts of movement. It controls all sorts of movement. It controls all sorts of things, but it is strongly related to things, but it is strongly related to things, but it is strongly related to the motivation pathways. How do we know the motivation pathways. How do we know the motivation pathways. How do we know that? Well, there are experiments on that? Well, there are experiments on that? Well, there are experiments on animals and humans which show that animals and humans which show that animals and humans which show that even in the absence of dopamine or in even in the absence of dopamine or in even in the absence of dopamine or in the presence of very low dopamine, I the presence of very low dopamine, I the presence of very low dopamine, I should say, should say, should say, people and animals can still experience people and animals can still experience people and animals can still experience pleasure. However, when dopamine levels pleasure. However, when dopamine levels pleasure. However, when dopamine levels are too low, people's ability to pursue are too low, people's ability to pursue are too low, people's ability to pursue pleasure or their willingness to pursue pleasure or their willingness to pursue pleasure or their willingness to pursue pleasure, in particular, their pleasure, in particular, their pleasure, in particular, their willingness to undergo effort to pursue willingness to undergo effort to pursue willingness to undergo effort to pursue pleasure or any goal of any kind, not pleasure or any goal of any kind, not pleasure or any goal of any kind, not just pleasure, any goal of any kind is just pleasure, any goal of any kind is just pleasure, any goal of any kind is strongly regulated by the levels of strongly regulated by the levels of strongly regulated by the levels of dopamine. So, if dopamine levels are too dopamine. So, if dopamine levels are too dopamine. So, if dopamine levels are too low, people simply will not put in the effort people simply will not put in the effort people simply will not put in the effort to obtain or to obtain or to obtain or reach a goal. reach a goal. reach a goal. If dopamine levels are adequately high, If dopamine levels are adequately high, If dopamine levels are adequately high, they will put in that effort. And if they will put in that effort. And if they will put in that effort. And if dopamine levels go too high, you dopamine levels go too high, you dopamine levels go too high, you actually see something that is actually see something that is actually see something that is pathologic, which is that people pathologic, which is that people pathologic, which is that people consider every goal a reasonable goal. consider every goal a reasonable goal. consider every goal a reasonable goal. This is often seen in the manic phase of This is often seen in the manic phase of This is often seen in the manic phase of a manic bipolar person. So, for a manic bipolar person. So, for a manic bipolar person. So, for instance, somebody with manic bipolar instance, somebody with manic bipolar instance, somebody with manic bipolar who's in a manic episode, dopamine who's in a manic episode, dopamine who's in a manic episode, dopamine levels are very, very high, and they levels are very, very high, and they levels are very, very high, and they will think every idea is a great idea, will think every idea is a great idea, will think every idea is a great idea, and they will have tons of energy to do and they will have tons of energy to do and they will have tons of energy to do that, so much so that so that they're that, so much so that so that they're that, so much so that so that they're not sleeping. So, obviously, that's not sleeping. So, obviously, that's not sleeping. So, obviously, that's not what we want. What we want and what the what we want. What we want and what the what we want. What we want and what the question asker, Martin, is asking about question asker, Martin, is asking about question asker, Martin, is asking about is how to keep dopamine levels in a is how to keep dopamine levels in a is how to keep dopamine levels in a range that allow us to lean into effort, range that allow us to lean into effort, range that allow us to lean into effort, but that we don't expend our ability to but that we don't expend our ability to but that we don't expend our ability to stay motivated. And we can really trace stay motivated. And we can really trace stay motivated. And we can really trace that back to a biochemical/neural that back to a biochemical/neural that back to a biochemical/neural circuit statement, which is we really circuit statement, which is we really circuit statement, which is we really want to control our output of dopamine want to control our output of dopamine want to control our output of dopamine and the baseline levels of dopamine from and the baseline levels of dopamine from and the baseline levels of dopamine from which that output is taken. In other which that output is taken. In other which that output is taken. In other words, we want to think about dopamine words, we want to think about dopamine words, we want to think about dopamine as a reservoir or residing in a as a reservoir or residing in a as a reservoir or residing in a reservoir. That reservoir can be depleted, so it's That reservoir can be depleted, so it's That reservoir can be depleted, so it's exhaustible, it's depletable, exhaustible, it's depletable, exhaustible, it's depletable, but it's renewable as well. And one of but it's renewable as well. And one of but it's renewable as well. And one of the best analogies the best analogies the best analogies that I've ever heard was by a previous that I've ever heard was by a previous that I've ever heard was by a previous guest on the Huberman Lab podcast, Dr. guest on the Huberman Lab podcast, Dr. guest on the Huberman Lab podcast, Dr. Kyle Gillette, who's a medical doctor, Kyle Gillette, who's a medical doctor, Kyle Gillette, who's a medical doctor, obesity specialist, expert in hormones. obesity specialist, expert in hormones. obesity specialist, expert in hormones. We did a episode on optimizing hormones We did a episode on optimizing hormones We did a episode on optimizing hormones in males with Dr. Kyle Gillette. You can in males with Dr. Kyle Gillette. You can in males with Dr. Kyle Gillette. You can find that at hubermanlab.com or anywhere find that at hubermanlab.com or anywhere find that at hubermanlab.com or anywhere you can find podcasts. Dr. Gillette you can find podcasts. Dr. Gillette you can find podcasts. Dr. Gillette offered an analogy of the baseline offered an analogy of the baseline offered an analogy of the baseline levels of dopamine as a wave pool. And I levels of dopamine as a wave pool. And I levels of dopamine as a wave pool. And I really like this. So, if you think about really like this. So, if you think about really like this. So, if you think about this pool full of dopamine, and here this pool full of dopamine, and here this pool full of dopamine, and here we're just talking about the dopamine we're just talking about the dopamine we're just talking about the dopamine that resides in the circuits of the that resides in the circuits of the that resides in the circuits of the brain that control motivation, but that brain that control motivation, but that brain that control motivation, but that pool of dopamine, you can imagine it's pool of dopamine, you can imagine it's pool of dopamine, you can imagine it's just sitting there not doing much of just sitting there not doing much of just sitting there not doing much of anything while you're asleep. In fact, anything while you're asleep. In fact, anything while you're asleep. In fact, while you're sleeping, you're while you're sleeping, you're while you're sleeping, you're replenishing those dopamine levels. I'll replenishing those dopamine levels. I'll replenishing those dopamine levels. I'll tell you another tool in a moment to tell you another tool in a moment to tell you another tool in a moment to replenish those dopamine levels. But, if replenish those dopamine levels. But, if replenish those dopamine levels. But, if you were to pursue a goal, really, you were to pursue a goal, really, you were to pursue a goal, really, really go forward center of mass for really go forward center of mass for really go forward center of mass for many, many hours or many, many days in many, many hours or many, many days in many, many hours or many, many days in some cases, and pursue a goal or some cases, and pursue a goal or some cases, and pursue a goal or multiple goals, and you're really driven multiple goals, and you're really driven multiple goals, and you're really driven to do a ton, what you're effectively to do a ton, what you're effectively to do a ton, what you're effectively doing is generating waves in that wave doing is generating waves in that wave doing is generating waves in that wave pool. And if those waves are too big, pool. And if those waves are too big, pool. And if those waves are too big, well, then the waves can't keep well, then the waves can't keep well, then the waves can't keep repeating themselves. So, think about repeating themselves. So, think about repeating themselves. So, think about the wave as the motivation, and the wave as the motivation, and the wave as the motivation, and the depth of the pool is the reservoir of depth of the pool is the reservoir of depth of the pool is the reservoir of dopamine. And if those waves are too dopamine. And if those waves are too dopamine. And if those waves are too big, too much excitement, too much big, too much excitement, too much big, too much excitement, too much motivation, too much center of mass for motivation, too much center of mass for motivation, too much center of mass for a given period of time, then the water a given period of time, then the water a given period of time, then the water in this wave pool sloshes out of the in this wave pool sloshes out of the in this wave pool sloshes out of the wave pool, lowering the reservoir. And wave pool, lowering the reservoir. And wave pool, lowering the reservoir. And then there are really three ways that then there are really three ways that then there are really three ways that you can replenish that reservoir, and you can replenish that reservoir, and you can replenish that reservoir, and you want to maintain or replenish that you want to maintain or replenish that you want to maintain or replenish that reservoir if it's been depleted. How do reservoir if it's been depleted. How do reservoir if it's been depleted. How do you do that? Well, first of all, quality you do that? Well, first of all, quality you do that? Well, first of all, quality sleep. So, when I say quality, I mean sleep. So, when I say quality, I mean sleep. So, when I say quality, I mean where you're getting enough slow wave where you're getting enough slow wave where you're getting enough slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. So, sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. So, sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. So, for some people 6 hours, for some people for some people 6 hours, for some people for some people 6 hours, for some people 8 hours. Some people might even need a 8 hours. Some people might even need a 8 hours. Some people might even need a little bit more or a little bit less. We little bit more or a little bit less. We little bit more or a little bit less. We have episodes, the perfect your sleep have episodes, the perfect your sleep have episodes, the perfect your sleep episode, the master your sleep episode. episode, the master your sleep episode. episode, the master your sleep episode. We have a toolkit for sleep, all We have a toolkit for sleep, all We have a toolkit for sleep, all available at zero cost at available at zero cost at available at zero cost at hubermanlab.com, links, etc. So, check hubermanlab.com, links, etc. So, check hubermanlab.com, links, etc. So, check those out for getting your sleep right. those out for getting your sleep right. those out for getting your sleep right. But, sleep is really when you replenish But, sleep is really when you replenish But, sleep is really when you replenish that reservoir of dopamine. So, you that reservoir of dopamine. So, you that reservoir of dopamine. So, you cannot ignore sleep. I'll come back to cannot ignore sleep. I'll come back to cannot ignore sleep. I'll come back to this in a moment. The second this in a moment. The second this in a moment. The second science-supported tool that's really science-supported tool that's really science-supported tool that's really been shown to replenish dopamine, in been shown to replenish dopamine, in been shown to replenish dopamine, in particular dopamine within the pathways particular dopamine within the pathways particular dopamine within the pathways that regulate motivation, is a practice that regulate motivation, is a practice that regulate motivation, is a practice I've talked about before on the podcast I've talked about before on the podcast I've talked about before on the podcast called non-sleep deep rest, sometimes called non-sleep deep rest, sometimes called non-sleep deep rest, sometimes called yoga nidra, although yoga nidra called yoga nidra, although yoga nidra called yoga nidra, although yoga nidra is a little bit different. There are two is a little bit different. There are two is a little bit different. There are two studies out of Denmark that have studies out of Denmark that have studies out of Denmark that have explored yoga nidra in the context of explored yoga nidra in the context of explored yoga nidra in the context of dopamine. The first one simply involved dopamine. The first one simply involved dopamine. The first one simply involved having people do a yoga nidra practice. having people do a yoga nidra practice. having people do a yoga nidra practice. Again, this doesn't involve any Again, this doesn't involve any Again, this doesn't involve any movement, but involves people, movement, but involves people, movement, but involves people, potentially you, doing anywhere from 30 potentially you, doing anywhere from 30 potentially you, doing anywhere from 30 to 60 minutes, although there are now to 60 minutes, although there are now to 60 minutes, although there are now data showing that as short as 10 minutes data showing that as short as 10 minutes data showing that as short as 10 minutes of a non-sleep deep rest, aka yoga nidra of a non-sleep deep rest, aka yoga nidra of a non-sleep deep rest, aka yoga nidra protocol, leads to dramatic, really dramatic leads to dramatic, really dramatic leads to dramatic, really dramatic increases in striatal dopamine reserves. increases in striatal dopamine reserves. increases in striatal dopamine reserves. So, it essentially is replenishing the So, it essentially is replenishing the So, it essentially is replenishing the dopamine reserve pool. This is why I'm dopamine reserve pool. This is why I'm dopamine reserve pool. This is why I'm such a fan of using NSDR, aka yoga such a fan of using NSDR, aka yoga such a fan of using NSDR, aka yoga nidra, at least once a day, and nidra, at least once a day, and nidra, at least once a day, and especially under times when you're especially under times when you're especially under times when you're engaging in a lot of high output. And engaging in a lot of high output. And engaging in a lot of high output. And when I say especially at times when I say especially at times when I say especially at times when you're engaging in a lot of high output, you're engaging in a lot of high output, you're engaging in a lot of high output, this is a mistake many people make. They this is a mistake many people make. They this is a mistake many people make. They push, push. They're in push, push. They're in push, push. They're in pursuit of a goal, then they hit that pursuit of a goal, then they hit that pursuit of a goal, then they hit that point where they're exhausted, then they point where they're exhausted, then they point where they're exhausted, then they start doing all the dopamine reserve start doing all the dopamine reserve start doing all the dopamine reserve pool replenishing tools, such as yoga pool replenishing tools, such as yoga pool replenishing tools, such as yoga nidra or NSDR. The real key is to always nidra or NSDR. The real key is to always nidra or NSDR. The real key is to always tap off that or refill that reservoir tap off that or refill that reservoir tap off that or refill that reservoir once a day before it's completely once a day before it's completely once a day before it's completely depleted. Now, this gets into some of depleted. Now, this gets into some of depleted. Now, this gets into some of the biochemistry of dopamine and the biochemistry of dopamine and the biochemistry of dopamine and the relevant circuits, but it takes a lot relevant circuits, but it takes a lot relevant circuits, but it takes a lot longer to restore the dopamine longer to restore the dopamine longer to restore the dopamine reservoir. Think of it still as a wave pool, but Think of it still as a wave pool, but Think of it still as a wave pool, but that reservoir from a place of complete that reservoir from a place of complete that reservoir from a place of complete depletion than it does of partial depletion than it does of partial depletion than it does of partial depletion. So, there's an asymmetry in depletion. So, there's an asymmetry in depletion. So, there's an asymmetry in the way this is done. So, it's not as the way this is done. So, it's not as the way this is done. So, it's not as if, you know, you drink a glass of if, you know, you drink a glass of if, you know, you drink a glass of water, you fill the glass of water at a water, you fill the glass of water at a water, you fill the glass of water at a certain rate and it fills up to a certain rate and it fills up to a certain rate and it fills up to a certain level and the rate is constant. certain level and the rate is constant. certain level and the rate is constant. Think about it as once the level of Think about it as once the level of Think about it as once the level of dopamine in your reserve is depleted dopamine in your reserve is depleted dopamine in your reserve is depleted past a certain point, it takes a lot past a certain point, it takes a lot past a certain point, it takes a lot more effort, much more sleep, much more effort, much more sleep, much more effort, much more sleep, much more NSDR, things of that sort to replenish NSDR, things of that sort to replenish NSDR, things of that sort to replenish that reservoir. Now, oftentimes what that reservoir. Now, oftentimes what that reservoir. Now, oftentimes what people will do when they start feeling people will do when they start feeling people will do when they start feeling less motivation is they will start less motivation is they will start less motivation is they will start relying on things like Adderall, relying on things like Adderall, relying on things like Adderall, Ritalin, some cases illegal substances that can some cases illegal substances that can some cases illegal substances that can increase dopamine. You know what those increase dopamine. You know what those increase dopamine. You know what those are, please don't are, please don't are, please don't ever lean to those. They are extremely ever lean to those. They are extremely ever lean to those. They are extremely dangerous. They really are because of dangerous. They really are because of dangerous. They really are because of their ability to potently release their ability to potently release their ability to potently release dopamine and guess what? Deplete that dopamine and guess what? Deplete that dopamine and guess what? Deplete that reservoir even further. We've talked reservoir even further. We've talked reservoir even further. We've talked about some supplements on the podcast about some supplements on the podcast about some supplements on the podcast that can replenish dopamine, L-tyrosine that can replenish dopamine, L-tyrosine that can replenish dopamine, L-tyrosine in particular. Mucuna pruriens is in particular. Mucuna pruriens is in particular. Mucuna pruriens is actually 99% L-dopa, the precursor to actually 99% L-dopa, the precursor to actually 99% L-dopa, the precursor to dopamine. I don't necessarily recommend dopamine. I don't necessarily recommend dopamine. I don't necessarily recommend Mucuna pruriens. It tends to make people Mucuna pruriens. It tends to make people Mucuna pruriens. It tends to make people very dopaminergic, drive, very dopaminergic, drive, very dopaminergic, drive, motivated and then crash, again drive, motivated and then crash, again drive, motivated and then crash, again depleting that pool. L-tyrosine is a depleting that pool. L-tyrosine is a depleting that pool. L-tyrosine is a little bit milder, but I really little bit milder, but I really little bit milder, but I really encourage people to lean first on the encourage people to lean first on the encourage people to lean first on the behavioral tools such as NSDR. And by behavioral tools such as NSDR. And by behavioral tools such as NSDR. And by the way, there's a NSDR script totally the way, there's a NSDR script totally the way, there's a NSDR script totally zero cost that you can find by putting zero cost that you can find by putting zero cost that you can find by putting my name and NSDR into YouTube. That one my name and NSDR into YouTube. That one my name and NSDR into YouTube. That one works quite well if you're looking for a works quite well if you're looking for a works quite well if you're looking for a short NSDR. short NSDR. short NSDR. There are some other NSDRs you can There are some other NSDRs you can There are some other NSDRs you can simply look on the internet or YouTube simply look on the internet or YouTube simply look on the internet or YouTube and just put NSDR and you'll find a and just put NSDR and you'll find a and just put NSDR and you'll find a NSDR. Or if you prefer to do the more NSDR. Or if you prefer to do the more NSDR. Or if you prefer to do the more classic Yoga Nidra type approach, there classic Yoga Nidra type approach, there classic Yoga Nidra type approach, there are a lot of different Yoga Nidra are a lot of different Yoga Nidra are a lot of different Yoga Nidra options to choose from on YouTube. Many options to choose from on YouTube. Many options to choose from on YouTube. Many people think NSDR or Yoga Nidra are people think NSDR or Yoga Nidra are people think NSDR or Yoga Nidra are simply meditation with a body scan. simply meditation with a body scan. simply meditation with a body scan. That's not true. Meditation is a focus That's not true. Meditation is a focus That's not true. Meditation is a focus exercise. Okay, most meditations are exercise. Okay, most meditations are exercise. Okay, most meditations are focus exercise. NSDR focus exercise. NSDR focus exercise. NSDR restores energy through the dopamine restores energy through the dopamine restores energy through the dopamine system and newer data are starting to system and newer data are starting to system and newer data are starting to show that it can actually recover lost show that it can actually recover lost show that it can actually recover lost sleep. So, if you're not sleeping sleep. So, if you're not sleeping sleep. So, if you're not sleeping enough, but enough, but enough, but to return to NSDR aka Yoga Nidra as a to return to NSDR aka Yoga Nidra as a to return to NSDR aka Yoga Nidra as a practice, yes, it's been shown in practice, yes, it's been shown in practice, yes, it's been shown in laboratory studies in humans, by the laboratory studies in humans, by the laboratory studies in humans, by the way, to restore dopamine levels. There's way, to restore dopamine levels. There's way, to restore dopamine levels. There's another study, lesser known, from that another study, lesser known, from that another study, lesser known, from that same group that was published in 2011, same group that was published in 2011, same group that was published in 2011, uh which is entitled "Dopaminergic uh which is entitled "Dopaminergic uh which is entitled "Dopaminergic Stimulation Enhances Confidence and Stimulation Enhances Confidence and Stimulation Enhances Confidence and Accuracy in Seeing Rapidly Presented Accuracy in Seeing Rapidly Presented Accuracy in Seeing Rapidly Presented Words." This was a cognitive task. Words." This was a cognitive task. Words." This was a cognitive task. They explored They explored They explored Yoga Nidra Yoga Nidra Yoga Nidra aka NSDR aka NSDR aka NSDR in the context of increasing striatal in the context of increasing striatal in the context of increasing striatal dopamine. They already knew that it did dopamine. They already knew that it did dopamine. They already knew that it did that. So, that's great. They confirmed that. So, that's great. They confirmed that. So, that's great. They confirmed that result. But, what they also found that result. But, what they also found that result. But, what they also found is that doing NSDR could restore is that doing NSDR could restore is that doing NSDR could restore confidence in cognitive ability and confidence in cognitive ability and confidence in cognitive ability and performance in these cognitive tasks. performance in these cognitive tasks. performance in these cognitive tasks. Okay, so this is a really powerful Okay, so this is a really powerful Okay, so this is a really powerful zero-cost tool for zero-cost tool for zero-cost tool for re-upping or replenishing that dopamine re-upping or replenishing that dopamine re-upping or replenishing that dopamine reserve. Okay, so this is something to reserve. Okay, so this is something to reserve. Okay, so this is something to do every day, especially when you're not do every day, especially when you're not do every day, especially when you're not feeling depleted. So, the question again feeling depleted. So, the question again feeling depleted. So, the question again was about how to make sure that you was about how to make sure that you was about how to make sure that you don't go through these cycles of extreme don't go through these cycles of extreme don't go through these cycles of extreme motivation and then lesser motivation. motivation and then lesser motivation. motivation and then lesser motivation. Well, get your sleep right. I always say Well, get your sleep right. I always say Well, get your sleep right. I always say 80% or more of the nights of your life, 80% or more of the nights of your life, 80% or more of the nights of your life, hopefully the nights that it's not good hopefully the nights that it's not good hopefully the nights that it's not good are for good reasons that you're are for good reasons that you're are for good reasons that you're enjoying yourself, but hey, life enjoying yourself, but hey, life enjoying yourself, but hey, life happens. So, you know, 100% of the time happens. So, you know, 100% of the time happens. So, you know, 100% of the time is just not reasonable to expect of is just not reasonable to expect of is just not reasonable to expect of yourself. Do NSDR Do NSDR Do NSDR once a day for either 10 minutes, if you once a day for either 10 minutes, if you once a day for either 10 minutes, if you have the time to do 20, 30 minutes, or have the time to do 20, 30 minutes, or have the time to do 20, 30 minutes, or an hour, you will see even more positive an hour, you will see even more positive an hour, you will see even more positive effects. It has been shown in these effects. It has been shown in these effects. It has been shown in these research studies to replenish dopamine, research studies to replenish dopamine, research studies to replenish dopamine, levels of confidence, cognitive ability, levels of confidence, cognitive ability, levels of confidence, cognitive ability, etc., and sense of motivation. And I etc., and sense of motivation. And I etc., and sense of motivation. And I said there were three tools, and the said there were three tools, and the said there were three tools, and the third tool third tool third tool that really can allow you to that really can allow you to that really can allow you to keep the dopamine aka motivation keep the dopamine aka motivation keep the dopamine aka motivation circuitry tuned up properly is to really circuitry tuned up properly is to really circuitry tuned up properly is to really start paying attention to peaks in start paying attention to peaks in start paying attention to peaks in dopamine and be very careful about dopamine and be very careful about dopamine and be very careful about layering in too many things that can layering in too many things that can layering in too many things that can stimulate the dopamine system. I talked stimulate the dopamine system. I talked stimulate the dopamine system. I talked about this quite a bit in the episode about this quite a bit in the episode about this quite a bit in the episode that we did on ADHD and building and that we did on ADHD and building and that we did on ADHD and building and maintaining focus. maintaining focus. maintaining focus. There are many things out there nowadays There are many things out there nowadays There are many things out there nowadays that will deplete the dopamine system. that will deplete the dopamine system. that will deplete the dopamine system. For instance, and by the way, none of For instance, and by the way, none of For instance, and by the way, none of what I'm about to list is necessarily what I'm about to list is necessarily what I'm about to list is necessarily bad. I actually use some of these bad. I actually use some of these bad. I actually use some of these things. For instance, caffeine will things. For instance, caffeine will things. For instance, caffeine will increase dopamine receptors that will increase dopamine receptors that will increase dopamine receptors that will allow whatever dopamine is available to allow whatever dopamine is available to allow whatever dopamine is available to be more potent. Okay, so caffeine's be more potent. Okay, so caffeine's be more potent. Okay, so caffeine's great for some people, less good for great for some people, less good for great for some people, less good for people with anxiety, don't drink it too people with anxiety, don't drink it too people with anxiety, don't drink it too late in the day cuz it'll interfere with late in the day cuz it'll interfere with late in the day cuz it'll interfere with your sleep, and so on and so forth. But your sleep, and so on and so forth. But your sleep, and so on and so forth. But many people will combine caffeine with many people will combine caffeine with many people will combine caffeine with music that they particularly like. music that they particularly like. music that they particularly like. Music's great. Music can stimulate Music's great. Music can stimulate Music's great. Music can stimulate dopamine release, we know this. It can dopamine release, we know this. It can dopamine release, we know this. It can enhance motivation, especially if it's enhance motivation, especially if it's enhance motivation, especially if it's the kind of music that really puts you the kind of music that really puts you the kind of music that really puts you in the groove for the particular type of in the groove for the particular type of in the groove for the particular type of work you're going to do. For me, I like work you're going to do. For me, I like work you're going to do. For me, I like to listen to either loud fast music or to listen to either loud fast music or to listen to either loud fast music or Glenn Gould classical piano, so one or Glenn Gould classical piano, so one or Glenn Gould classical piano, so one or the other. I know what's right for me the other. I know what's right for me the other. I know what's right for me for a given time. You'll know what's for a given time. You'll know what's for a given time. You'll know what's right for you for a given time and your right for you for a given time and your right for you for a given time and your preferences. But what will happen is preferences. But what will happen is preferences. But what will happen is people will start consuming caffeine at people will start consuming caffeine at people will start consuming caffeine at higher and higher levels. higher and higher levels. higher and higher levels. Again, caffeine isn't necessarily bad, Again, caffeine isn't necessarily bad, Again, caffeine isn't necessarily bad, but they'll start doing that and they'll but they'll start doing that and they'll but they'll start doing that and they'll start layering it in or stacking start layering it in or stacking start layering it in or stacking very potent music, potent for them, plus very potent music, potent for them, plus very potent music, potent for them, plus things like L-tyrosine. Again, none of things like L-tyrosine. Again, none of things like L-tyrosine. Again, none of these things are terrible on their own. these things are terrible on their own. these things are terrible on their own. In fact, they could be very beneficial. In fact, they could be very beneficial. In fact, they could be very beneficial. Sometimes they'll start taking Mucuna Sometimes they'll start taking Mucuna Sometimes they'll start taking Mucuna pruriens, sometimes they'll start pruriens, sometimes they'll start pruriens, sometimes they'll start relying on things like Adderall, relying on things like Adderall, relying on things like Adderall, Ritalin, and pretty soon what's Ritalin, and pretty soon what's Ritalin, and pretty soon what's happening is they're getting these big happening is they're getting these big happening is they're getting these big waves in that dopamine wave pool, big waves in that dopamine wave pool, big waves in that dopamine wave pool, big peaks. And within a few days or maybe peaks. And within a few days or maybe peaks. And within a few days or maybe even within a few hours, they're even within a few hours, they're even within a few hours, they're depleted and they're at that low. And depleted and they're at that low. And depleted and they're at that low. And then as Dr. Anna Lembke, who was a guest then as Dr. Anna Lembke, who was a guest then as Dr. Anna Lembke, who was a guest on the podcast, talked about in terms of on the podcast, talked about in terms of on the podcast, talked about in terms of addiction, but also in her wonderful addiction, but also in her wonderful addiction, but also in her wonderful book Dopamine Nation, book Dopamine Nation, book Dopamine Nation, what happens is after those big peaks in what happens is after those big peaks in what happens is after those big peaks in dopamine, the reservoir, the baseline in dopamine the reservoir, the baseline in dopamine the reservoir, the baseline in dopamine drops below its initial level. So it's drops below its initial level. So it's drops below its initial level. So it's as if the reservoir got deeper and it's as if the reservoir got deeper and it's as if the reservoir got deeper and it's emptier and it takes much, much longer emptier and it takes much, much longer emptier and it takes much, much longer to fill. Okay, so to be quite specific, to fill. Okay, so to be quite specific, to fill. Okay, so to be quite specific, what I'm recommending is get your sleep what I'm recommending is get your sleep what I'm recommending is get your sleep right. Ideally every night of your life, but Ideally every night of your life, but Ideally every night of your life, but for as many nights of your life as for as many nights of your life as for as many nights of your life as possible. That's clearly replenishing possible. That's clearly replenishing possible. That's clearly replenishing dopamine and sense of motivation. Do all dopamine and sense of motivation. Do all dopamine and sense of motivation. Do all the things associated with that. Morning the things associated with that. Morning the things associated with that. Morning sunlight, lack of artificial light at sunlight, lack of artificial light at sunlight, lack of artificial light at certain hours of the night, etc. All of certain hours of the night, etc. All of certain hours of the night, etc. All of that's in the toolkit for sleep in other that's in the toolkit for sleep in other that's in the toolkit for sleep in other episodes I mentioned before. episodes I mentioned before. episodes I mentioned before. Have a practice that is Have a practice that is Have a practice that is research-supported to replenish dopamine and incorporate to replenish dopamine and incorporate to replenish dopamine and incorporate that practice anytime of day. Again, that practice anytime of day. Again, that practice anytime of day. Again, NSDR can be done morning, afternoon, or NSDR can be done morning, afternoon, or NSDR can be done morning, afternoon, or evening, or middle of the night if you evening, or middle of the night if you evening, or middle of the night if you wake up and you need to get back to wake up and you need to get back to wake up and you need to get back to sleep. It can be very beneficial for sleep. It can be very beneficial for sleep. It can be very beneficial for that. But do it as a consistent practice that. But do it as a consistent practice that. But do it as a consistent practice so that dopamine reservoir remains so that dopamine reservoir remains so that dopamine reservoir remains tapped off. tapped off. tapped off. And as a third point, please be wary of And as a third point, please be wary of And as a third point, please be wary of or at least aware of these peaks in or at least aware of these peaks in or at least aware of these peaks in dopamine and the fact that layering in a dopamine and the fact that layering in a dopamine and the fact that layering in a lot of things that stimulate dopamine, lot of things that stimulate dopamine, lot of things that stimulate dopamine, well, that can be wonderful for your well, that can be wonderful for your well, that can be wonderful for your wedding, a birth of a new child, going wedding, a birth of a new child, going wedding, a birth of a new child, going to a sports event with a bunch of to a sports event with a bunch of to a sports event with a bunch of friends, celebrating a big anniversary. friends, celebrating a big anniversary. friends, celebrating a big anniversary. Yes, please do celebrate and enjoy the Yes, please do celebrate and enjoy the Yes, please do celebrate and enjoy the wonderful events of life. But please wonderful events of life. But please wonderful events of life. But please also understand and expect there will be also understand and expect there will be also understand and expect there will be a lull, a sort of postpartum low, maybe a lull, a sort of postpartum low, maybe a lull, a sort of postpartum low, maybe not full-blown depression, that follows not full-blown depression, that follows not full-blown depression, that follows that unless you incorporate some tools that unless you incorporate some tools that unless you incorporate some tools and practices to replenish that and practices to replenish that and practices to replenish that dopamine. Does that mean you should dopamine. Does that mean you should dopamine. Does that mean you should never combine caffeine, L-tyrosine, never combine caffeine, L-tyrosine, never combine caffeine, L-tyrosine, music, and a workout, and time with music, and a workout, and time with music, and a workout, and time with friends? No, absolutely not. But don't friends? No, absolutely not. But don't friends? No, absolutely not. But don't expect to do that and then go do an expect to do that and then go do an expect to do that and then go do an intense bout of work and then get up the intense bout of work and then get up the intense bout of work and then get up the next morning and do it all over again next morning and do it all over again next morning and do it all over again for more than a few days before you find for more than a few days before you find for more than a few days before you find yourself pretty depleted. Okay, so yourself pretty depleted. Okay, so yourself pretty depleted. Okay, so rather than give you a specific schedule rather than give you a specific schedule rather than give you a specific schedule of, you know, do 7 days of this and 4 of, you know, do 7 days of this and 4 of, you know, do 7 days of this and 4 days of this, what I encourage you to do days of this, what I encourage you to do days of this, what I encourage you to do is for at least 5 days a week, maybe is for at least 5 days a week, maybe is for at least 5 days a week, maybe give yourself some time off on the give yourself some time off on the give yourself some time off on the weekends, maybe not, but for at least 5 weekends, maybe not, but for at least 5 weekends, maybe not, but for at least 5 days a week get into a consistent days a week get into a consistent days a week get into a consistent routine that is I should say routine that is I should say routine that is I should say neurobiologically consistent as well neurobiologically consistent as well neurobiologically consistent as well with how the dopamine aka circuits that with how the dopamine aka circuits that with how the dopamine aka circuits that control motivation work and I assure you control motivation work and I assure you control motivation work and I assure you that you will find yourself in a more that you will find yourself in a more that you will find yourself in a more regular groove of focus and attention regular groove of focus and attention regular groove of focus and attention and alertness and motivation when you and alertness and motivation when you and alertness and motivation when you need to and provided you're doing all need to and provided you're doing all need to and provided you're doing all the things I described and hopefully the things I described and hopefully the things I described and hopefully paying attention to other things like paying attention to other things like paying attention to other things like nutrition and social connection too of nutrition and social connection too of nutrition and social connection too of course you'll find a much more even course you'll find a much more even course you'll find a much more even pattern of motivation over time. One pattern of motivation over time. One pattern of motivation over time. One last thing before I conclude the answer last thing before I conclude the answer last thing before I conclude the answer to this question when I was in graduate to this question when I was in graduate to this question when I was in graduate school I got some wonderful advice from an I got some wonderful advice from an I got some wonderful advice from an excellent neurologist his name is Robert excellent neurologist his name is Robert excellent neurologist his name is Robert Knight he used to be at University of Knight he used to be at University of Knight he used to be at University of California Berkeley I think he's retired California Berkeley I think he's retired California Berkeley I think he's retired now but um is still active in the now but um is still active in the now but um is still active in the scientific community and I asked him uh scientific community and I asked him uh scientific community and I asked him uh what he was doing that weekend I don't what he was doing that weekend I don't what he was doing that weekend I don't know why this came up and he said oh I'm know why this came up and he said oh I'm know why this came up and he said oh I'm going fishing I like kind of you know going fishing I like kind of you know going fishing I like kind of you know mindless recreation I said that's great mindless recreation I said that's great mindless recreation I said that's great you know fishing's fun and I'm not you know fishing's fun and I'm not you know fishing's fun and I'm not particularly uh into fishing myself but particularly uh into fishing myself but particularly uh into fishing myself but I've done it a few times and I enjoy it. I've done it a few times and I enjoy it. I've done it a few times and I enjoy it. And he said you know the most important And he said you know the most important And he said you know the most important thing for a science or medicine career thing for a science or medicine career thing for a science or medicine career or any demanding career I said what like or any demanding career I said what like or any demanding career I said what like I was all the years a super you know I was all the years a super you know I was all the years a super you know super hungry to get in the mix and super hungry to get in the mix and super hungry to get in the mix and you know do research and publish papers you know do research and publish papers you know do research and publish papers and he said figure out how many hours a and he said figure out how many hours a and he said figure out how many hours a day you can do real work consistently. day you can do real work consistently. day you can do real work consistently. That means five days a week for some That means five days a week for some That means five days a week for some people six or seven but five days a week people six or seven but five days a week people six or seven but five days a week I think for most people is going to be a I think for most people is going to be a I think for most people is going to be a bit healthier overall for your social bit healthier overall for your social bit healthier overall for your social life and family etc. And he said figure life and family etc. And he said figure life and family etc. And he said figure that out and know that number is that out and know that number is that out and know that number is what you should apply over and over and what you should apply over and over and what you should apply over and over and over again but update that number about over again but update that number about over again but update that number about every four or five years. And I said every four or five years. And I said every four or five years. And I said okay so does that mean that over time okay so does that mean that over time okay so does that mean that over time I'm working more and more or less and I'm working more and more or less and I'm working more and more or less and less and he said ah here's the deal as less and he said ah here's the deal as less and he said ah here's the deal as you get better at your profession you get better at your profession you get better at your profession you will find that you can do more potent will find that you can do more potent will find that you can do more potent work more directed work in a shorter work more directed work in a shorter work more directed work in a shorter amount of time amount of time amount of time but that does not mean that you can but that does not mean that you can but that does not mean that you can continue to expand the amount of time continue to expand the amount of time continue to expand the amount of time that you're doing focused work in fact that you're doing focused work in fact that you're doing focused work in fact the opposite. So this follows a sort of the opposite. So this follows a sort of the opposite. So this follows a sort of general principle that's also present in general principle that's also present in general principle that's also present in resistance training or weightlifting, resistance training or weightlifting, resistance training or weightlifting, right? Um right? Um right? Um the analogy there is that people always the analogy there is that people always the analogy there is that people always imagine that as you get better and imagine that as you get better and imagine that as you get better and better at resistance training, you better at resistance training, you better at resistance training, you should do more and more volume. Just should do more and more volume. Just should do more and more volume. Just keep adding volume. And you know, keep adding volume. And you know, keep adding volume. And you know, there's some evidence to support that, there's some evidence to support that, there's some evidence to support that, more volume for hypertrophy as opposed more volume for hypertrophy as opposed more volume for hypertrophy as opposed to less, etc. We've done episodes on to less, etc. We've done episodes on to less, etc. We've done episodes on this. However, there's a different this. However, there's a different this. However, there's a different school of thought that works exceedingly school of thought that works exceedingly school of thought that works exceedingly well, and it runs in the exact opposite well, and it runs in the exact opposite well, and it runs in the exact opposite direction, which is as you get better at direction, which is as you get better at direction, which is as you get better at controlling muscular contractions, or controlling muscular contractions, or controlling muscular contractions, or let's say for in an endurance sport, as let's say for in an endurance sport, as let's say for in an endurance sport, as you get better at regulating your stride you get better at regulating your stride you get better at regulating your stride and breathing and all those things, you and breathing and all those things, you and breathing and all those things, you actually can do more, quote and quote, actually can do more, quote and quote, actually can do more, quote and quote, adaptation-stimulating damage during a given training session. damage during a given training session. damage during a given training session. So, you want to train less, not more, So, you want to train less, not more, So, you want to train less, not more, over time. Because beginners don't over time. Because beginners don't over time. Because beginners don't actually have the ability to get much actually have the ability to get much actually have the ability to get much done in a lot of time, or a short period done in a lot of time, or a short period done in a lot of time, or a short period of time, whereas experts can come in of time, whereas experts can come in of time, whereas experts can come in there and really nail it. So, I think there and really nail it. So, I think there and really nail it. So, I think that advice that Robert Knight was that advice that Robert Knight was that advice that Robert Knight was really key, and it's something that I really key, and it's something that I really key, and it's something that I followed throughout my career. So, at followed throughout my career. So, at followed throughout my career. So, at one period of my life, I won't mention one period of my life, I won't mention one period of my life, I won't mention the hours that I worked in graduate the hours that I worked in graduate the hours that I worked in graduate school. They were pretty insane, to be school. They were pretty insane, to be school. They were pretty insane, to be honest. I had family members get a honest. I had family members get a honest. I had family members get a little concerned. I actually lived in little concerned. I actually lived in little concerned. I actually lived in the laboratory, even as a junior the laboratory, even as a junior the laboratory, even as a junior professor. I don't suggest people do that, by the I don't suggest people do that, by the I don't suggest people do that, by the way. But I enjoyed it at the time. And way. But I enjoyed it at the time. And way. But I enjoyed it at the time. And the key thing is that you figure out the key thing is that you figure out the key thing is that you figure out what you can do consistently and still what you can do consistently and still what you can do consistently and still maintain mental health and physical maintain mental health and physical maintain mental health and physical health. That's key as well. And do that, health. That's key as well. And do that, health. That's key as well. And do that, and then every couple of years or so and then every couple of years or so and then every couple of years or so update that, update that, update that, typically by reducing the total amount typically by reducing the total amount typically by reducing the total amount of time that you're doing that of time that you're doing that of time that you're doing that high-potency work. I think that, high-potency work. I think that, high-potency work. I think that, combined with the other tools that I combined with the other tools that I combined with the other tools that I described before for generating ongoing described before for generating ongoing described before for generating ongoing dopaminergic circuits, keeping that dopaminergic circuits, keeping that dopaminergic circuits, keeping that reservoir full, ought to give you reservoir full, ought to give you reservoir full, ought to give you consistent motivation. Again, it's an consistent motivation. Again, it's an consistent motivation. Again, it's an art and a practice and a science, so art and a practice and a science, so art and a practice and a science, so don't expect to get it perfect the first don't expect to get it perfect the first don't expect to get it perfect the first time around, but I wish you all luck, time around, but I wish you all luck, time around, but I wish you all luck, and I'm certain that these tools work. and I'm certain that these tools work. and I'm certain that these tools work. Thank you for joining for the beginning Thank you for joining for the beginning Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future the full episode and to hear future the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything episodes of these Ask Me Anything episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of sessions, plus to receive transcripts of sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium podcast standard channel and premium podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please tools not released anywhere else, please tools not released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. go to hubermanlab.com/premium. go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be course will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast. And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular And to fund research, in particular research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is the which I think we all agree is the which I think we all agree is the species that we are most interested in. species that we are most interested in. species that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund And we are going to specifically fund And we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing research that is aimed toward developing research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, further protocols for mental health, further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And physical health, and performance. And physical health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed those protocols will be distributed those protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the through all channels, not just the through all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all premium channel, but through all premium channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So the idea here is to media channels. So the idea here is to media channels. So the idea here is to give you information to your burning give you information to your burning give you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium raised for research through the premium channel. So this is a terrific way that they're So this is a terrific way that they're So this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further through the premium channel to further support research for science and support research for science and support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a Lab premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get your questions, and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be people ask as well. There will also be some premium content, such as some premium content, such as some premium content, such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found Lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your And as always, thank you for your interest in science.