Oftentimes people will ask me like an Oftentimes people will ask me like an Oftentimes people will ask me like an older person will say, "Hey, I do cross older person will say, "Hey, I do cross older person will say, "Hey, I do cross word puzzles. Is that good?" Yeah, it's word puzzles. Is that good?" Yeah, it's word puzzles. Is that good?" Yeah, it's good until you get good at it and then good until you get good at it and then good until you get good at it and then stop and do something that you're not stop and do something that you're not stop and do something that you're not good at and constantly find the next good at and constantly find the next good at and constantly find the next thing that's a real challenge for you. thing that's a real challenge for you. thing that's a real challenge for you. That's the key thing about plasticity. That's the key thing about plasticity. That's the key thing about plasticity. Your brain is locked in silence and Your brain is locked in silence and Your brain is locked in silence and darkness. It's trying to make a model of darkness. It's trying to make a model of darkness. It's trying to make a model of the outside world. And if you're the outside world. And if you're the outside world. And if you're constantly pushing and challenging it constantly pushing and challenging it constantly pushing and challenging it with things it doesn't understand, then with things it doesn't understand, then with things it doesn't understand, then it'll keep changing. Welcome to the it'll keep changing. Welcome to the it'll keep changing. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools [music] science and science-based tools [music] science and science-based tools [music] for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. David Eagleman. Dr. David today is Dr. David Eagleman. Dr. David today is Dr. David Eagleman. Dr. David Eagleman is a neuroscientist, a Eagleman is a neuroscientist, a Eagleman is a neuroscientist, a best-selling author, and a longtime best-selling author, and a longtime best-selling author, and a longtime science public educator. Today we science public educator. Today we science public educator. Today we discuss several different features of discuss several different features of discuss several different features of brain science that impact your everyday brain science that impact your everyday brain science that impact your everyday life. And once you understand the life. And once you understand the life. And once you understand the mechanisms behind these features, it mechanisms behind these features, it mechanisms behind these features, it will position you to make better will position you to make better will position you to make better decisions and if you choose to rewire decisions and if you choose to rewire decisions and if you choose to rewire your brain to be a more effective your brain to be a more effective your brain to be a more effective learner. We start by discussing learner. We start by discussing learner. We start by discussing neuroplasticity, which is your brain's neuroplasticity, which is your brain's neuroplasticity, which is your brain's ability to change in response to ability to change in response to ability to change in response to experience or any form of deliberate experience or any form of deliberate experience or any form of deliberate learning that you are trying to impose learning that you are trying to impose learning that you are trying to impose on yourself. We talk about the on yourself. We talk about the on yourself. We talk about the mechanisms for it and how you can get mechanisms for it and how you can get mechanisms for it and how you can get better at learning and unlearning in the better at learning and unlearning in the better at learning and unlearning in the context of skills and information. We context of skills and information. We context of skills and information. We also discuss memory formation and the also discuss memory formation and the also discuss memory formation and the relationship between stress and time relationship between stress and time relationship between stress and time perception and why it is that people perception and why it is that people perception and why it is that people experience things in slow motion if experience things in slow motion if experience things in slow motion if those things are very stressful or those things are very stressful or those things are very stressful or traumatic and how that can be useful for traumatic and how that can be useful for traumatic and how that can be useful for undoing traumatic memories. David also undoing traumatic memories. David also undoing traumatic memories. David also takes us through the neuroscience of takes us through the neuroscience of takes us through the neuroscience of cultural and political polarization, cultural and political polarization, cultural and political polarization, something that's very timely right now, something that's very timely right now, something that's very timely right now, false memories, deja vu, dreams and the false memories, deja vu, dreams and the false memories, deja vu, dreams and the meaning of dreams and a lot more. David meaning of dreams and a lot more. David meaning of dreams and a lot more. David is an absolutely legendary science is an absolutely legendary science is an absolutely legendary science communicator. I say this as a fellow communicator. I say this as a fellow communicator. I say this as a fellow neuroscientist. He is able to embed neuroscientist. He is able to embed neuroscientist. He is able to embed factual information about the brain into factual information about the brain into factual information about the brain into real life stories and in doing so he's real life stories and in doing so he's real life stories and in doing so he's able to shed light on how we work as able to shed light on how we work as able to shed light on how we work as humans and how we can all improve our humans and how we can all improve our humans and how we can all improve our life experience. He's a true virtuoso of life experience. He's a true virtuoso of life experience. He's a true virtuoso of neuroscience and science education more neuroscience and science education more neuroscience and science education more generally. What David shares with us generally. What David shares with us generally. What David shares with us today will change the way that you think today will change the way that you think today will change the way that you think about thinking and your own mind and no about thinking and your own mind and no about thinking and your own mind and no doubt will also change the way that you doubt will also change the way that you doubt will also change the way that you view the world. Before we begin, I'd view the world. Before we begin, I'd view the world. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science to consumer information about science to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. David And now for my discussion with Dr. David And now for my discussion with Dr. David Eagleman. Dr. David Eagleman, welcome. Eagleman. Dr. David Eagleman, welcome. Eagleman. Dr. David Eagleman, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thanks. Great to see you, Andrew. Man, I &gt;&gt; Thanks. Great to see you, Andrew. Man, I &gt;&gt; Thanks. Great to see you, Andrew. Man, I feel like the kid that was a freshman feel like the kid that was a freshman feel like the kid that was a freshman when you were a senior because you got when you were a senior because you got when you were a senior because you got into this public facing science into this public facing science into this public facing science education long before I did. And you've education long before I did. And you've education long before I did. And you've had a an amazing career also in your had a an amazing career also in your had a an amazing career also in your laboratory work. And today I want to laboratory work. And today I want to laboratory work. And today I want to talk about all of it, talk about all of it, talk about all of it, &gt;&gt; right? um by mostly listening and you &gt;&gt; right? um by mostly listening and you &gt;&gt; right? um by mostly listening and you doing the talking and there are so many doing the talking and there are so many doing the talking and there are so many topics in neuroscience that are topics in neuroscience that are topics in neuroscience that are fascinating as you know but I think fascinating as you know but I think fascinating as you know but I think perhaps the most fascinating thing about perhaps the most fascinating thing about perhaps the most fascinating thing about the human brain is its ability to change the human brain is its ability to change the human brain is its ability to change itself. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Plasticity. So I know how I think about &gt;&gt; Plasticity. So I know how I think about &gt;&gt; Plasticity. So I know how I think about neuroplasticity. I want to know how you neuroplasticity. I want to know how you neuroplasticity. I want to know how you think about neuroplasticity. What it is think about neuroplasticity. What it is think about neuroplasticity. What it is and how we should think about it and how we should think about it and how we should think about it and what we could possibly do with that what we could possibly do with that what we could possibly do with that information. &gt;&gt; Okay, great. I mean, this was mother &gt;&gt; Okay, great. I mean, this was mother &gt;&gt; Okay, great. I mean, this was mother nature's big trick with humans was nature's big trick with humans was nature's big trick with humans was figuring out how to drop a creature into figuring out how to drop a creature into figuring out how to drop a creature into the world with a halfbaked brain and the world with a halfbaked brain and the world with a halfbaked brain and then let the world wire up the rest of then let the world wire up the rest of then let the world wire up the rest of it. And so, you know, 1953, Crick and it. And so, you know, 1953, Crick and it. And so, you know, 1953, Crick and Watton, I worked with Crick at the Salt. Watton, I worked with Crick at the Salt. Watton, I worked with Crick at the Salt. They burst into the Eagle and Child pub They burst into the Eagle and Child pub They burst into the Eagle and Child pub and said, "We've discovered the secret and said, "We've discovered the secret and said, "We've discovered the secret to life." Because they figure out the to life." Because they figure out the to life." Because they figure out the structure of DNA. But that was really structure of DNA. But that was really structure of DNA. But that was really half the secret of life because the half the secret of life because the half the secret of life because the other half is all around us. It's every other half is all around us. It's every other half is all around us. It's every bit of experience that you have. It's bit of experience that you have. It's bit of experience that you have. It's your culture. It's your language. It's your culture. It's your language. It's your culture. It's your language. It's your neighborhood. All of that stuff your neighborhood. All of that stuff your neighborhood. All of that stuff gets absorbed by the brain and wires us gets absorbed by the brain and wires us gets absorbed by the brain and wires us up. And I often think about this issue up. And I often think about this issue up. And I often think about this issue of what if you were born 30,000 years of what if you were born 30,000 years of what if you were born 30,000 years ago exactly your DNA? You pop out and ago exactly your DNA? You pop out and ago exactly your DNA? You pop out and you look around and the question is you look around and the question is you look around and the question is would you be you? The answer is you would you be you? The answer is you would you be you? The answer is you wouldn't be. You'd look maybe similar wouldn't be. You'd look maybe similar wouldn't be. You'd look maybe similar because of the same genetic blueprint, because of the same genetic blueprint, because of the same genetic blueprint, but you would have a different culture but you would have a different culture but you would have a different culture and a different language and different and a different language and different and a different language and different stories and all that stuff. You'd be a stories and all that stuff. You'd be a stories and all that stuff. You'd be a very different kind of person. So, brain very different kind of person. So, brain very different kind of person. So, brain plasticity, for anyone who doesn't know, plasticity, for anyone who doesn't know, plasticity, for anyone who doesn't know, it's that the brain is constantly it's that the brain is constantly it's that the brain is constantly reconfiguring itself every second of reconfiguring itself every second of reconfiguring itself every second of your life. You got 86 billion neurons. your life. You got 86 billion neurons. your life. You got 86 billion neurons. And really, the way to think about it, And really, the way to think about it, And really, the way to think about it, these are like little creatures that are these are like little creatures that are these are like little creatures that are all crawling around and moving around. all crawling around and moving around. all crawling around and moving around. each one is, you know, on average each one is, you know, on average each one is, you know, on average contacting 10,000 of its neighbors, but contacting 10,000 of its neighbors, but contacting 10,000 of its neighbors, but it's not like a fixed thing like you it's not like a fixed thing like you it's not like a fixed thing like you might see in a textbook. Instead, might see in a textbook. Instead, might see in a textbook. Instead, they're, you know, plugging and they're, you know, plugging and they're, you know, plugging and unplugging and searching around and unplugging and searching around and unplugging and searching around and finding new places to plug in, of finding new places to plug in, of finding new places to plug in, of course, changing the strength of those course, changing the strength of those course, changing the strength of those connections. And I actually always find this weird. And I actually always find this weird. And I actually always find this weird. It's like having all these little It's like having all these little It's like having all these little creatures in your head that are creatures in your head that are creatures in your head that are slithering around, but that's what makes slithering around, but that's what makes slithering around, but that's what makes us absorb every single thing in our us absorb every single thing in our us absorb every single thing in our worlds. And this is what uh you know worlds. And this is what uh you know worlds. And this is what uh you know humans have that other creatures have humans have that other creatures have humans have that other creatures have less of. And that's why we've taken over less of. And that's why we've taken over less of. And that's why we've taken over every corner of the earth. That's why we every corner of the earth. That's why we every corner of the earth. That's why we have succeed. We've gotten off the have succeed. We've gotten off the have succeed. We've gotten off the planet. We build skyscrapers and compos planet. We build skyscrapers and compos planet. We build skyscrapers and compos symphonies and so on because each symphonies and so on because each symphonies and so on because each generation we land and we get to spend generation we land and we get to spend generation we land and we get to spend our first few years absorbing everything our first few years absorbing everything our first few years absorbing everything that's been discovered before us. And that's been discovered before us. And that's been discovered before us. And then we springboard off of that and do then we springboard off of that and do then we springboard off of that and do something new. Because we are able to something new. Because we are able to something new. Because we are able to figure out all the discoveries figure out all the discoveries figure out all the discoveries that have come before us because of this that have come before us because of this that have come before us because of this ability to reconfigure our own ability to reconfigure our own ability to reconfigure our own circuitry. &gt;&gt; And uh you know if you were a an &gt;&gt; And uh you know if you were a an &gt;&gt; And uh you know if you were a an alligator born 30,000 years ago, you'd alligator born 30,000 years ago, you'd alligator born 30,000 years ago, you'd be the same alligator. You know, eat, be the same alligator. You know, eat, be the same alligator. You know, eat, mate, swim, whatever, and you mate, swim, whatever, and you mate, swim, whatever, and you wouldn't be meaningfully different. But wouldn't be meaningfully different. But wouldn't be meaningfully different. But but humans because of our flexibility, but humans because of our flexibility, but humans because of our flexibility, we are the dominant species. we are the dominant species. we are the dominant species. &gt;&gt; Such an interesting take on time and &gt;&gt; Such an interesting take on time and &gt;&gt; Such an interesting take on time and human evolution that uh and I completely human evolution that uh and I completely human evolution that uh and I completely agree with you. I just had never thought agree with you. I just had never thought agree with you. I just had never thought about it this way before that we land uh about it this way before that we land uh about it this way before that we land uh when we're born and we're absorbing the when we're born and we're absorbing the when we're born and we're absorbing the um the outcroppings of all the um the outcroppings of all the um the outcroppings of all the neuroplasticity that came before us. We neuroplasticity that came before us. We neuroplasticity that came before us. We often hear that, you know, that the often hear that, you know, that the often hear that, you know, that the human brain is kind of like a macac human brain is kind of like a macac human brain is kind of like a macac monkey brain with a supercomputer added monkey brain with a supercomputer added monkey brain with a supercomputer added on top of it. Mostly the prefrontal on top of it. Mostly the prefrontal on top of it. Mostly the prefrontal cortex. A bit more prefrontal cortex. A bit more prefrontal cortex. A bit more prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal cortex. We Prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal cortex. We Prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal cortex. We actually cortex in general. actually cortex in general. actually cortex in general. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Interesting. &gt;&gt; We we have four times as much cortex as &gt;&gt; We we have four times as much cortex as &gt;&gt; We we have four times as much cortex as our nearest neighbors in the animal our nearest neighbors in the animal our nearest neighbors in the animal kingdom. And that seems to be the kingdom. And that seems to be the kingdom. And that seems to be the magical stuff. magical stuff. magical stuff. &gt;&gt; Not just prefrontal cortex, &gt;&gt; Not just prefrontal cortex, &gt;&gt; Not just prefrontal cortex, &gt;&gt; right? And for I'm sure the listenership &gt;&gt; right? And for I'm sure the listenership &gt;&gt; right? And for I'm sure the listenership knows this, but you know, uh the cortex knows this, but you know, uh the cortex knows this, but you know, uh the cortex is just the outer 3 millimeters of the is just the outer 3 millimeters of the is just the outer 3 millimeters of the brain. It's that wrinkly bit. And that's brain. It's that wrinkly bit. And that's brain. It's that wrinkly bit. And that's the magic stuff because it turns out the magic stuff because it turns out the magic stuff because it turns out cortex is a one-trick pony. The reason cortex is a one-trick pony. The reason cortex is a one-trick pony. The reason the cortex looks the same everywhere is the cortex looks the same everywhere is the cortex looks the same everywhere is because it is the same. It's got the because it is the same. It's got the because it is the same. It's got the same circuitry. It's got six little same circuitry. It's got six little same circuitry. It's got six little layers. It's doing the same algorithms layers. It's doing the same algorithms layers. It's doing the same algorithms and it gets defined by what you plug and it gets defined by what you plug and it gets defined by what you plug into it. So if you plug in a cable into it. So if you plug in a cable into it. So if you plug in a cable that's carrying visual information, then that's carrying visual information, then that's carrying visual information, then it becomes visual cortex. And we look at it becomes visual cortex. And we look at it becomes visual cortex. And we look at it and we say, "Oh, look, it detects the it and we say, "Oh, look, it detects the it and we say, "Oh, look, it detects the orientation of lines. and a detect orientation of lines. and a detect orientation of lines. and a detect motion, things like that. If you plug motion, things like that. If you plug motion, things like that. If you plug auditory information into it, it becomes auditory information into it, it becomes auditory information into it, it becomes auditory cortex and so on. And it turns auditory cortex and so on. And it turns auditory cortex and so on. And it turns out, you know, the way we do this in out, you know, the way we do this in out, you know, the way we do this in textbooks is we make a picture and we textbooks is we make a picture and we textbooks is we make a picture and we say, "Look, that's visual cortex, that's say, "Look, that's visual cortex, that's say, "Look, that's visual cortex, that's auditory, that's the metaensory." But auditory, that's the metaensory." But auditory, that's the metaensory." But all this stuff is really flexible. It's all this stuff is really flexible. It's all this stuff is really flexible. It's it's so much more interesting than the it's so much more interesting than the it's so much more interesting than the textbook model because you can take the textbook model because you can take the textbook model because you can take the fibers and plug them in somewhere else. fibers and plug them in somewhere else. fibers and plug them in somewhere else. So you may know this study in 2000 by So you may know this study in 2000 by So you may know this study in 2000 by Morgankaur at MIT where he in a farret Morgankaur at MIT where he in a farret Morgankaur at MIT where he in a farret took uh the visual information visual uh took uh the visual information visual uh took uh the visual information visual uh the optic nerve and he plugged it into the optic nerve and he plugged it into the optic nerve and he plugged it into the visual sorry into the auditory the visual sorry into the auditory the visual sorry into the auditory cortex and then the what would have been cortex and then the what would have been cortex and then the what would have been the auditory cortex became visually the auditory cortex became visually the auditory cortex became visually responsive and it started caring about responsive and it started caring about responsive and it started caring about vision. So what does that mean? It means vision. So what does that mean? It means vision. So what does that mean? It means the cortex is a onetrick pony and we got the cortex is a onetrick pony and we got the cortex is a onetrick pony and we got so much more of it including the so much more of it including the so much more of it including the prefrontal cortex. So that has two major prefrontal cortex. So that has two major prefrontal cortex. So that has two major effects. One is that there's a lot more effects. One is that there's a lot more effects. One is that there's a lot more room with our species in between input room with our species in between input room with our species in between input and output. So with a squirrel or a and output. So with a squirrel or a and output. So with a squirrel or a cat or even a macac monkey, you know, cat or even a macac monkey, you know, cat or even a macac monkey, you know, you throw some food in front of it, it you throw some food in front of it, it you throw some food in front of it, it that sensory cortex is right next that sensory cortex is right next that sensory cortex is right next to the motor cortex, it's going to eat to the motor cortex, it's going to eat to the motor cortex, it's going to eat the thing, but we've got all this the thing, but we've got all this the thing, but we've got all this computational real estate in between in computational real estate in between in computational real estate in between in and out. So we can say, well, I'm on a and out. So we can say, well, I'm on a and out. So we can say, well, I'm on a diet. I'm trying whatever you I'll eat diet. I'm trying whatever you I'll eat diet. I'm trying whatever you I'll eat it later. We've got all these other it later. We've got all these other it later. We've got all these other options that we can take. That's one options that we can take. That's one options that we can take. That's one thing. And then the other thing is thing. And then the other thing is thing. And then the other thing is exactly what you pointed to, which is exactly what you pointed to, which is exactly what you pointed to, which is the prefrontal cortex, which allows us the prefrontal cortex, which allows us the prefrontal cortex, which allows us to simulate whatifs. Allows us to think to simulate whatifs. Allows us to think to simulate whatifs. Allows us to think about possible futures, simulate things about possible futures, simulate things about possible futures, simulate things in a way that we don't have to risk our in a way that we don't have to risk our in a way that we don't have to risk our lives doing it. We can simulate it and lives doing it. We can simulate it and lives doing it. We can simulate it and say, "Oh, that would be a bad idea. Oh, say, "Oh, that would be a bad idea. Oh, say, "Oh, that would be a bad idea. Oh, that'd be a pretty good idea." And then that'd be a pretty good idea." And then that'd be a pretty good idea." And then we can take the action. we can take the action. we can take the action. &gt;&gt; Couple different questions. Um, I'm a &gt;&gt; Couple different questions. Um, I'm a &gt;&gt; Couple different questions. Um, I'm a big fan of McGranka's work, and I'm so big fan of McGranka's work, and I'm so big fan of McGranka's work, and I'm so glad you mentioned that work. it glad you mentioned that work. it glad you mentioned that work. it really points to the fact that while really points to the fact that while really points to the fact that while there are cortical areas that are there are cortical areas that are there are cortical areas that are genetically devoted by virtue of wiring genetically devoted by virtue of wiring genetically devoted by virtue of wiring when we arrive in the world too auditory when we arrive in the world too auditory when we arrive in the world too auditory or visual that there's a lot of or visual that there's a lot of or visual that there's a lot of crossover especially in the extreme crossover especially in the extreme crossover especially in the extreme cases so my understanding correct me if cases so my understanding correct me if cases so my understanding correct me if I'm wrong is that um if somebody is I'm wrong is that um if somebody is I'm wrong is that um if somebody is blind from birth the real estate that blind from birth the real estate that blind from birth the real estate that would be allocated to vision becomes would be allocated to vision becomes would be allocated to vision becomes allocated to tactile sensation allocated to tactile sensation allocated to tactile sensation especially if they learn how to braille especially if they learn how to braille especially if they learn how to braille read um maybe auditory processing and read um maybe auditory processing and read um maybe auditory processing and because they rely on it more so there's because they rely on it more so there's because they rely on it more so there's really no blank real estate in the really no blank real estate in the really no blank real estate in the cortex it's all used. cortex it's all used. cortex it's all used. &gt;&gt; That is exactly right. So it turns out &gt;&gt; That is exactly right. So it turns out &gt;&gt; That is exactly right. So it turns out um you know right people who are born um you know right people who are born um you know right people who are born blind what we call the visual cortex at blind what we call the visual cortex at blind what we call the visual cortex at the back of the back of the head here the back of the back of the head here the back of the back of the head here that gets taken over. It's no longer that gets taken over. It's no longer that gets taken over. It's no longer visual. It becomes devoted to hearing to visual. It becomes devoted to hearing to visual. It becomes devoted to hearing to touch to memory things like this. And touch to memory things like this. And touch to memory things like this. And you can demonstrate that people who are you can demonstrate that people who are you can demonstrate that people who are born blind are better at hearing and born blind are better at hearing and born blind are better at hearing and at touch and so on. They can at touch and so on. They can at touch and so on. They can discriminate things much more finely. Um discriminate things much more finely. Um discriminate things much more finely. Um same with people who go deaf that the same with people who go deaf that the same with people who go deaf that the auditory cortex all that real estate auditory cortex all that real estate auditory cortex all that real estate nothing lies in the brain all that gets nothing lies in the brain all that gets nothing lies in the brain all that gets taken over for different tasks and they taken over for different tasks and they taken over for different tasks and they can do things like see your accent you can do things like see your accent you can do things like see your accent you know just by lip reading they can tell know just by lip reading they can tell know just by lip reading they can tell where in the country you're from and so where in the country you're from and so where in the country you're from and so on. Um all of this demonstrates that on. Um all of this demonstrates that on. Um all of this demonstrates that first of all the more real estate you first of all the more real estate you first of all the more real estate you have the better. We are in a sense if have the better. We are in a sense if have the better. We are in a sense if you've got all your senses you uh you you've got all your senses you uh you you've got all your senses you uh you have to share everything and so we're have to share everything and so we're have to share everything and so we're pretty good at vision and hearing and pretty good at vision and hearing and pretty good at vision and hearing and touch and so on but everything has to touch and so on but everything has to touch and so on but everything has to get shared. But there are pretty get shared. But there are pretty get shared. But there are pretty extraordinary things that happen when extraordinary things that happen when extraordinary things that happen when people devote more real estate towards people devote more real estate towards people devote more real estate towards one task. And by the way, just as a side one task. And by the way, just as a side one task. And by the way, just as a side note, this is one hypothesis about what note, this is one hypothesis about what note, this is one hypothesis about what goes on with savantism in autism is goes on with savantism in autism is goes on with savantism in autism is that somebody for whatever genetic set that somebody for whatever genetic set that somebody for whatever genetic set of reasons ends up devoting a ton of reasons ends up devoting a ton of reasons ends up devoting a ton of real estate to let's say the Rubik's real estate to let's say the Rubik's real estate to let's say the Rubik's cube or the piano or memorizing visual cube or the piano or memorizing visual cube or the piano or memorizing visual scenes or something and then they are scenes or something and then they are scenes or something and then they are absolutely superhuman at it. That comes absolutely superhuman at it. That comes absolutely superhuman at it. That comes at the cost of other things. Let's say at the cost of other things. Let's say at the cost of other things. Let's say social skills that might be needed. Um, social skills that might be needed. Um, social skills that might be needed. Um, but the general story is if you devote a but the general story is if you devote a but the general story is if you devote a lot of real estate towards something, lot of real estate towards something, lot of real estate towards something, you're gonna get really good at it. you're gonna get really good at it. you're gonna get really good at it. &gt;&gt; I'm excited to share with you that &gt;&gt; I'm excited to share with you that &gt;&gt; I'm excited to share with you that Matina, the Yerba Mate drink that I Matina, the Yerba Mate drink that I Matina, the Yerba Mate drink that I helped create, is now available at helped create, is now available at helped create, is now available at Sprouts Market nationwide. Longtime Sprouts Market nationwide. Longtime Sprouts Market nationwide. Longtime listeners of the Huberman Lab podcast listeners of the Huberman Lab podcast listeners of the Huberman Lab podcast know that Yerba Mate is my preferred know that Yerba Mate is my preferred know that Yerba Mate is my preferred caffeine source. It provides a smooth caffeine source. It provides a smooth caffeine source. It provides a smooth energy lift without giving you the energy lift without giving you the energy lift without giving you the jitters and it has many other benefits jitters and it has many other benefits jitters and it has many other benefits such as helping regulate blood sugar, such as helping regulate blood sugar, such as helping regulate blood sugar, improving digestion, mild appetite improving digestion, mild appetite improving digestion, mild appetite suppression, and more. Matina is my suppression, and more. Matina is my suppression, and more. Matina is my absolute favorite of all the Yerba Mate absolute favorite of all the Yerba Mate absolute favorite of all the Yerba Mate brands out there, and believe me, I've brands out there, and believe me, I've brands out there, and believe me, I've tried them all. The flavors are tried them all. The flavors are tried them all. The flavors are fantastic. I drink at least three cans fantastic. I drink at least three cans fantastic. I drink at least three cans of Matina every single day. You'll often of Matina every single day. You'll often of Matina every single day. You'll often see them on the table during our podcast see them on the table during our podcast see them on the table during our podcast recordings. I absolutely love the recordings. I absolutely love the recordings. I absolutely love the product and I'm proud to now have it product and I'm proud to now have it product and I'm proud to now have it sold at Sprouts Market. Also, there's a sold at Sprouts Market. Also, there's a sold at Sprouts Market. Also, there's a great new offer. They are giving away a great new offer. They are giving away a great new offer. They are giving away a free can of Matina to anyone who buys it free can of Matina to anyone who buys it free can of Matina to anyone who buys it at Sprouts and sends in a photo of their at Sprouts and sends in a photo of their at Sprouts and sends in a photo of their receipt. To learn more about how you can receipt. To learn more about how you can receipt. To learn more about how you can get a free can of Matina, go to get a free can of Matina, go to get a free can of Matina, go to drinkmatina.com/offer. Again, that's drinkmatina.com/offer Again, that's drinkmatina.com/offer Again, that's drinkmatina.com/offer to get a can of Matina for free at your to get a can of Matina for free at your to get a can of Matina for free at your local Sprouts Market. Today's episode is local Sprouts Market. Today's episode is local Sprouts Market. Today's episode is also brought to us by Aurora. Aurora also brought to us by Aurora. Aurora also brought to us by Aurora. Aurora makes what I believe are the best water makes what I believe are the best water makes what I believe are the best water filters on the market. It's an filters on the market. It's an filters on the market. It's an unfortunate reality, but tap water often unfortunate reality, but tap water often unfortunate reality, but tap water often contains contaminants that negatively contains contaminants that negatively contains contaminants that negatively impact our health. In fact, a 2020 study impact our health. In fact, a 2020 study impact our health. In fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental Working Group by the Environmental Working Group by the Environmental Working Group estimated that more than 200 million estimated that more than 200 million estimated that more than 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS chemicals, Americans are exposed to PAS chemicals, Americans are exposed to PAS chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, through also known as forever chemicals, through also known as forever chemicals, through drinking of tap water. These forever drinking of tap water. These forever drinking of tap water. These forever chemicals are linked to serious health chemicals are linked to serious health chemicals are linked to serious health issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. The and many other health problems. The and many other health problems. The Environmental Working Group has also Environmental Working Group has also Environmental Working Group has also shown that over 122 million Americans shown that over 122 million Americans shown that over 122 million Americans drink tap water with high levels of drink tap water with high levels of drink tap water with high levels of chemicals known to cause cancer. It's chemicals known to cause cancer. It's chemicals known to cause cancer. It's for all these reasons that I'm thrilled for all these reasons that I'm thrilled for all these reasons that I'm thrilled to have Rora as a sponsor of this to have Rora as a sponsor of this to have Rora as a sponsor of this podcast. I've been using the Aurora podcast. I've been using the Aurora podcast. I've been using the Aurora countertop system for almost a year now. countertop system for almost a year now. countertop system for almost a year now. Aurora's filtration technology removes Aurora's filtration technology removes Aurora's filtration technology removes harmful substances, including endocrine harmful substances, including endocrine harmful substances, including endocrine disruptors and disinfection byproducts, disruptors and disinfection byproducts, disruptors and disinfection byproducts, while preserving beneficial minerals while preserving beneficial minerals while preserving beneficial minerals like magnesium and calcium. It requires like magnesium and calcium. It requires like magnesium and calcium. It requires no installation or plumbing. It's built no installation or plumbing. It's built no installation or plumbing. It's built from medical grade stainless steel and from medical grade stainless steel and from medical grade stainless steel and its sleek design fits beautifully on its sleek design fits beautifully on its sleek design fits beautifully on your countertop. In fact, I consider it your countertop. In fact, I consider it your countertop. In fact, I consider it a welcome addition to my kitchen. It a welcome addition to my kitchen. It a welcome addition to my kitchen. It looks great and the water is delicious. looks great and the water is delicious. looks great and the water is delicious. If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to roora.com/huberman and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. I don't know if you saw this study that I don't know if you saw this study that I don't know if you saw this study that was published in science recently that was published in science recently that was published in science recently that explored um early specialization in explored um early specialization in explored um early specialization in sport or creative endeavor versus kids sport or creative endeavor versus kids sport or creative endeavor versus kids that played a bunch of different sports that played a bunch of different sports that played a bunch of different sports or involved in a bunch of different or involved in a bunch of different or involved in a bunch of different creative endeavors. And it turns out creative endeavors. And it turns out creative endeavors. And it turns out that um specializing too early on that um specializing too early on that um specializing too early on average doesn't play out so well in average doesn't play out so well in average doesn't play out so well in terms of um kind of uh peak of success terms of um kind of uh peak of success terms of um kind of uh peak of success later. Now there are exceptions, right? later. Now there are exceptions, right? later. Now there are exceptions, right? But um turns out that being a bit more But um turns out that being a bit more But um turns out that being a bit more diversified in your uh physical diversified in your uh physical diversified in your uh physical activities and cognitive activities as a activities and cognitive activities as a activities and cognitive activities as a as a young person into the early teens as a young person into the early teens as a young person into the early teens even um and beyond uh is more even um and beyond uh is more even um and beyond uh is more beneficial. And this to me kind of beneficial. And this to me kind of beneficial. And this to me kind of runs counter to my images of like um runs counter to my images of like um runs counter to my images of like um Tiger Woods uh putting uh golf balls Tiger Woods uh putting uh golf balls Tiger Woods uh putting uh golf balls with his uh dad when he was, you know, with his uh dad when he was, you know, with his uh dad when he was, you know, kind of still waddling. He was so kind of still waddling. He was so kind of still waddling. He was so little, right? and then he becomes Tiger little, right? and then he becomes Tiger little, right? and then he becomes Tiger Woods or um or the Williams sisters who Woods or um or the Williams sisters who Woods or um or the Williams sisters who were you know early on. I think that were you know early on. I think that were you know early on. I think that especially in the United States we have especially in the United States we have especially in the United States we have this notion that early specialization is this notion that early specialization is this notion that early specialization is really what sets you up to be really what sets you up to be really what sets you up to be spectacularly good later. So I'm curious spectacularly good later. So I'm curious spectacularly good later. So I'm curious what your general thoughts are for the what your general thoughts are for the what your general thoughts are for the every person. I mean you have kids the every person. I mean you have kids the every person. I mean you have kids um and some of us still are kids who are um and some of us still are kids who are um and some of us still are kids who are listening and we all have plasticity listening and we all have plasticity listening and we all have plasticity into adulthood. you know, is do you into adulthood. you know, is do you into adulthood. you know, is do you think that we come into the world with think that we come into the world with think that we come into the world with some genetic leanings toward particular some genetic leanings toward particular some genetic leanings toward particular activities being right for us or more activities being right for us or more activities being right for us or more right for us? And how do you think about right for us? And how do you think about right for us? And how do you think about it in terms of how many difficult hard it in terms of how many difficult hard it in terms of how many difficult hard to access things we do just so that to access things we do just so that to access things we do just so that we're sure that we have a full we're sure that we have a full we're sure that we have a full experience of life? Because what I hear experience of life? Because what I hear experience of life? Because what I hear you saying and I totally subscribe to is you saying and I totally subscribe to is you saying and I totally subscribe to is that our early experience becomes the that our early experience becomes the that our early experience becomes the funnel through which we have more or funnel through which we have more or funnel through which we have more or less opportunity later. like the kind of less opportunity later. like the kind of less opportunity later. like the kind of width of the of the funnel depends on width of the of the funnel depends on width of the of the funnel depends on how many things we did or didn't do how many things we did or didn't do how many things we did or didn't do early on. early on. early on. &gt;&gt; So this is really interesting because um &gt;&gt; So this is really interesting because um &gt;&gt; So this is really interesting because um first of all take somebody like the first of all take somebody like the first of all take somebody like the Williams sisters they got drilled on Williams sisters they got drilled on Williams sisters they got drilled on tennis from day one and this stuff can tennis from day one and this stuff can tennis from day one and this stuff can be taught and this is why they became be taught and this is why they became be taught and this is why they became champions and this is obvious but this champions and this is obvious but this champions and this is obvious but this is the same what you find with chess is the same what you find with chess is the same what you find with chess champions and golf champions like Woods champions and golf champions like Woods champions and golf champions like Woods and so on. Um you have to really spend and so on. Um you have to really spend and so on. Um you have to really spend the time doing it. Now I find this the time doing it. Now I find this the time doing it. Now I find this interesting for a few reasons. One is interesting for a few reasons. One is interesting for a few reasons. One is that cognitively you can understand how to cognitively you can understand how to cognitively you can understand how to you know what a forehand or a backhand you know what a forehand or a backhand you know what a forehand or a backhand you know is hit in tennis but to you know is hit in tennis but to you know is hit in tennis but to actually get good at it you have to burn actually get good at it you have to burn actually get good at it you have to burn it down into the circuitry. So actually it down into the circuitry. So actually it down into the circuitry. So actually let me back up for one second which is let me back up for one second which is let me back up for one second which is the reason that we have brain plasticity the reason that we have brain plasticity the reason that we have brain plasticity is because this is how a brain makes is because this is how a brain makes is because this is how a brain makes things that you do fast and efficient. things that you do fast and efficient. things that you do fast and efficient. So when you're doing a task a lot like So when you're doing a task a lot like So when you're doing a task a lot like you know serving tennis or something you know serving tennis or something you know serving tennis or something you're taking that from the software to you're taking that from the software to you're taking that from the software to the hardware of the brain let's say uh the hardware of the brain let's say uh the hardware of the brain let's say uh I'm an amateur tennis player and I'm an amateur tennis player and I'm an amateur tennis player and there's Serena Williams I'm playing there's Serena Williams I'm playing there's Serena Williams I'm playing against her. Um it turns out against her. Um it turns out against her. Um it turns out surprisingly when we're playing she's surprisingly when we're playing she's surprisingly when we're playing she's beaten me like crazy but my brain's the beaten me like crazy but my brain's the beaten me like crazy but my brain's the one using all the activity. I'm the one using all the activity. I'm the one using all the activity. I'm the one burning all the calories with my brain. burning all the calories with my brain. burning all the calories with my brain. Why? Because she has burned tennis into Why? Because she has burned tennis into Why? Because she has burned tennis into the hardware of the brain. So it's fast the hardware of the brain. So it's fast the hardware of the brain. So it's fast and efficient. I, on the other hand, am and efficient. I, on the other hand, am and efficient. I, on the other hand, am trying to simulate lots of things and trying to simulate lots of things and trying to simulate lots of things and figure out where I should go and all figure out where I should go and all figure out where I should go and all that. So the brain does this for reasons that. So the brain does this for reasons that. So the brain does this for reasons of efficiency. Obviously the brain's of efficiency. Obviously the brain's of efficiency. Obviously the brain's main job is to save energy because we main job is to save energy because we main job is to save energy because we are mobile creatures who run on are mobile creatures who run on are mobile creatures who run on batteries. And so um this is one of the batteries. And so um this is one of the batteries. And so um this is one of the big things about plasticity. So big things about plasticity. So big things about plasticity. So people get extraordinarily good by doing people get extraordinarily good by doing people get extraordinarily good by doing things over and over. the these things over and over. the these things over and over. the these three women, the Polar sisters who these three women, the Polar sisters who these three women, the Polar sisters who are chess champions. They're, you know, are chess champions. They're, you know, are chess champions. They're, you know, the best to my knowledge are still the best to my knowledge are still the best to my knowledge are still the best three female chess players in the best three female chess players in the best three female chess players in the world. Their father from day one started world. Their father from day one started world. Their father from day one started teaching them how to do chess and so on teaching them how to do chess and so on teaching them how to do chess and so on and they all became uh world champions and they all became uh world champions and they all became uh world champions at this. You know, the thing about at this. You know, the thing about at this. You know, the thing about whether you need to have whether you need to have whether you need to have diversification, that's an interesting diversification, that's an interesting diversification, that's an interesting question. I can see why it would be question. I can see why it would be question. I can see why it would be useful because you're learning different useful because you're learning different useful because you're learning different ways, different moves about it in the ways, different moves about it in the ways, different moves about it in the same way that if you learn how to same way that if you learn how to same way that if you learn how to snowboard and ski, um, you know, you snowboard and ski, um, you know, you snowboard and ski, um, you know, you might you might get better at both of might you might get better at both of might you might get better at both of them. But I got to say, uh, when them. But I got to say, uh, when them. But I got to say, uh, when children grow up, let's say, children grow up, let's say, children grow up, let's say, triilingually, uh, or even bilingually, triilingually, uh, or even bilingually, triilingually, uh, or even bilingually, they end up having a lower they end up having a lower they end up having a lower vocabulary in both languages than if vocabulary in both languages than if vocabulary in both languages than if they grow up monolingually. they grow up monolingually. they grow up monolingually. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's just because of the amount of &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's just because of the amount of &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's just because of the amount of practice you get with a language. practice you get with a language. practice you get with a language. &gt;&gt; Kids, still do your uh second language &gt;&gt; Kids, still do your uh second language &gt;&gt; Kids, still do your uh second language homework. [laughter] homework. [laughter] homework. [laughter] &gt;&gt; In California, it's it's, you know, &gt;&gt; In California, it's it's, you know, &gt;&gt; In California, it's it's, you know, growing up here, it's very useful to growing up here, it's very useful to growing up here, it's very useful to know English and some Spanish. know English and some Spanish. know English and some Spanish. &gt;&gt; I mean, very, very useful. In fact, I &gt;&gt; I mean, very, very useful. In fact, I &gt;&gt; I mean, very, very useful. In fact, I wish I'd gotten better at Spanish when I wish I'd gotten better at Spanish when I wish I'd gotten better at Spanish when I was a kid. was a kid. was a kid. &gt;&gt; Uh, and my father's born and raised in &gt;&gt; Uh, and my father's born and raised in &gt;&gt; Uh, and my father's born and raised in Wanosirus, but we didn't speak Spanish Wanosirus, but we didn't speak Spanish Wanosirus, but we didn't speak Spanish at home, at least not very much. So, you at home, at least not very much. So, you at home, at least not very much. So, you know, I can tell you learn a musical know, I can tell you learn a musical know, I can tell you learn a musical instrument and learn a second language. instrument and learn a second language. instrument and learn a second language. a musical instrument for your own a musical instrument for your own a musical instrument for your own enrichment um and those around you. But enrichment um and those around you. But enrichment um and those around you. But the second language thing I think is the second language thing I think is the second language thing I think is extremely useful at least in California extremely useful at least in California extremely useful at least in California I find it to be really useful. But I find it to be really useful. But I find it to be really useful. But &gt;&gt; kids are resisting this by the way now &gt;&gt; kids are resisting this by the way now &gt;&gt; kids are resisting this by the way now because they say look I can do Google because they say look I can do Google because they say look I can do Google translate or you know my meta sunglasses translate or you know my meta sunglasses translate or you know my meta sunglasses and &gt;&gt; so they're resisting it. &gt;&gt; so they're resisting it. &gt;&gt; so they're resisting it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But Google translate is not Google &gt;&gt; Yeah. But Google translate is not Google &gt;&gt; Yeah. But Google translate is not Google relate. &gt;&gt; I totally agree. &gt;&gt; I totally agree. &gt;&gt; I totally agree. &gt;&gt; You know I mean it's and I'm not I'm &gt;&gt; You know I mean it's and I'm not I'm &gt;&gt; You know I mean it's and I'm not I'm hardly fluent but I can get by now. I'm hardly fluent but I can get by now. I'm hardly fluent but I can get by now. I'm pretty good. But I've been practicing my pretty good. But I've been practicing my pretty good. But I've been practicing my Spanish more and more and just by virtue Spanish more and more and just by virtue Spanish more and more and just by virtue of living in Southern California, that of living in Southern California, that of living in Southern California, that just happens. But I think knowing a just happens. But I think knowing a just happens. But I think knowing a second language um and being a to have second language um and being a to have second language um and being a to have that kind of face tof face conversation that kind of face tof face conversation that kind of face tof face conversation with someone, it's um even the struggle with someone, it's um even the struggle with someone, it's um even the struggle of it is enriching in a way because of it is enriching in a way because of it is enriching in a way because you're forcing your brain to do some you're forcing your brain to do some you're forcing your brain to do some work. &gt;&gt; My father spoke eight languages fluently &gt;&gt; My father spoke eight languages fluently &gt;&gt; My father spoke eight languages fluently without accent. Uh and that's because he without accent. Uh and that's because he without accent. Uh and that's because he went to medical school in Europe and did went to medical school in Europe and did went to medical school in Europe and did his clinical rotations in different his clinical rotations in different his clinical rotations in different countries and you know he was a young countries and you know he was a young countries and you know he was a young man. So everywhere he went, he got a man. So everywhere he went, he got a man. So everywhere he went, he got a girlfriend and then he had the incentive girlfriend and then he had the incentive girlfriend and then he had the incentive to learn the language. And by the maybe to learn the language. And by the maybe to learn the language. And by the maybe we'll come to this, but when it comes to we'll come to this, but when it comes to we'll come to this, but when it comes to brain plasticity, the reward systems are brain plasticity, the reward systems are brain plasticity, the reward systems are a big part of what makes change happen a big part of what makes change happen a big part of what makes change happen in the brain. Actually, let me just in the brain. Actually, let me just in the brain. Actually, let me just mention, this is tangential, but let me mention, this is tangential, but let me mention, this is tangential, but let me just mention this while it's on my mind. just mention this while it's on my mind. just mention this while it's on my mind. Um, you know, a lot of people really for Um, you know, a lot of people really for Um, you know, a lot of people really for the last 30 years, ever since the last 30 years, ever since the last 30 years, ever since the internet became a big thing, really internet became a big thing, really internet became a big thing, really worried about what this is going to mean worried about what this is going to mean worried about what this is going to mean for kids and education. I think it's for kids and education. I think it's for kids and education. I think it's terrific. I am very optimistic about terrific. I am very optimistic about terrific. I am very optimistic about this because this because this because what kids started getting a few what kids started getting a few what kids started getting a few decades ago was this opportunity to decades ago was this opportunity to decades ago was this opportunity to learn about something right when they learn about something right when they learn about something right when they were curious about it. So they want to were curious about it. So they want to were curious about it. So they want to know how to fix the bicycle tire or what know how to fix the bicycle tire or what know how to fix the bicycle tire or what is this space physics thing or whatever is this space physics thing or whatever is this space physics thing or whatever and they ask the question and get the and they ask the question and get the and they ask the question and get the answer. Why does that matter? It's answer. Why does that matter? It's answer. Why does that matter? It's because brain plasticity really happens because brain plasticity really happens because brain plasticity really happens when you have the right cocktail of when you have the right cocktail of when you have the right cocktail of neurotransmitters present and that neurotransmitters present and that neurotransmitters present and that cocktail happens to map on to curiosity cocktail happens to map on to curiosity cocktail happens to map on to curiosity or engagement. when I'm slightly or engagement. when I'm slightly or engagement. when I'm slightly older than you are, but when we uh you older than you are, but when we uh you older than you are, but when we uh you know, when we were in school, the know, when we were in school, the know, when we were in school, the teacher teaches you the thing. They just teacher teaches you the thing. They just teacher teaches you the thing. They just dump everything like, "Oh, the Battle of dump everything like, "Oh, the Battle of dump everything like, "Oh, the Battle of Hastings happened in 1066 and you may or Hastings happened in 1066 and you may or Hastings happened in 1066 and you may or may not ever need to know that." But may not ever need to know that." But may not ever need to know that." But what kids get now is information right what kids get now is information right what kids get now is information right in the context of their curiosity and in the context of their curiosity and in the context of their curiosity and that makes a big difference because that makes a big difference because that makes a big difference because stuff really sticks and I have been stuff really sticks and I have been stuff really sticks and I have been extraordinarily impressed with young extraordinarily impressed with young extraordinarily impressed with young people that I meet. I meet all these people that I meet. I meet all these people that I meet. I meet all these young people who say these extraordinary young people who say these extraordinary young people who say these extraordinary things. I say, "Wow, how did you know things. I say, "Wow, how did you know things. I say, "Wow, how did you know that?" and they, you know, they've that?" and they, you know, they've that?" and they, you know, they've watched TED talks, they've asked Alexa, watched TED talks, they've asked Alexa, watched TED talks, they've asked Alexa, they've talked to ChatGpt and they get they've talked to ChatGpt and they get they've talked to ChatGpt and they get the information and it sticks. Super the information and it sticks. Super the information and it sticks. Super interesting. I hadn't thought about it interesting. I hadn't thought about it interesting. I hadn't thought about it that way. I uh I guess I'm reflecting my that way. I uh I guess I'm reflecting my that way. I uh I guess I'm reflecting my age um to everyone when I say that, you age um to everyone when I say that, you age um to everyone when I say that, you know, I remember being interested in know, I remember being interested in know, I remember being interested in something and then having to bike or something and then having to bike or something and then having to bike or skateboard down to Tower Books or go to skateboard down to Tower Books or go to skateboard down to Tower Books or go to the library um and look things up. And I the library um and look things up. And I the library um and look things up. And I tell myself that the effort involved in tell myself that the effort involved in tell myself that the effort involved in going to get it actually is useful. But going to get it actually is useful. But going to get it actually is useful. But you're right, had I been able to um kind you're right, had I been able to um kind you're right, had I been able to um kind of look up what I was interested in and of look up what I was interested in and of look up what I was interested in and get it right then, I probably would have get it right then, I probably would have get it right then, I probably would have spent more time implementing the spent more time implementing the spent more time implementing the information because I was interested in information because I was interested in information because I was interested in all sorts of things that usually all sorts of things that usually all sorts of things that usually involved building something or doing involved building something or doing involved building something or doing something that was going to make a big something that was going to make a big something that was going to make a big mess and frustrate my parents, right? mess and frustrate my parents, right? mess and frustrate my parents, right? But I spent a lot of time searching for But I spent a lot of time searching for But I spent a lot of time searching for the information. Yeah. Um, plus you the information. Yeah. Um, plus you the information. Yeah. Um, plus you remember how dinner table conversations remember how dinner table conversations remember how dinner table conversations used to go, which is that everyone used to go, which is that everyone used to go, which is that everyone argues about something and then they argues about something and then they argues about something and then they someone says, "Well, I think it's this." someone says, "Well, I think it's this." someone says, "Well, I think it's this." And the other person says, "No, I think And the other person says, "No, I think And the other person says, "No, I think it's that." And then it just sort of it's that." And then it just sort of it's that." And then it just sort of stops there because no one knows the stops there because no one knows the stops there because no one knows the right answer. But now everyone whips out right answer. But now everyone whips out right answer. But now everyone whips out their phone, gets the answer, and then their phone, gets the answer, and then their phone, gets the answer, and then and then it keeps going, which is really and then it keeps going, which is really and then it keeps going, which is really terrific. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's dissolved um some of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's dissolved um some of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's dissolved um some of the social dominance that comes about when social dominance that comes about when social dominance that comes about when one person's word is the word that one person's word is the word that one person's word is the word that everyone has to just kind of believe everyone has to just kind of believe everyone has to just kind of believe just because they say it with more just because they say it with more just because they say it with more certainty. &gt;&gt; They're the father or whatever. Exactly. &gt;&gt; They're the father or whatever. Exactly. &gt;&gt; They're the father or whatever. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or the grandfather or whoever. Or &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or the grandfather or whoever. Or &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or the grandfather or whoever. Or the grandmother. in some cases, who the grandmother. in some cases, who the grandmother. in some cases, who knows? Now, it gets checked against the knows? Now, it gets checked against the knows? Now, it gets checked against the internet and uh claude for me or chat internet and uh claude for me or chat internet and uh claude for me or chat GBT for a lot of other people. I GBT for a lot of other people. I GBT for a lot of other people. I realize that um the question I'm about realize that um the question I'm about realize that um the question I'm about to ask can't be answered uh completely to ask can't be answered uh completely to ask can't be answered uh completely but given what you know about plasticity but given what you know about plasticity but given what you know about plasticity and the fact that yes you know we come and the fact that yes you know we come and the fact that yes you know we come in to the world with some in to the world with some in to the world with some pre-programming of our of our brain pre-programming of our of our brain pre-programming of our of our brain circuitry but we have some control over circuitry but we have some control over circuitry but we have some control over uh what the inputs are some depending on uh what the inputs are some depending on uh what the inputs are some depending on our circumstances. It depends what you our circumstances. It depends what you our circumstances. It depends what you mean by we. Uh, so as infants, of mean by we. Uh, so as infants, of mean by we. Uh, so as infants, of course, we have no control over that. course, we have no control over that. course, we have no control over that. &gt;&gt; As an adolescent, as a teen, as a &gt;&gt; As an adolescent, as a teen, as a &gt;&gt; As an adolescent, as a teen, as a 20-year-old, assuming plasticity extends 20-year-old, assuming plasticity extends 20-year-old, assuming plasticity extends into adulthood, still as adults, into adulthood, still as adults, into adulthood, still as adults, although it's harder, um, although it's harder, um, although it's harder, um, &gt;&gt; some control over what one learns or &gt;&gt; some control over what one learns or &gt;&gt; some control over what one learns or does. What do you think are um sort of does. What do you think are um sort of does. What do you think are um sort of the core elements to uh making sure you the core elements to uh making sure you the core elements to uh making sure you build a healthy, well-rounded nervous build a healthy, well-rounded nervous build a healthy, well-rounded nervous system? Nobody's really ever attempted system? Nobody's really ever attempted system? Nobody's really ever attempted to answer this question. you know, a to answer this question. you know, a to answer this question. you know, a howler monkey learns all the things that howler monkey learns all the things that howler monkey learns all the things that a howler monkey needs to do. Um, humans, a howler monkey needs to do. Um, humans, a howler monkey needs to do. Um, humans, we have, as you said, the benefit of all we have, as you said, the benefit of all we have, as you said, the benefit of all the technology that comes from the technology that comes from the technology that comes from the plasticity of those that came before us. plasticity of those that came before us. plasticity of those that came before us. And so, And so, And so, &gt;&gt; you know, maybe kids don't need to learn &gt;&gt; you know, maybe kids don't need to learn &gt;&gt; you know, maybe kids don't need to learn a second language, but what do you think a second language, but what do you think a second language, but what do you think are sort of the essentials? I mean, are sort of the essentials? I mean, are sort of the essentials? I mean, obviously learning to communicate and obviously learning to communicate and obviously learning to communicate and understand, learning to move, but do we understand, learning to move, but do we understand, learning to move, but do we have some sense of how you check off have some sense of how you check off have some sense of how you check off the like the core 10 boxes of the like the core 10 boxes of the like the core 10 boxes of neuroplasticity to make sure that by neuroplasticity to make sure that by neuroplasticity to make sure that by time you land in adulthood or even if time you land in adulthood or even if time you land in adulthood or even if you're still an adult that you're still an adult that you're still an adult that you're doing the doing the doing the &gt;&gt; quote unquote best that you can with &gt;&gt; quote unquote best that you can with &gt;&gt; quote unquote best that you can with your brain? This is a tough question, I your brain? This is a tough question, I your brain? This is a tough question, I realize. &gt;&gt; I mean, I would say two things. One is &gt;&gt; I mean, I would say two things. One is &gt;&gt; I mean, I would say two things. One is um you know, try to maximize along every um you know, try to maximize along every um you know, try to maximize along every axis. So try to be an athlete, try to be axis. So try to be an athlete, try to be axis. So try to be an athlete, try to be a scholar, try to be uh you know, a scholar, try to be uh you know, a scholar, try to be uh you know, somebody who's good at social life and somebody who's good at social life and somebody who's good at social life and has a lot of friends. All all of these has a lot of friends. All all of these has a lot of friends. All all of these axes of life, it's worth spending the axes of life, it's worth spending the axes of life, it's worth spending the time doing that. And if obviously we're time doing that. And if obviously we're time doing that. And if obviously we're in an era, especially now, where there in an era, especially now, where there in an era, especially now, where there are a million ways to waste time. I sit are a million ways to waste time. I sit are a million ways to waste time. I sit on airplanes next to people and they're on airplanes next to people and they're on airplanes next to people and they're playing Candy Crush for the whole playing Candy Crush for the whole playing Candy Crush for the whole flight. And I just feel like what a flight. And I just feel like what a flight. And I just feel like what a shame because there's so much you could shame because there's so much you could shame because there's so much you could be putting into your brain and making be putting into your brain and making be putting into your brain and making happen. You could be reading books, you happen. You could be reading books, you happen. You could be reading books, you could be listening to podcasts, anything could be listening to podcasts, anything could be listening to podcasts, anything like that. Okay. So, there's that. But like that. Okay. So, there's that. But like that. Okay. So, there's that. But the other half that I would say is um a the other half that I would say is um a the other half that I would say is um a lot of what we care to be depends a lot of what we care to be depends a lot of what we care to be depends a lot on what's going on in the future. And on what's going on in the future. And on what's going on in the future. And I'm fascinated by for children now in I'm fascinated by for children now in I'm fascinated by for children now in schools, what choices they should make because what choices they should make because what choices they should make because who the heck knows what careers are who the heck knows what careers are who the heck knows what careers are going to exist in 20 or 30 years from going to exist in 20 or 30 years from going to exist in 20 or 30 years from now. Therefore, the main things they can now. Therefore, the main things they can now. Therefore, the main things they can concentrate on, I think, are critical concentrate on, I think, are critical concentrate on, I think, are critical thinking and creativity. Those are the thinking and creativity. Those are the thinking and creativity. Those are the main things for them to figure out how main things for them to figure out how main things for them to figure out how to do. What are some good ways in your to do. What are some good ways in your to do. What are some good ways in your opinion to access critical thinking and opinion to access critical thinking and opinion to access critical thinking and creativity? I can imagine a number of creativity? I can imagine a number of creativity? I can imagine a number of them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Here's something I find very &gt;&gt; Yeah. Here's something I find very &gt;&gt; Yeah. Here's something I find very optimistic about AI in the realm of optimistic about AI in the realm of optimistic about AI in the realm of education. Um, education. Um, education. Um, you know, in any classroom, it's going you know, in any classroom, it's going you know, in any classroom, it's going too fast for half the kids and too slow too fast for half the kids and too slow too fast for half the kids and too slow for the other half of the kids. What we for the other half of the kids. What we for the other half of the kids. What we now have the opportunity for is really now have the opportunity for is really now have the opportunity for is really individualized education. One way this individualized education. One way this individualized education. One way this could be implemented is AI debate. So could be implemented is AI debate. So could be implemented is AI debate. So you take any hot button issue, abortion, you take any hot button issue, abortion, you take any hot button issue, abortion, gun control, whatever you want, and you gun control, whatever you want, and you gun control, whatever you want, and you debate with the AI and you get graded debate with the AI and you get graded debate with the AI and you get graded based on the quality of your arguments based on the quality of your arguments based on the quality of your arguments and then you switch sides and you take and then you switch sides and you take and then you switch sides and you take the other side and you argue again. This the other side and you argue again. This the other side and you argue again. This is the kind of thing you could never is the kind of thing you could never is the kind of thing you could never have enough teachers for. They would have enough teachers for. They would have enough teachers for. They would never have enough patience for. AI is never have enough patience for. AI is never have enough patience for. AI is terrific at this. And by the way, it's terrific at this. And by the way, it's terrific at this. And by the way, it's really important so that students get a really important so that students get a really important so that students get a 360 view of issues instead of 360 view of issues instead of 360 view of issues instead of ideological capture. So this is a ideological capture. So this is a ideological capture. So this is a terrific way to teach critical thinking terrific way to teach critical thinking terrific way to teach critical thinking to every student, not just the kids on to every student, not just the kids on to every student, not just the kids on the speech and debate team. Okay. the speech and debate team. Okay. the speech and debate team. Okay. Creativity, that's easy. That has to do Creativity, that's easy. That has to do Creativity, that's easy. That has to do with learning the foundational stuff and with learning the foundational stuff and with learning the foundational stuff and then doing remixes, bending, breaking, then doing remixes, bending, breaking, then doing remixes, bending, breaking, blending, doing new versions of it. And blending, doing new versions of it. And blending, doing new versions of it. And I think schools can implement this I think schools can implement this I think schools can implement this easily and without any extra expense easily and without any extra expense easily and without any extra expense which is you have to teach the which is you have to teach the which is you have to teach the foundational stuff but you compress that foundational stuff but you compress that foundational stuff but you compress that so you have one extra week at the end of so you have one extra week at the end of so you have one extra week at the end of each semester and then that last week each semester and then that last week each semester and then that last week you say great take everything you've you say great take everything you've you say great take everything you've learned and now make your own thing with learned and now make your own thing with learned and now make your own thing with it using all the elements that we've it using all the elements that we've it using all the elements that we've learned bend it break it blend it make learned bend it break it blend it make learned bend it break it blend it make your own version of this. That kind of your own version of this. That kind of your own version of this. That kind of exercise is that is creativity. That's exercise is that is creativity. That's exercise is that is creativity. That's all creativity is taking your all creativity is taking your all creativity is taking your storehouse of knowledge and doing storehouse of knowledge and doing storehouse of knowledge and doing remixes. &gt;&gt; We should be teaching that. &gt;&gt; We should be teaching that. &gt;&gt; We should be teaching that. &gt;&gt; So critical thinking and uh creativity. &gt;&gt; So critical thinking and uh creativity. &gt;&gt; So critical thinking and uh creativity. Gerta the German philosopher had Gerta the German philosopher had Gerta the German philosopher had said uh there are two uh bequests that a said uh there are two uh bequests that a said uh there are two uh bequests that a that a parent can give a child. One is that a parent can give a child. One is that a parent can give a child. One is roots and one is wings. And my roots and one is wings. And my roots and one is wings. And my interpretation of that has always been interpretation of that has always been interpretation of that has always been critical thinking and creativity. Love critical thinking and creativity. Love critical thinking and creativity. Love that and thank you for making it that and thank you for making it that and thank you for making it practical. That's something I think any practical. That's something I think any practical. That's something I think any and all of us could invest some more and all of us could invest some more and all of us could invest some more time in. I also agree it's very easy to time in. I also agree it's very easy to time in. I also agree it's very easy to waste time on uh on the internet. Uh waste time on uh on the internet. Uh waste time on uh on the internet. Uh I have a separate phone for social I have a separate phone for social I have a separate phone for social media. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. &gt;&gt; That solved a lot of issues. Not that it &gt;&gt; That solved a lot of issues. Not that it &gt;&gt; That solved a lot of issues. Not that it was really contaminating my life that was really contaminating my life that was really contaminating my life that much. I like social media. I like much. I like social media. I like much. I like social media. I like teaching and learning there and some teaching and learning there and some teaching and learning there and some entertainment there. But by putting it entertainment there. But by putting it entertainment there. But by putting it on an old phone, so X and Instagram are on an old phone, so X and Instagram are on an old phone, so X and Instagram are just on that phone. It's amaz people just on that phone. It's amaz people just on that phone. It's amaz people send me things by text and I have to send me things by text and I have to send me things by text and I have to transfer them over. Sometimes I see transfer them over. Sometimes I see transfer them over. Sometimes I see them, sometimes I don't. My default them, sometimes I don't. My default them, sometimes I don't. My default setting is no longer to just look at my setting is no longer to just look at my setting is no longer to just look at my phone and look at social media. phone and look at social media. phone and look at social media. &gt;&gt; Yes, &gt;&gt; Yes, &gt;&gt; Yes, &gt;&gt; it has increased my productivity and &gt;&gt; it has increased my productivity and &gt;&gt; it has increased my productivity and just my happiness and my level of just my happiness and my level of just my happiness and my level of attention. Also, when I do social media, attention. Also, when I do social media, attention. Also, when I do social media, that's I'm doing like a like a that's I'm doing like a like a that's I'm doing like a like a purposeful like watching a show or doing purposeful like watching a show or doing purposeful like watching a show or doing something that I would devote time for something that I would devote time for something that I would devote time for is to not always just scrolling in the is to not always just scrolling in the is to not always just scrolling in the background. &gt;&gt; Do you find yourself picking up that &gt;&gt; Do you find yourself picking up that &gt;&gt; Do you find yourself picking up that phone sometimes? Actually, phone sometimes? Actually, phone sometimes? Actually, &gt;&gt; no. If I do, if I find myself doing that &gt;&gt; no. If I do, if I find myself doing that &gt;&gt; no. If I do, if I find myself doing that reflexively, I have a uh what I call a reflexively, I have a uh what I call a reflexively, I have a uh what I call a supermax prison lock box, which you supermax prison lock box, which you supermax prison lock box, which you can't code out of. And the fun for me, can't code out of. And the fun for me, can't code out of. And the fun for me, and get this, this is like really weird. and get this, this is like really weird. and get this, this is like really weird. I don't know what this says about my I don't know what this says about my I don't know what this says about my psychology. I'll put it in there and psychology. I'll put it in there and psychology. I'll put it in there and I'll dial in, you know, okay, like 4 I'll dial in, you know, okay, like 4 I'll dial in, you know, okay, like 4 hours, and then I hit the supermax hours, and then I hit the supermax hours, and then I hit the supermax button, and then there's this 15-second button, and then there's this 15-second button, and then there's this 15-second countdown, and then I'll go 5, six, countdown, and then I'll go 5, six, countdown, and then I'll go 5, six, seven, eight, nine hours. And I go, seven, eight, nine hours. And I go, seven, eight, nine hours. And I go, okay, cool. Like 9 hours. So, there's okay, cool. Like 9 hours. So, there's okay, cool. Like 9 hours. So, there's this weird thing where you don't want to this weird thing where you don't want to this weird thing where you don't want to let it go, but then you let it go, but then you let it go, but then you &gt;&gt; I really enjoy the freedom from it. so &gt;&gt; I really enjoy the freedom from it. so &gt;&gt; I really enjoy the freedom from it. so much that the extra hours that I add on much that the extra hours that I add on much that the extra hours that I add on and that last thing it feels like a gift and that last thing it feels like a gift and that last thing it feels like a gift to myself and then I'm like I'm going to myself and then I'm like I'm going to myself and then I'm like I'm going to have a great day and then when I get have a great day and then when I get have a great day and then when I get back on it certainly there's this back on it certainly there's this back on it certainly there's this dopamine dynamics thing where you go oh dopamine dynamics thing where you go oh dopamine dynamics thing where you go oh this is a lot of fun but you have to be this is a lot of fun but you have to be this is a lot of fun but you have to be super careful super careful super careful &gt;&gt; because it'll suck you in. I'm just &gt;&gt; because it'll suck you in. I'm just &gt;&gt; because it'll suck you in. I'm just amazed at how fast time goes which we're amazed at how fast time goes which we're amazed at how fast time goes which we're going to talk about time perception. I going to talk about time perception. I going to talk about time perception. I before we do that though, I have a before we do that though, I have a before we do that though, I have a question about plasticity that I've been question about plasticity that I've been question about plasticity that I've been waiting to ask you and only you because waiting to ask you and only you because waiting to ask you and only you because we have a lot of friends that are we have a lot of friends that are we have a lot of friends that are neuroscientists, but I have a feeling neuroscientists, but I have a feeling neuroscientists, but I have a feeling you've thought about this more than you've thought about this more than you've thought about this more than anyone, which is are there any things anyone, which is are there any things anyone, which is are there any things that we can do to extend the window of that we can do to extend the window of that we can do to extend the window of plasticity? Or are there activities like plasticity? Or are there activities like plasticity? Or are there activities like learning an instrument or some sort learning an instrument or some sort learning an instrument or some sort of game who knows that gives us our of game who knows that gives us our of game who knows that gives us our capacity for plasticity uh more height, capacity for plasticity uh more height, capacity for plasticity uh more height, more width um as opposed to just you more width um as opposed to just you more width um as opposed to just you know the same principles. You need to know the same principles. You need to know the same principles. You need to focus on the thing then you need to make focus on the thing then you need to make focus on the thing then you need to make errors then you need to do some error errors then you need to do some error errors then you need to do some error correction. You get to sleep that night correction. You get to sleep that night correction. You get to sleep that night you rewire you trial and error. I mean, you rewire you trial and error. I mean, you rewire you trial and error. I mean, we know that the basics now. I think we know that the basics now. I think we know that the basics now. I think most people have heard them. But what most people have heard them. But what most people have heard them. But what can we do to broaden our ability or can we do to broaden our ability or can we do to broaden our ability or heighten our ability to get uh heighten our ability to get uh heighten our ability to get uh plasticity? &gt;&gt; Two words, seek novelty. That's the &gt;&gt; Two words, seek novelty. That's the &gt;&gt; Two words, seek novelty. That's the whole game is you got to continually whole game is you got to continually whole game is you got to continually challenge the brain. And this is challenge the brain. And this is challenge the brain. And this is something that as we get older is more something that as we get older is more something that as we get older is more important than ever. It's finding new important than ever. It's finding new important than ever. It's finding new things that we haven't done before. You things that we haven't done before. You things that we haven't done before. You always have to keep yourself between the always have to keep yourself between the always have to keep yourself between the levels of frustrating but achievable. levels of frustrating but achievable. levels of frustrating but achievable. And as long as you're trying new things, And as long as you're trying new things, And as long as you're trying new things, so yes, a new instrument is great. so yes, a new instrument is great. so yes, a new instrument is great. Speaking a new language is great. Um, Speaking a new language is great. Um, Speaking a new language is great. Um, you know, obviously we're in a world you know, obviously we're in a world you know, obviously we're in a world that's moving very fast. So just keeping that's moving very fast. So just keeping that's moving very fast. So just keeping up with the technology and figuring out, up with the technology and figuring out, up with the technology and figuring out, wow, there's this new opportunity here wow, there's this new opportunity here wow, there's this new opportunity here with this piece of software, whatever. with this piece of software, whatever. with this piece of software, whatever. All that stuff is great. This is the All that stuff is great. This is the All that stuff is great. This is the critically important part. Um, you may critically important part. Um, you may critically important part. Um, you may know these studies. There's been this know these studies. There's been this know these studies. There's been this study going on for decades now this study going on for decades now this study going on for decades now called the what is it? religious called the what is it? religious called the what is it? religious orders study uh up in Chicago area where orders study uh up in Chicago area where orders study uh up in Chicago area where there's a whole bunch of nuns and there's a whole bunch of nuns and there's a whole bunch of nuns and priests that agreed to donate their priests that agreed to donate their priests that agreed to donate their brains when they passed away. And then brains when they passed away. And then brains when they passed away. And then when they donate their brains, the when they donate their brains, the when they donate their brains, the researchers uh you know examine them, do researchers uh you know examine them, do researchers uh you know examine them, do autopsies on them. What the researchers autopsies on them. What the researchers autopsies on them. What the researchers found is that some fraction of these found is that some fraction of these found is that some fraction of these nuns had Alzheimer's disease, but nobody nuns had Alzheimer's disease, but nobody nuns had Alzheimer's disease, but nobody knew it when they were alive. Nobody saw knew it when they were alive. Nobody saw knew it when they were alive. Nobody saw any cognitive deficits. Why? It's any cognitive deficits. Why? It's any cognitive deficits. Why? It's because these women died in their because these women died in their because these women died in their 90s. And to the day they died, they lived in And to the day they died, they lived in And to the day they died, they lived in these convents. And in the convents, these convents. And in the convents, these convents. And in the convents, they had social responsibilities. They they had social responsibilities. They they had social responsibilities. They had chores. They were fighting with had chores. They were fighting with had chores. They were fighting with their sisters. They were playing games their sisters. They were playing games their sisters. They were playing games with their fellow sisters. They were with their fellow sisters. They were with their fellow sisters. They were singing songs. They were doing things singing songs. They were doing things singing songs. They were doing things all the time. So they kept their brain all the time. So they kept their brain all the time. So they kept their brain active. So even as their brain was active. So even as their brain was active. So even as their brain was physically degenerating with Alzheimer's physically degenerating with Alzheimer's physically degenerating with Alzheimer's disease, they were building new disease, they were building new disease, they were building new roadways. They were building new bridges roadways. They were building new bridges roadways. They were building new bridges over these areas. This is one of the big over these areas. This is one of the big over these areas. This is one of the big things that tells us that uh you know things that tells us that uh you know things that tells us that uh you know contrast this with people who contrast this with people who contrast this with people who retire at 65 and they go home and they retire at 65 and they go home and they retire at 65 and they go home and they sit on a couch and watch the television. sit on a couch and watch the television. sit on a couch and watch the television. They don't have as good an outcome They don't have as good an outcome They don't have as good an outcome because they're not challenging their because they're not challenging their because they're not challenging their brain anymore. Um so it is so important brain anymore. Um so it is so important brain anymore. Um so it is so important to be doing things. You know I once to be doing things. You know I once to be doing things. You know I once heard the expression that there's heard the expression that there's heard the expression that there's nothing as hard that the brain does than nothing as hard that the brain does than nothing as hard that the brain does than other people. And so for these for these other people. And so for these for these other people. And so for these for these women living in convents, they were women living in convents, they were women living in convents, they were constantly dealing with because you constantly dealing with because you constantly dealing with because you never know what somebody's going to say never know what somebody's going to say never know what somebody's going to say or how they're going to react or what or how they're going to react or what or how they're going to react or what they're going to do. So this is great they're going to do. So this is great they're going to do. So this is great challenge opportunity for the brain. challenge opportunity for the brain. challenge opportunity for the brain. Anyway, the point is we need to always Anyway, the point is we need to always Anyway, the point is we need to always find that with ourselves. Often times find that with ourselves. Often times find that with ourselves. Often times people will ask me uh like an older people will ask me uh like an older people will ask me uh like an older person will say, "Hey, I do cross word person will say, "Hey, I do cross word person will say, "Hey, I do cross word puzzles. Is that good?" Yeah, it's good puzzles. Is that good?" Yeah, it's good puzzles. Is that good?" Yeah, it's good until you get good at it and then stop until you get good at it and then stop until you get good at it and then stop and do something that you're not good at and do something that you're not good at and do something that you're not good at and constantly find the next thing and constantly find the next thing and constantly find the next thing that's a real challenge for you. That's that's a real challenge for you. That's that's a real challenge for you. That's the key thing about plasticity. the key thing about plasticity. the key thing about plasticity. Essentially, the backstory is this. As Essentially, the backstory is this. As Essentially, the backstory is this. As you well know, your brain is locked in you well know, your brain is locked in you well know, your brain is locked in silence and darkness. It's trying to silence and darkness. It's trying to silence and darkness. It's trying to make a model of the outside world. And make a model of the outside world. And make a model of the outside world. And its whole goal is to make a successful its whole goal is to make a successful its whole goal is to make a successful model. And when it succeeds at that and model. And when it succeeds at that and model. And when it succeeds at that and says, "Oh, okay, wait. I I've got good says, "Oh, okay, wait. I I've got good says, "Oh, okay, wait. I I've got good predictions about what's going on." Then predictions about what's going on." Then predictions about what's going on." Then it stops changing. I That's its goal is it stops changing. I That's its goal is it stops changing. I That's its goal is to stop changing. And if you're to stop changing. And if you're to stop changing. And if you're constantly pushing and challenging it constantly pushing and challenging it constantly pushing and challenging it with things it doesn't understand, then with things it doesn't understand, then with things it doesn't understand, then it'll keep changing. Amen to that. I it'll keep changing. Amen to that. I it'll keep changing. Amen to that. I been trying to beat the drum that the been trying to beat the drum that the been trying to beat the drum that the agitation that one feels when trying to agitation that one feels when trying to agitation that one feels when trying to learn something new, it's actually a learn something new, it's actually a learn something new, it's actually a reflection in part of the reflection in part of the reflection in part of the catakolamines, right? Like adrenaline catakolamines, right? Like adrenaline catakolamines, right? Like adrenaline and norepinephrine, the frustration and norepinephrine, the frustration and norepinephrine, the frustration and the agitation that we feel. the agitation that we feel. the agitation that we feel. &gt;&gt; That's the feedback signal to the brain &gt;&gt; That's the feedback signal to the brain &gt;&gt; That's the feedback signal to the brain that hey, this is different than the that hey, this is different than the that hey, this is different than the stuff you know how to do. I mean, stuff you know how to do. I mean, stuff you know how to do. I mean, because the neurons are not thinking, because the neurons are not thinking, because the neurons are not thinking, they're firing, right? And so and so they're firing, right? And so and so they're firing, right? And so and so that neurochemical millu associated with that neurochemical millu associated with that neurochemical millu associated with frustration is one of the triggers that frustration is one of the triggers that frustration is one of the triggers that uh generates plasticity which actually uh generates plasticity which actually uh generates plasticity which actually you can resolve this question for me. you can resolve this question for me. you can resolve this question for me. I'm struck by the fact that there's so I'm struck by the fact that there's so I'm struck by the fact that there's so many studies showing that the adult many studies showing that the adult many studies showing that the adult brain can change. brain can change. brain can change. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; And some of the more interesting ones um &gt;&gt; And some of the more interesting ones um &gt;&gt; And some of the more interesting ones um involve boosting the levels of some involve boosting the levels of some involve boosting the levels of some neurom modulator dopamine or neurom modulator dopamine or neurom modulator dopamine or acetylcholine or norepinephrine or acetylcholine or norepinephrine or acetylcholine or norepinephrine or epinephrine serotonin. But what's so epinephrine serotonin. But what's so epinephrine serotonin. But what's so interesting to me is that seems like you interesting to me is that seems like you interesting to me is that seems like you can boost the levels of any of those and can boost the levels of any of those and can boost the levels of any of those and get plasticity. It's not like one neurom get plasticity. It's not like one neurom get plasticity. It's not like one neurom modulator gives you uh the opportunity modulator gives you uh the opportunity modulator gives you uh the opportunity for plasticity. So many of the for plasticity. So many of the for plasticity. So many of the interesting studies on psychedelics are interesting studies on psychedelics are interesting studies on psychedelics are using psychedelics that are using psychedelics that are using psychedelics that are &gt;&gt; kind of like serotonin. I mean they act &gt;&gt; kind of like serotonin. I mean they act &gt;&gt; kind of like serotonin. I mean they act on different receptors, but they're very on different receptors, but they're very on different receptors, but they're very serotonic. I remind people of this serotonic. I remind people of this serotonic. I remind people of this because people really like to um beat up because people really like to um beat up because people really like to um beat up on SSRIs. And I agree they have their on SSRIs. And I agree they have their on SSRIs. And I agree they have their problems and side effects, but they've problems and side effects, but they've problems and side effects, but they've also helped a great number of people. also helped a great number of people. also helped a great number of people. But whether it's SSRIs or psilocybin, But whether it's SSRIs or psilocybin, But whether it's SSRIs or psilocybin, they're both just tools for plasticity they're both just tools for plasticity they're both just tools for plasticity that drive serotonin. But we know you that drive serotonin. But we know you that drive serotonin. But we know you can amplify acetylcholine, get a window can amplify acetylcholine, get a window can amplify acetylcholine, get a window of plasticity. This is a speculative of plasticity. This is a speculative of plasticity. This is a speculative question, but why do you think it is question, but why do you think it is question, but why do you think it is that there's this sort of equip that there's this sort of equip that there's this sort of equip potential of neuromodulators where potential of neuromodulators where potential of neuromodulators where boosting any one of them can open boosting any one of them can open boosting any one of them can open plasticity or the window or the plasticity or the window or the plasticity or the window or the opportunity for plasticity? opportunity for plasticity? opportunity for plasticity? &gt;&gt; Okay, a few things on this. as you &gt;&gt; Okay, a few things on this. as you &gt;&gt; Okay, a few things on this. as you well know you know all the neurom well know you know all the neurom well know you know all the neurom modulators exist in a dance with each modulators exist in a dance with each modulators exist in a dance with each other and fundamentally I think other and fundamentally I think other and fundamentally I think we're going to come to understand this we're going to come to understand this we're going to come to understand this in 50 years as you know sort of in 50 years as you know sort of in 50 years as you know sort of combination locks of things and the way combination locks of things and the way combination locks of things and the way we keep looking at it in science we keep looking at it in science we keep looking at it in science currently is ah here's acetylcholine or currently is ah here's acetylcholine or currently is ah here's acetylcholine or here's serotonin or so and it's probably here's serotonin or so and it's probably here's serotonin or so and it's probably not the right way to look certainly not the right way to look certainly not the right way to look certainly not how the neurons are looking at it okay how the neurons are looking at it okay how the neurons are looking at it okay that said acetylcholine really feels to that said acetylcholine really feels to that said acetylcholine really feels to me like the main one involved in me like the main one involved in me like the main one involved in plasticity when you are a Maybe you've plasticity when you are a Maybe you've plasticity when you are a Maybe you've got acetylcholine going everywhere got acetylcholine going everywhere got acetylcholine going everywhere whenever you're trying to figure out the whenever you're trying to figure out the whenever you're trying to figure out the world. Whenever something's not matching world. Whenever something's not matching world. Whenever something's not matching a prediction and you've got a prediction and you've got a prediction and you've got acetylcholine going everywhere that acetylcholine going everywhere that acetylcholine going everywhere that says, "Hey, I got to figure out what says, "Hey, I got to figure out what says, "Hey, I got to figure out what just happened and how to link this with just happened and how to link this with just happened and how to link this with what I did and so on." As you get older, what I did and so on." As you get older, what I did and so on." As you get older, it's more like, you know, a pointalist it's more like, you know, a pointalist it's more like, you know, a pointalist artist who just dabs things here or artist who just dabs things here or artist who just dabs things here or there. You get to see the colon release there. You get to see the colon release there. You get to see the colon release very locally in very in small places and very locally in very in small places and very locally in very in small places and that's where you make changes. Why? that's where you make changes. Why? that's where you make changes. Why? That's because as you get to be an That's because as you get to be an That's because as you get to be an adult, you've got a better and better adult, you've got a better and better adult, you've got a better and better model of the world. You don't want to model of the world. You don't want to model of the world. You don't want to change everything. You just change like, change everything. You just change like, change everything. You just change like, "Oh, I didn't realize there was that "Oh, I didn't realize there was that "Oh, I didn't realize there was that button on the coffee machine that did button on the coffee machine that did button on the coffee machine that did this new thing or whatever." So, you this new thing or whatever." So, you this new thing or whatever." So, you just change little bits at a time here. just change little bits at a time here. just change little bits at a time here. We're in this really interesting We're in this really interesting We're in this really interesting situation in the history of our situation in the history of our situation in the history of our species where now we can do things like, species where now we can do things like, species where now we can do things like, "Hey, what if we just crank up "Hey, what if we just crank up "Hey, what if we just crank up acetylcholine or, you know, obviously acetylcholine or, you know, obviously acetylcholine or, you know, obviously we've done lots of things with we've done lots of things with we've done lots of things with dopamine." Um, we always find when we dopamine." Um, we always find when we dopamine." Um, we always find when we tweak these things that it's tweak these things that it's tweak these things that it's complicated. Just as one example, you complicated. Just as one example, you complicated. Just as one example, you know, with Parkinson's, people get have know, with Parkinson's, people get have know, with Parkinson's, people get have less dopamine and so the medications are less dopamine and so the medications are less dopamine and so the medications are to crank up the dopamine. What that led to crank up the dopamine. What that led to crank up the dopamine. What that led to, you may know this fascinating story, to, you may know this fascinating story, to, you may know this fascinating story, this probably 25 years ago now, where this probably 25 years ago now, where this probably 25 years ago now, where you know, observant clinicians noted you know, observant clinicians noted you know, observant clinicians noted that people on these Parkinson's that people on these Parkinson's that people on these Parkinson's medications were becoming medications were becoming medications were becoming hypercompulsive gamblers. They were hypercompulsive gamblers. They were hypercompulsive gamblers. They were blowing their family's fortune on online blowing their family's fortune on online blowing their family's fortune on online gambling and Las Vegas and so on. And gambling and Las Vegas and so on. And gambling and Las Vegas and so on. And and what they realized is when you crank and what they realized is when you crank and what they realized is when you crank up the dopamine that changes your risk up the dopamine that changes your risk up the dopamine that changes your risk aversion such that people are taking. So aversion such that people are taking. So aversion such that people are taking. So now it's a it's a contra indication now it's a it's a contra indication now it's a it's a contra indication that's listed on the bottle. You know if that's listed on the bottle. You know if that's listed on the bottle. You know if you notice gambling turn down the you notice gambling turn down the you notice gambling turn down the amount here. So anyway whenever the amount here. So anyway whenever the amount here. So anyway whenever we whenever we start dialing these we whenever we start dialing these we whenever we start dialing these around we always find things that are a around we always find things that are a around we always find things that are a little bit out of our predictive realm. little bit out of our predictive realm. little bit out of our predictive realm. Um, but uh the general story is that Um, but uh the general story is that Um, but uh the general story is that your brain's trying to put together this your brain's trying to put together this your brain's trying to put together this model of what's going on and as it gets model of what's going on and as it gets model of what's going on and as it gets better and better, it's doing less and better and better, it's doing less and better and better, it's doing less and less plasticity. I do want to point out less plasticity. I do want to point out less plasticity. I do want to point out though that parts of the brain become though that parts of the brain become though that parts of the brain become less plastic and others stay plastic less plastic and others stay plastic less plastic and others stay plastic your whole life. As an example, your whole life. As an example, your whole life. As an example, your primary visual cortex at the back of the primary visual cortex at the back of the primary visual cortex at the back of the head that locks down early. You really head that locks down early. You really head that locks down early. You really can't do much to change that. And um you can't do much to change that. And um you can't do much to change that. And um you know there were studies by Logitus' lab know there were studies by Logitus' lab know there were studies by Logitus' lab years ago where they looked at changes years ago where they looked at changes years ago where they looked at changes to let's say the retina in an adult to let's say the retina in an adult to let's say the retina in an adult monkey and they expected to see changes monkey and they expected to see changes monkey and they expected to see changes in the visual cortex of the monkey and in the visual cortex of the monkey and in the visual cortex of the monkey and they didn't see any changes at all and they didn't see any changes at all and they didn't see any changes at all and that surprised them given all the that surprised them given all the that surprised them given all the plasticity literature. But it's because plasticity literature. But it's because plasticity literature. But it's because the visual cortex locks down. In the visual cortex locks down. In the visual cortex locks down. In contrast, these downstream areas from contrast, these downstream areas from contrast, these downstream areas from the visual cortex that care about things the visual cortex that care about things the visual cortex that care about things like recognizing faces or new brands of like recognizing faces or new brands of like recognizing faces or new brands of fast food restaurants or whatever it is, fast food restaurants or whatever it is, fast food restaurants or whatever it is, those stay plastic your whole life those stay plastic your whole life those stay plastic your whole life because there's constantly new data because there's constantly new data because there's constantly new data coming in on those. So the general story coming in on those. So the general story coming in on those. So the general story is the primary areas are like the I is the primary areas are like the I is the primary areas are like the I think about it like the software think about it like the software think about it like the software kernels where you know if you're at kernels where you know if you're at kernels where you know if you're at Microsoft for example there's parts of Microsoft for example there's parts of Microsoft for example there's parts of the code that no one ever touches the code that no one ever touches the code that no one ever touches because that's like how to add two because that's like how to add two because that's like how to add two numbers and multiply whatever that's the numbers and multiply whatever that's the numbers and multiply whatever that's the kernel of the code you never touch that kernel of the code you never touch that kernel of the code you never touch that but you get these higher and higher but you get these higher and higher but you get these higher and higher application layers on top of that and application layers on top of that and application layers on top of that and that's essentially how to think about that's essentially how to think about that's essentially how to think about primary sensory cortices and then all primary sensory cortices and then all primary sensory cortices and then all the stuff downstream from there the stuff downstream from there the stuff downstream from there &gt;&gt; perfect analogy I um for people to &gt;&gt; perfect analogy I um for people to &gt;&gt; perfect analogy I um for people to understand, you know, how much understand, you know, how much understand, you know, how much challenge to embrace. I mean, you're not challenge to embrace. I mean, you're not challenge to embrace. I mean, you're not trying to um, you know, defrag the whole trying to um, you know, defrag the whole trying to um, you know, defrag the whole system, you know, and I system, you know, and I system, you know, and I mentioned psychedelics. I, you know, I mentioned psychedelics. I, you know, I mentioned psychedelics. I, you know, I do think they have some interesting do think they have some interesting do think they have some interesting therapeutic potential. I also worry therapeutic potential. I also worry therapeutic potential. I also worry about and I can tell you examples of about and I can tell you examples of about and I can tell you examples of people that got I guess now they people that got I guess now they people that got I guess now they nowadays they call it one-shotted. They nowadays they call it one-shotted. They nowadays they call it one-shotted. They take Iawaska a couple times and they are take Iawaska a couple times and they are take Iawaska a couple times and they are forever different in ways that does not forever different in ways that does not forever different in ways that does not serve them. those examples don't get serve them. those examples don't get serve them. those examples don't get talked about quite as often as the also talked about quite as often as the also talked about quite as often as the also many people who you know um seem to many people who you know um seem to many people who you know um seem to benefit from these things. So um benefit from these things. So um benefit from these things. So um plasticity it seems is not the goal. plasticity it seems is not the goal. plasticity it seems is not the goal. Directed plasticity is the goal. That's Directed plasticity is the goal. That's Directed plasticity is the goal. That's right. And it's very hard to direct. So right. And it's very hard to direct. So right. And it's very hard to direct. So I feel like you know let's imagine you I feel like you know let's imagine you I feel like you know let's imagine you could take some cocktail of could take some cocktail of could take some cocktail of neurotransmitters and get total neurotransmitters and get total neurotransmitters and get total plasticity of your brain. I don't think plasticity of your brain. I don't think plasticity of your brain. I don't think you'd want that. You wouldn't be you you'd want that. You wouldn't be you you'd want that. You wouldn't be you anymore. who we are is the sum of our memories who we are is the sum of our memories who we are is the sum of our memories and the sum of our skills that we've and the sum of our skills that we've and the sum of our skills that we've built and you know that keeps changing. built and you know that keeps changing. built and you know that keeps changing. We're always a moving target. Um and who We're always a moving target. Um and who We're always a moving target. Um and who you will be in five or 10 years will be you will be in five or 10 years will be you will be in five or 10 years will be different. But I don't think we'd want different. But I don't think we'd want different. But I don't think we'd want the plasticity of an infant even though the plasticity of an infant even though the plasticity of an infant even though when you're doing let's say language when you're doing let's say language when you're doing let's say language learning you say I wish I could learn learning you say I wish I could learn learning you say I wish I could learn this as well as I did when I was seven. this as well as I did when I was seven. this as well as I did when I was seven. But uh generally it's not a state that But uh generally it's not a state that But uh generally it's not a state that you would desire. I think you would desire. I think you would desire. I think &gt;&gt; if you're a regular listener of the &gt;&gt; if you're a regular listener of the &gt;&gt; if you're a regular listener of the Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been on the fence about it, now's an awesome on the fence about it, now's an awesome on the fence about it, now's an awesome time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full supplement package with your first supplement package with your first supplement package with your first subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a sample pack of the new sleep formula, sample pack of the new sleep formula, sample pack of the new sleep formula, AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It tastes great, and like I said, it has me tastes great, and like I said, it has me tastes great, and like I said, it has me sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, so make sure to go to so make sure to go to so make sure to go to drinkagg1.com/huberman to get started today. You've mentioned a to get started today. You've mentioned a to get started today. You've mentioned a few times future self. I think uh all of few times future self. I think uh all of few times future self. I think uh all of us are inherently interested in our us are inherently interested in our us are inherently interested in our future selves and whether the things of future selves and whether the things of future selves and whether the things of our past, present, uh and what we have our past, present, uh and what we have our past, present, uh and what we have control over going forward is going to control over going forward is going to control over going forward is going to put us in the best future self possible. put us in the best future self possible. put us in the best future self possible. Right? Humans love to optimize or Right? Humans love to optimize or Right? Humans love to optimize or fantasize about optimal. But how should fantasize about optimal. But how should fantasize about optimal. But how should we think about thinking about our future we think about thinking about our future we think about thinking about our future self? Or should we not do that? Right? self? Or should we not do that? Right? self? Or should we not do that? Right? Should we should we should we just avoid Should we should we should we just avoid Should we should we should we just avoid that loop-de-loop and um and uh get real that loop-de-loop and um and uh get real that loop-de-loop and um and uh get real stoic about it and just live in stoic about it and just live in stoic about it and just live in 10-minute time blocks or one minute time 10-minute time blocks or one minute time 10-minute time blocks or one minute time blocks? It raises a really interesting blocks? It raises a really interesting blocks? It raises a really interesting question, I think, of where should we question, I think, of where should we question, I think, of where should we set our time horizon set our time horizon set our time horizon &gt;&gt; to not just feel the best, but to be our &gt;&gt; to not just feel the best, but to be our &gt;&gt; to not just feel the best, but to be our best and to feel our best going forward. best and to feel our best going forward. best and to feel our best going forward. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Our capacity to think about our &gt;&gt; Yeah. Our capacity to think about our &gt;&gt; Yeah. Our capacity to think about our future selves is the most special part future selves is the most special part future selves is the most special part of being humans. And you if we didn't do of being humans. And you if we didn't do of being humans. And you if we didn't do it, if we said, "I'm gonna be stoked it, if we said, "I'm gonna be stoked it, if we said, "I'm gonna be stoked about it." Yeah. You'd eat the about it." Yeah. You'd eat the about it." Yeah. You'd eat the cupcake and you do what? Like all the cupcake and you do what? Like all the cupcake and you do what? Like all the things that wouldn't serve your future things that wouldn't serve your future things that wouldn't serve your future self. &gt;&gt; Never eat the cupcake like a real stoic &gt;&gt; Never eat the cupcake like a real stoic &gt;&gt; Never eat the cupcake like a real stoic and then starve to death, right? Even if and then starve to death, right? Even if and then starve to death, right? Even if the cupcake were the only thing, the cupcake were the only thing, the cupcake were the only thing, [laughter] right? What would the stoic [laughter] right? What would the stoic [laughter] right? What would the stoic do? &gt;&gt; That's right. So, um, yeah, we actually &gt;&gt; That's right. So, um, yeah, we actually &gt;&gt; That's right. So, um, yeah, we actually spend most of our time not in the here spend most of our time not in the here spend most of our time not in the here and now. We're reminiscing about the and now. We're reminiscing about the and now. We're reminiscing about the past and we're simulating possible past and we're simulating possible past and we're simulating possible futures. Your your mind is a movie futures. Your your mind is a movie futures. Your your mind is a movie theater. We're constantly thinking about theater. We're constantly thinking about theater. We're constantly thinking about where things are going. But this is where things are going. But this is where things are going. But this is great. This is what makes us able to do great. This is what makes us able to do great. This is what makes us able to do all the things that humans do all the things that humans do all the things that humans do successfully. And in our own lives, this successfully. And in our own lives, this successfully. And in our own lives, this matters so much because we're able to matters so much because we're able to matters so much because we're able to think about who do I want to be? Now, as think about who do I want to be? Now, as think about who do I want to be? Now, as you know, we've got this rivalry in the you know, we've got this rivalry in the you know, we've got this rivalry in the brain. You've got all these voices going brain. You've got all these voices going brain. You've got all these voices going on at the same time, all these different on at the same time, all these different on at the same time, all these different networks running. So, for example, if I networks running. So, for example, if I networks running. So, for example, if I put the cupcake down in front of you, put the cupcake down in front of you, put the cupcake down in front of you, um, you know, part of your brain wants um, you know, part of your brain wants um, you know, part of your brain wants to eat that. It's delicious. It's a rich to eat that. It's delicious. It's a rich to eat that. It's delicious. It's a rich energy source. Part of your brain says, energy source. Part of your brain says, energy source. Part of your brain says, "Don't eat it. You know, I want to "Don't eat it. You know, I want to "Don't eat it. You know, I want to stay fit." And so, part of your brain stay fit." And so, part of your brain stay fit." And so, part of your brain says, "Okay, maybe I'll eat part of it. says, "Okay, maybe I'll eat part of it. says, "Okay, maybe I'll eat part of it. Uh, but I'll go to the gym later." Or, Uh, but I'll go to the gym later." Or, Uh, but I'll go to the gym later." Or, you know, I promise my girlfriend that you know, I promise my girlfriend that you know, I promise my girlfriend that I'll go do this thing. What? Like, we've I'll go do this thing. What? Like, we've I'll go do this thing. What? Like, we've got all these voices. You can cuss at got all these voices. You can cuss at got all these voices. You can cuss at yourself. You can cajol yourself. You yourself. You can cajol yourself. You yourself. You can cajol yourself. You can contract with yourself. And the can contract with yourself. And the can contract with yourself. And the question is, who's talking to whom? It's question is, who's talking to whom? It's question is, who's talking to whom? It's all you, but it's parts of you that have all you, but it's parts of you that have all you, but it's parts of you that have these different drives. Now, the part these different drives. Now, the part these different drives. Now, the part that's really amazing about us is we got that's really amazing about us is we got that's really amazing about us is we got lots of short-term drives, but we also lots of short-term drives, but we also lots of short-term drives, but we also have this capacity to look into the have this capacity to look into the have this capacity to look into the future and think about who we want to future and think about who we want to future and think about who we want to be. And that is essentially subserved by be. And that is essentially subserved by be. And that is essentially subserved by our prefrontal cortex, which as we our prefrontal cortex, which as we our prefrontal cortex, which as we mentioned earlier is something that is mentioned earlier is something that is mentioned earlier is something that is a, you know, the size of it is unique to a, you know, the size of it is unique to a, you know, the size of it is unique to humans. All of our closest cousins in humans. All of our closest cousins in humans. All of our closest cousins in the animal kingdom don't have a the animal kingdom don't have a the animal kingdom don't have a prefrontal cortex that's a fraction of prefrontal cortex that's a fraction of prefrontal cortex that's a fraction of what we have. That's what allows us to what we have. That's what allows us to what we have. That's what allows us to unhook from the here and now. Okay. Now, unhook from the here and now. Okay. Now, unhook from the here and now. Okay. Now, here's the thing. I have been fascinated here's the thing. I have been fascinated here's the thing. I have been fascinated by this for a long time about how we by this for a long time about how we by this for a long time about how we sometimes know, okay, my future self is sometimes know, okay, my future self is sometimes know, okay, my future self is going to act badly in this situation. going to act badly in this situation. going to act badly in this situation. So, I'm going to do something now so So, I'm going to do something now so So, I'm going to do something now so that my future self can't act badly. So, that my future self can't act badly. So, that my future self can't act badly. So, this is the topic of my next book. It's this is the topic of my next book. It's this is the topic of my next book. It's called the Ulisses Contract. And where called the Ulisses Contract. And where called the Ulisses Contract. And where this term comes from is in the Odyssey, this term comes from is in the Odyssey, this term comes from is in the Odyssey, Odysius, otherwise known as Ulisses, is Odysius, otherwise known as Ulisses, is Odysius, otherwise known as Ulisses, is coming home from the Trojan War. And he coming home from the Trojan War. And he coming home from the Trojan War. And he realizes that way up ahead, he's going realizes that way up ahead, he's going realizes that way up ahead, he's going to pass the island of the sirens where to pass the island of the sirens where to pass the island of the sirens where you've got these beautiful female you've got these beautiful female you've got these beautiful female creatures who sing these songs that are creatures who sing these songs that are creatures who sing these songs that are so beautiful it beggars the mind of the so beautiful it beggars the mind of the so beautiful it beggars the mind of the sailors and everyone crashes into sailors and everyone crashes into sailors and everyone crashes into the rocks and dies. Ulisses really wants the rocks and dies. Ulisses really wants the rocks and dies. Ulisses really wants to hear the song, but he knows like any to hear the song, but he knows like any to hear the song, but he knows like any mortal man, he's going to fall for this mortal man, he's going to fall for this mortal man, he's going to fall for this and crash the rocks. So what does he do? and crash the rocks. So what does he do? and crash the rocks. So what does he do? He has his men lash him to the mass. So He has his men lash him to the mass. So He has his men lash him to the mass. So he can't move. He has them put beeswax he can't move. He has them put beeswax he can't move. He has them put beeswax in their ears so they can't do anything. in their ears so they can't do anything. in their ears so they can't do anything. And and he tells them, "No matter what I And and he tells them, "No matter what I And and he tells them, "No matter what I do, no matter how much I'm screaming, do, no matter how much I'm screaming, do, no matter how much I'm screaming, just keep going. Just keep sailing." just keep going. Just keep sailing." just keep going. Just keep sailing." &gt;&gt; Smart, &gt;&gt; Smart, &gt;&gt; Smart, &gt;&gt; right? It's smart because what is &gt;&gt; right? It's smart because what is &gt;&gt; right? It's smart because what is happening is the Ulisses of sound mind happening is the Ulisses of sound mind happening is the Ulisses of sound mind is making a contract for the future is making a contract for the future is making a contract for the future Ulisses who he knows is going to behave Ulisses who he knows is going to behave Ulisses who he knows is going to behave badly. So he's lashing him to the mass. badly. So he's lashing him to the mass. badly. So he's lashing him to the mass. And what I've been fascinated by is the And what I've been fascinated by is the And what I've been fascinated by is the ways that we do this in our lives all ways that we do this in our lives all ways that we do this in our lives all the time. So the example you gave a few the time. So the example you gave a few the time. So the example you gave a few minutes ago about locking up your phone minutes ago about locking up your phone minutes ago about locking up your phone in one of these lock boxes is a perfect in one of these lock boxes is a perfect in one of these lock boxes is a perfect example because what you're making sure example because what you're making sure example because what you're making sure is that the Andrew of two hours from now is that the Andrew of two hours from now is that the Andrew of two hours from now can't do the wrong thing because you can't do the wrong thing because you can't do the wrong thing because you know he might you know he's going to be know he might you know he's going to be know he might you know he's going to be tempted. So you take away that tempted. So you take away that tempted. So you take away that temptation. By the way, I recently met temptation. By the way, I recently met temptation. By the way, I recently met uh an older gentleman who told me about uh an older gentleman who told me about uh an older gentleman who told me about an older woman that he'd met years ago an older woman that he'd met years ago an older woman that he'd met years ago who used to take her money, her cash, who used to take her money, her cash, who used to take her money, her cash, and freeze it in a block of ice in the and freeze it in a block of ice in the and freeze it in a block of ice in the freezer so that she couldn't spend the freezer so that she couldn't spend the freezer so that she couldn't spend the money until she really needed it. money until she really needed it. money until she really needed it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't have a money spending &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't have a money spending &gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't have a money spending thing. And I actually have pretty good thing. And I actually have pretty good thing. And I actually have pretty good control uh with the phone and with control uh with the phone and with control uh with the phone and with social media. social media. social media. &gt;&gt; For me, there's also a I don't want to &gt;&gt; For me, there's also a I don't want to &gt;&gt; For me, there's also a I don't want to call it a sick pleasure. There's a uh a call it a sick pleasure. There's a uh a call it a sick pleasure. There's a uh a bit of a pleasure in knowing that it's bit of a pleasure in knowing that it's bit of a pleasure in knowing that it's completely off limits completely off limits completely off limits &gt;&gt; because it means I can't even look at it &gt;&gt; because it means I can't even look at it &gt;&gt; because it means I can't even look at it for 10 seconds. I don't know. I think it for 10 seconds. I don't know. I think it for 10 seconds. I don't know. I think it involves something over control of involves something over control of involves something over control of things that I feel like are trying to things that I feel like are trying to things that I feel like are trying to control me. control me. control me. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Which I do not like. &gt;&gt; Which I do not like. &gt;&gt; Which I do not like. &gt;&gt; Exactly. Because you care about your &gt;&gt; Exactly. Because you care about your &gt;&gt; Exactly. Because you care about your future self and you want future Andrew future self and you want future Andrew future self and you want future Andrew to do the right thing. to do the right thing. to do the right thing. &gt;&gt; So there are a million ways to make &gt;&gt; So there are a million ways to make &gt;&gt; So there are a million ways to make these Ulyses contracts and I've been these Ulyses contracts and I've been these Ulyses contracts and I've been studying this for years and I Yeah. studying this for years and I Yeah. studying this for years and I Yeah. Anyway, so I decided to write a book Anyway, so I decided to write a book Anyway, so I decided to write a book on this because the way that we deal on this because the way that we deal on this because the way that we deal with our future selves is just this with our future selves is just this with our future selves is just this fascinating thing because your future fascinating thing because your future fascinating thing because your future self is a little different than who you self is a little different than who you self is a little different than who you are now. But with time, we come to are now. But with time, we come to are now. But with time, we come to understand that our future self will understand that our future self will understand that our future self will behave badly in different situations. behave badly in different situations. behave badly in different situations. And so we just try to cut those off. And so we just try to cut those off. And so we just try to cut those off. I I'll give I'll give a couple examples. I I'll give I'll give a couple examples. I I'll give I'll give a couple examples. One is it's super useful to get um One is it's super useful to get um One is it's super useful to get um social pressure involved. So, for social pressure involved. So, for social pressure involved. So, for example, I'm guessing you and I both do example, I'm guessing you and I both do example, I'm guessing you and I both do this. You know, going to the gym is this. You know, going to the gym is this. You know, going to the gym is something we enjoy, but it's really something we enjoy, but it's really something we enjoy, but it's really useful to have a buddy where you say, useful to have a buddy where you say, useful to have a buddy where you say, "Hey, I'll meet you at the gym at 8 "Hey, I'll meet you at the gym at 8 "Hey, I'll meet you at the gym at 8 tomorrow morning." And then even if you tomorrow morning." And then even if you tomorrow morning." And then even if you wake up, you're a little tired, your wake up, you're a little tired, your wake up, you're a little tired, your shoulder hurts, or whatever, you got to shoulder hurts, or whatever, you got to shoulder hurts, or whatever, you got to go because he's going to be there. So, go because he's going to be there. So, go because he's going to be there. So, getting social pressure involves a good getting social pressure involves a good getting social pressure involves a good idea. I found this thing where it's idea. I found this thing where it's idea. I found this thing where it's a boot camp where you sign up for it a boot camp where you sign up for it a boot camp where you sign up for it and every morning, you know, go jogging and every morning, you know, go jogging and every morning, you know, go jogging together and do push-ups, whatever. But together and do push-ups, whatever. But together and do push-ups, whatever. But if you don't show up, the group jogs to if you don't show up, the group jogs to if you don't show up, the group jogs to your house and they stand on your front your house and they stand on your front your house and they stand on your front lawn and they do jumping jack jumping lawn and they do jumping jack jumping lawn and they do jumping jack jumping jacks and they scream your name until jacks and they scream your name until jacks and they scream your name until you come out. you come out. you come out. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's really good to get that to &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's really good to get that to &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's really good to get that to commit to that sort of thing so that commit to that sort of thing so that commit to that sort of thing so that you're really going to show up. Um there you're really going to show up. Um there you're really going to show up. Um there are ways to do this where you put money are ways to do this where you put money are ways to do this where you put money on the line. So you can say, for on the line. So you can say, for on the line. So you can say, for example, there was a woman who was example, there was a woman who was example, there was a woman who was trying to quit smoking and she tried for trying to quit smoking and she tried for trying to quit smoking and she tried for years to quit smoking. So, what she did years to quit smoking. So, what she did years to quit smoking. So, what she did is she wrote a $10,000 check and gave it is she wrote a $10,000 check and gave it is she wrote a $10,000 check and gave it to her friend and said, "If you catch me to her friend and said, "If you catch me to her friend and said, "If you catch me smoking, I want you to donate this check smoking, I want you to donate this check smoking, I want you to donate this check to the KKK, which to her was the most to the KKK, which to her was the most to the KKK, which to her was the most aversive thing that could ever happen aversive thing that could ever happen aversive thing that could ever happen with her money." And that's what with her money." And that's what with her money." And that's what prevented her from smoking because the prevented her from smoking because the prevented her from smoking because the sting of knowing that she gave her money sting of knowing that she gave her money sting of knowing that she gave her money to the KKK was the worst thing that she to the KKK was the worst thing that she to the KKK was the worst thing that she could imagine. So, there are a million could imagine. So, there are a million could imagine. So, there are a million ways to do these Ulisses contracts, but ways to do these Ulisses contracts, but ways to do these Ulisses contracts, but what they have in common is how do you what they have in common is how do you what they have in common is how do you lash yourself to the mass so you'll keep lash yourself to the mass so you'll keep lash yourself to the mass so you'll keep the good behavior you want? the good behavior you want? the good behavior you want? Yeah, the example of this woman writing Yeah, the example of this woman writing Yeah, the example of this woman writing the check is interesting because um the check is interesting because um the check is interesting because um I could ask why couldn't she access her I could ask why couldn't she access her I could ask why couldn't she access her inner clearly has a lot of inner fight inner clearly has a lot of inner fight inner clearly has a lot of inner fight right like she really stands so strongly right like she really stands so strongly right like she really stands so strongly on one camp which um I agree the KKK on one camp which um I agree the KKK on one camp which um I agree the KKK horrible organization would never want horrible organization would never want horrible organization would never want to support them in any way uh whatsoever to support them in any way uh whatsoever to support them in any way uh whatsoever and um and yet she needed to do that and um and yet she needed to do that and um and yet she needed to do that right she needed a punishment a right she needed a punishment a right she needed a punishment a potential punishment potential punishment potential punishment And so it speaks to how even if we know And so it speaks to how even if we know And so it speaks to how even if we know something and feel something so strongly something and feel something so strongly something and feel something so strongly in the present, in the present, in the present, &gt;&gt; yes, &gt;&gt; yes, &gt;&gt; yes, &gt;&gt; it still becomes very hard to um to &gt;&gt; it still becomes very hard to um to &gt;&gt; it still becomes very hard to um to access our best choices. access our best choices. access our best choices. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um but there's something about the &gt;&gt; Um but there's something about the &gt;&gt; Um but there's something about the future self that we're not even in yet future self that we're not even in yet future self that we're not even in yet that we fear our future self so much that we fear our future self so much that we fear our future self so much more than we uh can't handle the more than we uh can't handle the more than we uh can't handle the discomfort of our present self. It's the discomfort of our present self. It's the discomfort of our present self. It's almost like and so we tether those in almost like and so we tether those in almost like and so we tether those in this Ulyses contract. this Ulyses contract. this Ulyses contract. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a kind of wisdom that we come &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a kind of wisdom that we come &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's a kind of wisdom that we come to understand how we will behave when to understand how we will behave when to understand how we will behave when we're not in our present, you know, we're not in our present, you know, we're not in our present, you know, sober, rational moment. Um, we come to sober, rational moment. Um, we come to sober, rational moment. Um, we come to understand, for example, people who are understand, for example, people who are understand, for example, people who are trying who are alcoholics and they're trying who are alcoholics and they're trying who are alcoholics and they're trying to break that. The first thing trying to break that. The first thing trying to break that. The first thing they're told at, um, Alcoholics they're told at, um, Alcoholics they're told at, um, Alcoholics Anonymous is clear all the alcohol out Anonymous is clear all the alcohol out Anonymous is clear all the alcohol out of your house. Because you might think, of your house. Because you might think, of your house. Because you might think, okay, I'm done. I'm firmly going to not okay, I'm done. I'm firmly going to not okay, I'm done. I'm firmly going to not drink anymore. So, you put the alcohol drink anymore. So, you put the alcohol drink anymore. So, you put the alcohol away up in a high shelf. But on a away up in a high shelf. But on a away up in a high shelf. But on a festive Friday night or a lonely Sunday festive Friday night or a lonely Sunday festive Friday night or a lonely Sunday night or something, you might go up night or something, you might go up night or something, you might go up there. Your future self might do that. there. Your future self might do that. there. Your future self might do that. So what you do is you get rid of the So what you do is you get rid of the So what you do is you get rid of the temptation. Same thing with people who temptation. Same thing with people who temptation. Same thing with people who are trying to battle drug addictions. are trying to battle drug addictions. are trying to battle drug addictions. They're told, "Never carry more than $20 They're told, "Never carry more than $20 They're told, "Never carry more than $20 of cash in your pocket because at some of cash in your pocket because at some of cash in your pocket because at some point you're going to run into some guy point you're going to run into some guy point you're going to run into some guy who's trying to sell you drugs and if who's trying to sell you drugs and if who's trying to sell you drugs and if you got the money, it's burning a hole you got the money, it's burning a hole you got the money, it's burning a hole in your pocket. You buy the drugs." I in your pocket. You buy the drugs." I in your pocket. You buy the drugs." I don't think we can trust our future don't think we can trust our future don't think we can trust our future selves. When we're in a moment of selves. When we're in a moment of selves. When we're in a moment of reflection and we can think about who we reflection and we can think about who we reflection and we can think about who we want to be, it's worth setting into want to be, it's worth setting into want to be, it's worth setting into place some walls. place some walls. place some walls. &gt;&gt; So that's about avoiding uh bad &gt;&gt; So that's about avoiding uh bad &gt;&gt; So that's about avoiding uh bad behaviors. Um what about building toward behaviors. Um what about building toward behaviors. Um what about building toward future self where we're trying to future self where we're trying to future self where we're trying to envision a better version of ourselves envision a better version of ourselves envision a better version of ourselves that involves actively doing things. So that involves actively doing things. So that involves actively doing things. So there's always dos and don'ts in order there's always dos and don'ts in order there's always dos and don'ts in order to become our better self. Um, how does to become our better self. Um, how does to become our better self. Um, how does Ulys's contract play in when it's not Ulys's contract play in when it's not Ulys's contract play in when it's not about the sirens? When it's about um about the sirens? When it's about um about the sirens? When it's about um knowing that we want to be knowing that we want to be knowing that we want to be this person or have these attributes or this person or have these attributes or this person or have these attributes or having done something and trying to tie having done something and trying to tie having done something and trying to tie our future self to our present behavior, our future self to our present behavior, our future self to our present behavior, how good are we at that? Um, in general, how good are we at that? Um, in general, how good are we at that? Um, in general, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; better or worse than avoiding bad &gt;&gt; better or worse than avoiding bad &gt;&gt; better or worse than avoiding bad behavior? &gt;&gt; Oh, we're terrible at all this stuff. I &gt;&gt; Oh, we're terrible at all this stuff. I &gt;&gt; Oh, we're terrible at all this stuff. I mean, take New Year's resolutions. I mean, take New Year's resolutions. I mean, take New Year's resolutions. I mean, everybody makes New Year's mean, everybody makes New Year's mean, everybody makes New Year's resolutions. they rarely last a week or resolutions. they rarely last a week or resolutions. they rarely last a week or two before they drop off. People get two before they drop off. People get two before they drop off. People get busy, people get tired or whatever. Um, busy, people get tired or whatever. Um, busy, people get tired or whatever. Um, so it's just as important with the so it's just as important with the so it's just as important with the positive things to hook things to that. positive things to hook things to that. positive things to hook things to that. Um, for example, this idea of putting Um, for example, this idea of putting Um, for example, this idea of putting money on the line. There are various money on the line. There are various money on the line. There are various websites where you can do this. You say, websites where you can do this. You say, websites where you can do this. You say, "Okay, look, I'm going to put, you know, "Okay, look, I'm going to put, you know, "Okay, look, I'm going to put, you know, 50 bucks on the line that I want to be 50 bucks on the line that I want to be 50 bucks on the line that I want to be able to bench 250 by this date or able to bench 250 by this date or able to bench 250 by this date or something like that." Um, and then something like that." Um, and then something like that." Um, and then you've given your money to this company you've given your money to this company you've given your money to this company and you have to get to that point. So, and you have to get to that point. So, and you have to get to that point. So, you get your money back. Um, there are you get your money back. Um, there are you get your money back. Um, there are lots of ways to do this. Um, you know, lots of ways to do this. Um, you know, lots of ways to do this. Um, you know, obviously putting, you know, I think you obviously putting, you know, I think you obviously putting, you know, I think you had James Clear on a little while ago had James Clear on a little while ago had James Clear on a little while ago and there there's all kinds of good and there there's all kinds of good and there there's all kinds of good uh ideas that he's got about, you know, uh ideas that he's got about, you know, uh ideas that he's got about, you know, put your running shoes near the door or put your running shoes near the door or put your running shoes near the door or whatever so that it's easy. You get the whatever so that it's easy. You get the whatever so that it's easy. You get the you get rid of the friction to go do you get rid of the friction to go do you get rid of the friction to go do things like that. But all of those moves things like that. But all of those moves things like that. But all of those moves are for your future self. When you put are for your future self. When you put are for your future self. When you put your shoes near the door before you go your shoes near the door before you go your shoes near the door before you go to sleep that night, you are doing to sleep that night, you are doing to sleep that night, you are doing something because you know your future something because you know your future something because you know your future self's going to be a little bit lazy and self's going to be a little bit lazy and self's going to be a little bit lazy and tired. &gt;&gt; I have friends that are uh I'll just &gt;&gt; I have friends that are uh I'll just &gt;&gt; I have friends that are uh I'll just call them what I would call them to call them what I would call them to call them what I would call them to their face because it's a friendly their face because it's a friendly their face because it's a friendly exchange. Are are kind of neurotic, exchange. Are are kind of neurotic, exchange. Are are kind of neurotic, right? They tend to overthink things. If right? They tend to overthink things. If right? They tend to overthink things. If they're going to go running at 8 a.m. they're going to go running at 8 a.m. they're going to go running at 8 a.m. and it's 8:02, they're like, "I can't go and it's 8:02, they're like, "I can't go and it's 8:02, they're like, "I can't go because it's 8:02, not 8. I'll go at because it's 8:02, not 8. I'll go at because it's 8:02, not 8. I'll go at 9:00. Got to do it on the hour." This 9:00. Got to do it on the hour." This 9:00. Got to do it on the hour." This kind of thing. And then I know people kind of thing. And then I know people kind of thing. And then I know people who are like you just do things and you who are like you just do things and you who are like you just do things and you don't think about it as much and they're don't think about it as much and they're don't think about it as much and they're good at suppressing that voice. Um I good at suppressing that voice. Um I good at suppressing that voice. Um I think we assume that the chatter the think we assume that the chatter the think we assume that the chatter the neurosis doesn't exist for them but the neurosis doesn't exist for them but the neurosis doesn't exist for them but I think um I think it does. They're just I think um I think it does. They're just I think um I think it does. They're just better at saying like ignoring that better at saying like ignoring that better at saying like ignoring that inner voice. Um inner voice. Um inner voice. Um &gt;&gt; we're never trained how to do this. &gt;&gt; we're never trained how to do this. &gt;&gt; we're never trained how to do this. We're never taught as kids here's when We're never taught as kids here's when We're never taught as kids here's when you need to really think and deliberate you need to really think and deliberate you need to really think and deliberate and here's when you just need to just do and here's when you just need to just do and here's when you just need to just do it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's interesting to think &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's interesting to think &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's interesting to think about, okay, different career paths, about, okay, different career paths, about, okay, different career paths, different life requirements, and so different life requirements, and so different life requirements, and so forth. But, um, I feel like people fall forth. But, um, I feel like people fall forth. But, um, I feel like people fall into kind of two camps with this. Some into kind of two camps with this. Some into kind of two camps with this. Some people need to think and analyze less people need to think and analyze less people need to think and analyze less and do more. And some people actually and do more. And some people actually and do more. And some people actually need to, you know, probably still do, need to, you know, probably still do, need to, you know, probably still do, but maybe think a little bit more about but maybe think a little bit more about but maybe think a little bit more about their behavior and reflect a bit more. their behavior and reflect a bit more. their behavior and reflect a bit more. And they would probably both say, "I'm And they would probably both say, "I'm And they would probably both say, "I'm crazy about this." Um, I won't tell you crazy about this." Um, I won't tell you crazy about this." Um, I won't tell you where I land. I think I'm kind of in the where I land. I think I'm kind of in the where I land. I think I'm kind of in the middle. No, I'm just kidding. Um, middle. No, I'm just kidding. Um, middle. No, I'm just kidding. Um, [laughter] it depends on what's at [laughter] it depends on what's at [laughter] it depends on what's at hand. Yeah. hand. Yeah. hand. Yeah. &gt;&gt; for most people I think. Um &gt;&gt; for most people I think. Um &gt;&gt; for most people I think. Um &gt;&gt; what do you think that's about the &gt;&gt; what do you think that's about the &gt;&gt; what do you think that's about the ability to suppress the various versions ability to suppress the various versions ability to suppress the various versions of oneself or not? of oneself or not? of oneself or not? &gt;&gt; The inner voice. &gt;&gt; The inner voice. &gt;&gt; The inner voice. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, I would say one of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, I would say one of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, I would say one of the most fascinating things we've discovered most fascinating things we've discovered most fascinating things we've discovered in neuroscience to for my money is in neuroscience to for my money is in neuroscience to for my money is just this issue that along anything we just this issue that along anything we just this issue that along anything we measure there's a spectrum. So just take measure there's a spectrum. So just take measure there's a spectrum. So just take something like the internal voice. Uh something like the internal voice. Uh something like the internal voice. Uh for my wife for example, she describes for my wife for example, she describes for my wife for example, she describes it as her inner radio. She's always it as her inner radio. She's always it as her inner radio. She's always hearing her inner voice. I don't hearing her inner voice. I don't hearing her inner voice. I don't really have one. I just never hear that. really have one. I just never hear that. really have one. I just never hear that. So, we're on opposite ends of the So, we're on opposite ends of the So, we're on opposite ends of the spectrum that way. But, you know, one of spectrum that way. But, you know, one of spectrum that way. But, you know, one of the things I've studied is um aphantasia the things I've studied is um aphantasia the things I've studied is um aphantasia all the way to hyperfantasia. That means all the way to hyperfantasia. That means all the way to hyperfantasia. That means when you know, if I ask you to visualize when you know, if I ask you to visualize when you know, if I ask you to visualize an ant crawling on a tablecloth towards an ant crawling on a tablecloth towards an ant crawling on a tablecloth towards a jar of purple jelly, some people see a jar of purple jelly, some people see a jar of purple jelly, some people see it like a movie in their head. That's it like a movie in their head. That's it like a movie in their head. That's called hyperfantasia. Some people have called hyperfantasia. Some people have called hyperfantasia. Some people have no picture at all in their head. That's no picture at all in their head. That's no picture at all in their head. That's called aphantasia. And everywhere is called aphantasia. And everywhere is called aphantasia. And everywhere is everyone is somewhere in between on the everyone is somewhere in between on the everyone is somewhere in between on the spectrum. &gt;&gt; What does the middle look like? So, if I &gt;&gt; What does the middle look like? So, if I &gt;&gt; What does the middle look like? So, if I do that, if I maybe everyone can do this do that, if I maybe everyone can do this do that, if I maybe everyone can do this right now. It's a fun experiment. If right now. It's a fun experiment. If right now. It's a fun experiment. If you're driving, don't close your eyes. you're driving, don't close your eyes. you're driving, don't close your eyes. Um [laughter] Um [laughter] Um [laughter] &gt;&gt; uh &gt;&gt; uh &gt;&gt; uh &gt;&gt; picture sun coming over the mountain and &gt;&gt; picture sun coming over the mountain and &gt;&gt; picture sun coming over the mountain and the rays of the sun poking through the rays of the sun poking through the rays of the sun poking through the clouds &gt;&gt; and then it starts raining and rains &gt;&gt; and then it starts raining and rains &gt;&gt; and then it starts raining and rains coming down. coming down. coming down. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; So, the question is, do you see it as &gt;&gt; So, the question is, do you see it as &gt;&gt; So, the question is, do you see it as clearly as a movie or do you have really clearly as a movie or do you have really clearly as a movie or do you have really no visual anything in your head or are no visual anything in your head or are no visual anything in your head or are you somewhere in between? Typically, you somewhere in between? Typically, you somewhere in between? Typically, this is judged on a scale from one to this is judged on a scale from one to this is judged on a scale from one to five where five is a movie, one is no five where five is a movie, one is no five where five is a movie, one is no visual at all and, you know, three is in visual at all and, you know, three is in visual at all and, you know, three is in between. Where where do you stand on between. Where where do you stand on between. Where where do you stand on that? &gt;&gt; I feel like I can see it quote unquote &gt;&gt; I feel like I can see it quote unquote &gt;&gt; I feel like I can see it quote unquote um in my mind's eye, but um it's almost um in my mind's eye, but um it's almost um in my mind's eye, but um it's almost like I'm looking at a silhouette of it. like I'm looking at a silhouette of it. like I'm looking at a silhouette of it. So, even though I want to see bright, So, even though I want to see bright, So, even though I want to see bright, you know, rays of sun, sunshine, one of you know, rays of sun, sunshine, one of you know, rays of sun, sunshine, one of my favorite things in life. I know my favorite things in life. I know my favorite things in life. I know they're there, but they're actually pale they're there, but they're actually pale they're there, but they're actually pale yellow, it's almost as if it's more pale yellow, it's almost as if it's more pale yellow, it's almost as if it's more opaque than it would be in real life. opaque than it would be in real life. opaque than it would be in real life. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You're saying people with it with &gt;&gt; Yeah. You're saying people with it with &gt;&gt; Yeah. You're saying people with it with hyper hyperfantasia see it as a same way hyper hyperfantasia see it as a same way hyper hyperfantasia see it as a same way I would on a on my phone I would on a on my phone I would on a on my phone &gt;&gt; essentially. Yes. They're seeing it like &gt;&gt; essentially. Yes. They're seeing it like &gt;&gt; essentially. Yes. They're seeing it like vision. Now I happen to be like vision. Now I happen to be like vision. Now I happen to be aphantasia. So it's very hard. You know aphantasia. So it's very hard. You know aphantasia. So it's very hard. You know I've studied this for years. I've studied this for years. I've studied this for years. I've interviewed hundreds of people on this interviewed hundreds of people on this interviewed hundreds of people on this and so I get their description but I and so I get their description but I and so I get their description but I can't I can't picture that myself. By can't I can't picture that myself. By can't I can't picture that myself. By the way it's an interesting quick the way it's an interesting quick the way it's an interesting quick tangent. Um for years I've talked with tangent. Um for years I've talked with tangent. Um for years I've talked with Ed Catmol about this. Ed Catmull is the Ed Catmol about this. Ed Catmull is the Ed Catmol about this. Ed Catmull is the guy who started Pixar. Pixar with all guy who started Pixar. Pixar with all guy who started Pixar. Pixar with all these terrific animated films and so on. these terrific animated films and so on. these terrific animated films and so on. Um Ed has all these patents on like how Um Ed has all these patents on like how Um Ed has all these patents on like how to do ray tracing to get the you know to do ray tracing to get the you know to do ray tracing to get the you know to get these animated characters looking as get these animated characters looking as get these animated characters looking as amazing as they do. He was surprised amazing as they do. He was surprised amazing as they do. He was surprised when he discovered that he was when he discovered that he was when he discovered that he was afantasic. He doesn't picture anything afantasic. He doesn't picture anything afantasic. He doesn't picture anything in his head. So he ended up giving this in his head. So he ended up giving this in his head. So he ended up giving this questionnaire to everybody at Pixar. And questionnaire to everybody at Pixar. And questionnaire to everybody at Pixar. And it turns out most of his best directors it turns out most of his best directors it turns out most of his best directors and animators are aphantasic. They don't and animators are aphantasic. They don't and animators are aphantasic. They don't see anything in their head. And nobody I see anything in their head. And nobody I see anything in their head. And nobody I think would have predicted that because think would have predicted that because think would have predicted that because it seems so strange this visual, it seems so strange this visual, it seems so strange this visual, you know, magisterium of Pixar. But I you know, magisterium of Pixar. But I you know, magisterium of Pixar. But I have a hypothesis about why this is. I have a hypothesis about why this is. I have a hypothesis about why this is. It's because the kid who grows up who's It's because the kid who grows up who's It's because the kid who grows up who's aphantasic, when they're asked, "Okay, draw a when they're asked, "Okay, draw a when they're asked, "Okay, draw a horse." You know, the kid sitting next horse." You know, the kid sitting next horse." You know, the kid sitting next to them who's hyper fantasic says, "Oh, to them who's hyper fantasic says, "Oh, to them who's hyper fantasic says, "Oh, I know what a horse looks like." And I know what a horse looks like." And I know what a horse looks like." And just draws it. But the poor aphantasia just draws it. But the poor aphantasia just draws it. But the poor aphantasia kid has to really stare and figure out kid has to really stare and figure out kid has to really stare and figure out like that, okay, how does that work? And like that, okay, how does that work? And like that, okay, how does that work? And so on and they get better at drawing so on and they get better at drawing so on and they get better at drawing as a result. That's why all his best as a result. That's why all his best as a result. That's why all his best animators and drawers are people who animators and drawers are people who animators and drawers are people who grew up a fantasic. grew up a fantasic. grew up a fantasic. &gt;&gt; Interesting. I'm just uh thinking about &gt;&gt; Interesting. I'm just uh thinking about &gt;&gt; Interesting. I'm just uh thinking about that movie. Have you seen that movie Bow that movie. Have you seen that movie Bow that movie. Have you seen that movie Bow Finger? &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; With with Steve Martin and uh Eddie &gt;&gt; With with Steve Martin and uh Eddie &gt;&gt; With with Steve Martin and uh Eddie Murphy, which is Bowfinger is the you Murphy, which is Bowfinger is the you Murphy, which is Bowfinger is the you know, for those just listening, it's know, for those just listening, it's know, for those just listening, it's where you put kind of make two uh you where you put kind of make two uh you where you put kind of make two uh you know L an L and a sort of reverse L. know L an L and a sort of reverse L. know L an L and a sort of reverse L. And it's like how you know it's about And it's like how you know it's about And it's like how you know it's about making a movie in LA and uh it's making a movie in LA and uh it's making a movie in LA and uh it's hilarious. It's it's spectacularly hilarious. It's it's spectacularly hilarious. It's it's spectacularly funny. It's got those two folks I just funny. It's got those two folks I just funny. It's got those two folks I just mentioned, Heather Graham, a bunch of mentioned, Heather Graham, a bunch of mentioned, Heather Graham, a bunch of other people, but he's constantly other people, but he's constantly other people, but he's constantly going around and kind of envisioning, going around and kind of envisioning, going around and kind of envisioning, you know, that this is the movie. This you know, that this is the movie. This you know, that this is the movie. This is the movie. Exactly. And so I always is the movie. Exactly. And so I always is the movie. Exactly. And so I always thought people that make movies are thought people that make movies are thought people that make movies are going through life thinking, okay, like going through life thinking, okay, like going through life thinking, okay, like there's the shot and there's the shot. there's the shot and there's the shot. there's the shot and there's the shot. But I think what you're saying is that But I think what you're saying is that But I think what you're saying is that there's somewhere in between where there's somewhere in between where there's somewhere in between where people have this kind of fantasy life of people have this kind of fantasy life of people have this kind of fantasy life of like, okay, here's this um here's the like, okay, here's this um here's the like, okay, here's this um here's the script and then um they can't really script and then um they can't really script and then um they can't really imagine it and so they have to put more imagine it and so they have to put more imagine it and so they have to put more work into uh materializing it. work into uh materializing it. work into uh materializing it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. Well, they have a dialogue with &gt;&gt; Okay. Well, they have a dialogue with &gt;&gt; Okay. Well, they have a dialogue with the page. So, if you're a guy drawing the page. So, if you're a guy drawing the page. So, if you're a guy drawing and you know you're looking at the horse and you know you're looking at the horse and you know you're looking at the horse or you're picturing what you know, Ariel or you're picturing what you know, Ariel or you're picturing what you know, Ariel the mermaid looks like or whatever, the mermaid looks like or whatever, the mermaid looks like or whatever, you're trying lines and you're trying lines and you're trying lines and scratching and doing things, you don't scratching and doing things, you don't scratching and doing things, you don't come to the table always saying, "Oh, I come to the table always saying, "Oh, I come to the table always saying, "Oh, I know what a mermaid looks like." And you know what a mermaid looks like." And you know what a mermaid looks like." And you draw it. Um, so they just end up getting draw it. Um, so they just end up getting draw it. Um, so they just end up getting more practice and they get better at it. more practice and they get better at it. more practice and they get better at it. &gt;&gt; I love this stuff because what we're &gt;&gt; I love this stuff because what we're &gt;&gt; I love this stuff because what we're really getting at here is um, you know, really getting at here is um, you know, really getting at here is um, you know, I think as you mentioned, everyone has I think as you mentioned, everyone has I think as you mentioned, everyone has kind of individualized hardware and kind of individualized hardware and kind of individualized hardware and software, but there are some software, but there are some software, but there are some commonalities. And you know, wouldn't it commonalities. And you know, wouldn't it commonalities. And you know, wouldn't it be spectacular if we knew, you know, be spectacular if we knew, you know, be spectacular if we knew, you know, which you know, just like we learned, which you know, just like we learned, which you know, just like we learned, okay, here are the macronutrients and okay, here are the macronutrients and okay, here are the macronutrients and you perhaps want them in different you perhaps want them in different you perhaps want them in different proportions depending on who you are and proportions depending on who you are and proportions depending on who you are and what you need and, you know, and uh you what you need and, you know, and uh you what you need and, you know, and uh you need to, as a kid, you should probably need to, as a kid, you should probably need to, as a kid, you should probably learn how to like climb and run and, you learn how to like climb and run and, you learn how to like climb and run and, you know, and assuming you have access to know, and assuming you have access to know, and assuming you have access to all of that, you know, and um and jump a all of that, you know, and um and jump a all of that, you know, and um and jump a little bit, but you know, maybe you little bit, but you know, maybe you little bit, but you know, maybe you won't be an athlete, but you need to won't be an athlete, but you need to won't be an athlete, but you need to like be active at some point and then like be active at some point and then like be active at some point and then you be and we tend to figure out what you be and we tend to figure out what you be and we tend to figure out what we're good at and then really lean into we're good at and then really lean into we're good at and then really lean into those trenches and then by then we're those trenches and then by then we're those trenches and then by then we're getting evaluated for it and the way getting evaluated for it and the way getting evaluated for it and the way we're evaluated puts us on a career we're evaluated puts us on a career we're evaluated puts us on a career track and there's very little track and there's very little track and there's very little opportunity to go back and kind of fill opportunity to go back and kind of fill opportunity to go back and kind of fill in blanks. Um, right there's, you know, in blanks. Um, right there's, you know, in blanks. Um, right there's, you know, I I'm never going to be a musician in I I'm never going to be a musician in I I'm never going to be a musician in part because I'm just not willing to put part because I'm just not willing to put part because I'm just not willing to put in the work because there are other in the work because there are other in the work because there are other things I'd rather do with my plasticity. things I'd rather do with my plasticity. things I'd rather do with my plasticity. Right? So, um, and maybe that's best. Right? So, um, and maybe that's best. Right? So, um, and maybe that's best. So, big picture question. Um do you So, big picture question. Um do you So, big picture question. Um do you think that think that think that human evolution and the progress of human evolution and the progress of human evolution and the progress of building technologies building technologies building technologies um reflects the fact that people get um reflects the fact that people get um reflects the fact that people get siloed into um different tracks and on siloed into um different tracks and on siloed into um different tracks and on the whole that's advancing our species the whole that's advancing our species the whole that's advancing our species right you've got people that are hunter right you've got people that are hunter right you've got people that are hunter gatherers still very good at that and gatherers still very good at that and gatherers still very good at that and building and other people building and other people building and other people building weaponry and other people building AI weaponry and other people building AI weaponry and other people building AI technologies and that it would be technologies and that it would be technologies and that it would be uh detrimental to our species if uh detrimental to our species if uh detrimental to our species if everybody got sort of core everybody got sort of core everybody got sort of core neuroplasticity training, learning how neuroplasticity training, learning how neuroplasticity training, learning how to do a little bit of everything, right? to do a little bit of everything, right? to do a little bit of everything, right? Um, or is that the what we see as Um, or is that the what we see as Um, or is that the what we see as chance actually part of the reasons why chance actually part of the reasons why chance actually part of the reasons why humans are the curators of the earth? humans are the curators of the earth? humans are the curators of the earth? Not just the prefrontal cortex, not just Not just the prefrontal cortex, not just Not just the prefrontal cortex, not just the extended window of plasticity, but the extended window of plasticity, but the extended window of plasticity, but how we are afforded different how we are afforded different how we are afforded different opportunities to work with that opportunities to work with that opportunities to work with that plasticity. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'd say a couple things. One is &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'd say a couple things. One is &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'd say a couple things. One is we're clearly predisposed to particular we're clearly predisposed to particular we're clearly predisposed to particular things. And so, for example, I'd like to things. And so, for example, I'd like to things. And so, for example, I'd like to be a swimmer as good as Michael Phelps, be a swimmer as good as Michael Phelps, be a swimmer as good as Michael Phelps, but I just don't have the wingspan that but I just don't have the wingspan that but I just don't have the wingspan that he does. is he's got like I don't know he does. is he's got like I don't know he does. is he's got like I don't know seven feet between his fingertips or seven feet between his fingertips or seven feet between his fingertips or something. Gez, there's no way I'm going something. Gez, there's no way I'm going something. Gez, there's no way I'm going to be able to be as good as he is. Um to be able to be as good as he is. Um to be able to be as good as he is. Um that's a genetic thing that he drops in that's a genetic thing that he drops in that's a genetic thing that he drops in the world with that I don't fine. Um so the world with that I don't fine. Um so the world with that I don't fine. Um so given that people are off on different given that people are off on different given that people are off on different trajectories anyway, the way I think trajectories anyway, the way I think trajectories anyway, the way I think about this, I don't know how this will about this, I don't know how this will about this, I don't know how this will translate just in terms of audio, but translate just in terms of audio, but translate just in terms of audio, but like a space-time cone in physics is like a space-time cone in physics is like a space-time cone in physics is where you start in one spot and then where you start in one spot and then where you start in one spot and then there are all these different there are all these different there are all these different trajectories you can take into the trajectories you can take into the trajectories you can take into the future. Picture this like you're future. Picture this like you're future. Picture this like you're starting at the bottom of the ice cream starting at the bottom of the ice cream starting at the bottom of the ice cream cone and you can you can take any cone and you can you can take any cone and you can you can take any different trajectory as long as it still different trajectory as long as it still different trajectory as long as it still exists within the ice cream cone. Okay. exists within the ice cream cone. Okay. exists within the ice cream cone. Okay. So, um you know, we drop into the world So, um you know, we drop into the world So, um you know, we drop into the world with our genetic skills and with our genetic skills and with our genetic skills and predispositions. We have childhoods that predispositions. We have childhoods that predispositions. We have childhoods that we don't choose. We're born into a we don't choose. We're born into a we don't choose. We're born into a cultural language and era that we don't cultural language and era that we don't cultural language and era that we don't choose. And that defines the limits of choose. And that defines the limits of choose. And that defines the limits of the ice cream cone about where we can go the ice cream cone about where we can go the ice cream cone about where we can go with that. As far as specialization with that. As far as specialization with that. As far as specialization goes, you know, economists will argue goes, you know, economists will argue goes, you know, economists will argue this is part of what makes a very this is part of what makes a very this is part of what makes a very healthy society is that, you know, some healthy society is that, you know, some healthy society is that, you know, some people become the lumberjacks and some people become the lumberjacks and some people become the lumberjacks and some the lawyers and some the accountants and the lawyers and some the accountants and the lawyers and some the accountants and whatever. Um, you know, I do feel like whatever. Um, you know, I do feel like whatever. Um, you know, I do feel like we're in a really great era though in we're in a really great era though in we're in a really great era though in general in humankind where kids do get general in humankind where kids do get general in humankind where kids do get very broad educations and they're sort very broad educations and they're sort very broad educations and they're sort of encouraged to try everything and of encouraged to try everything and of encouraged to try everything and spend a few years in karate and in spend a few years in karate and in spend a few years in karate and in soccer and in piano lessons and so on. soccer and in piano lessons and so on. soccer and in piano lessons and so on. That's wonderful. So the my father was a That's wonderful. So the my father was a That's wonderful. So the my father was a psychiatrist and he always said really psychiatrist and he always said really psychiatrist and he always said really the whole job of a parent is just to the whole job of a parent is just to the whole job of a parent is just to open doors for the child. That's it. So open doors for the child. That's it. So open doors for the child. That's it. So you give the child all these lessons, you give the child all these lessons, you give the child all these lessons, you open all these doors and then the you open all these doors and then the you open all these doors and then the kid takes their own path depending on kid takes their own path depending on kid takes their own path depending on you know this extraordinarily you know this extraordinarily you know this extraordinarily complicated formula of things that we'll complicated formula of things that we'll complicated formula of things that we'll never understand but they go through one never understand but they go through one never understand but they go through one door and not the others. Kirkagard said door and not the others. Kirkagard said door and not the others. Kirkagard said every man starts as a thousand men and every man starts as a thousand men and every man starts as a thousand men and dies as one. And what he meant, of dies as one. And what he meant, of dies as one. And what he meant, of course, was that you start with all this course, was that you start with all this course, was that you start with all this potential. You could do all you could potential. You could do all you could potential. You could do all you could have been a great saxoponist or have been a great saxoponist or have been a great saxoponist or whatever, but you're going to die having whatever, but you're going to die having whatever, but you're going to die having done exactly what you did and not done exactly what you did and not done exactly what you did and not the other path. So, what's weird about the other path. So, what's weird about the other path. So, what's weird about life is that yeah, every door that you life is that yeah, every door that you life is that yeah, every door that you choose, some others close as a result. choose, some others close as a result. choose, some others close as a result. &gt;&gt; Kirkard uh seemingly understood that the &gt;&gt; Kirkard uh seemingly understood that the &gt;&gt; Kirkard uh seemingly understood that the nervous system starts out hyperwired and nervous system starts out hyperwired and nervous system starts out hyperwired and then a lot of learning is the pruning then a lot of learning is the pruning then a lot of learning is the pruning back of connections and strengthening of back of connections and strengthening of back of connections and strengthening of the remaining ones. the remaining ones. the remaining ones. &gt;&gt; That's exactly right. Exactly right. You &gt;&gt; That's exactly right. Exactly right. You &gt;&gt; That's exactly right. Exactly right. You know, so as you of course know, the know, so as you of course know, the know, so as you of course know, the brain starts out, you got essentially a brain starts out, you got essentially a brain starts out, you got essentially a fixed number of neurons. There's some fixed number of neurons. There's some fixed number of neurons. There's some debate about whether there's a few new debate about whether there's a few new debate about whether there's a few new neurons born in humans or not. Put that neurons born in humans or not. Put that neurons born in humans or not. Put that aside. What happens is over the first aside. What happens is over the first aside. What happens is over the first two years, those neurons connect more two years, those neurons connect more two years, those neurons connect more and more and more and more. And what you and more and more and more. And what you and more and more and more. And what you end up getting is this hyperconnection end up getting is this hyperconnection end up getting is this hyperconnection by the time you're two years old. And by the time you're two years old. And by the time you're two years old. And from there, it's just a matter of from there, it's just a matter of from there, it's just a matter of pruning an overgrown garden. And that's pruning an overgrown garden. And that's pruning an overgrown garden. And that's all that's happening. And and the way all that's happening. And and the way all that's happening. And and the way the pruning happens is based on what the pruning happens is based on what the pruning happens is based on what you're experiencing in the world. the you're experiencing in the world. the you're experiencing in the world. the world is what prunes your garden and world is what prunes your garden and world is what prunes your garden and strengthens particular paths and lets strengthens particular paths and lets strengthens particular paths and lets other paths go other paths go other paths go &gt;&gt; as a bridge perhaps between plasticity &gt;&gt; as a bridge perhaps between plasticity &gt;&gt; as a bridge perhaps between plasticity and time perception which we've been and time perception which we've been and time perception which we've been sort of doing already. Uh I have this um sort of doing already. Uh I have this um sort of doing already. Uh I have this um practice that I've been doing for a few practice that I've been doing for a few practice that I've been doing for a few years um in hopes that it's beneficial years um in hopes that it's beneficial years um in hopes that it's beneficial for something and I just like your for something and I just like your for something and I just like your thoughts on it. Um I'm not looking for thoughts on it. Um I'm not looking for thoughts on it. Um I'm not looking for approval here uh truly but here's the approval here uh truly but here's the approval here uh truly but here's the idea. I was struck by the somewhat idea. I was struck by the somewhat idea. I was struck by the somewhat obvious thing that, you know, we can obvious thing that, you know, we can obvious thing that, you know, we can close our eyes, uh, focus on our close our eyes, uh, focus on our close our eyes, uh, focus on our interosception, our skin, our breathing. interosception, our skin, our breathing. interosception, our skin, our breathing. We can meditate, bring our awareness, We can meditate, bring our awareness, We can meditate, bring our awareness, you know, into the quoteunquote present. you know, into the quoteunquote present. you know, into the quoteunquote present. The breathing is seems like a good way The breathing is seems like a good way The breathing is seems like a good way to do that. Um, or we can open our eyes to do that. Um, or we can open our eyes to do that. Um, or we can open our eyes and we can focus on something some and we can focus on something some and we can focus on something some distance away. Or we can imagine the distance away. Or we can imagine the distance away. Or we can imagine the pale blue dot and we're just this little pale blue dot and we're just this little pale blue dot and we're just this little thing running around on this pale blue thing running around on this pale blue thing running around on this pale blue dot. And you know when we move through dot. And you know when we move through dot. And you know when we move through those different uh realms of space, not those different uh realms of space, not those different uh realms of space, not just outer space, but from body to out just outer space, but from body to out just outer space, but from body to out of outside our body to outer space, of outside our body to outer space, of outside our body to outer space, there's a different time association there's a different time association there's a different time association with each of those. And I' I'd like your with each of those. And I' I'd like your with each of those. And I' I'd like your thoughts on that. And I just started thoughts on that. And I just started thoughts on that. And I just started devoting a little bit of time to devoting a little bit of time to devoting a little bit of time to stepping from one of these to another stepping from one of these to another stepping from one of these to another and just spending some time trying to uh and just spending some time trying to uh and just spending some time trying to uh think and exist in the different time think and exist in the different time think and exist in the different time domains um in my head. And so I'll do domains um in my head. And so I'll do domains um in my head. And so I'll do that maybe for 2, three minutes or four that maybe for 2, three minutes or four that maybe for 2, three minutes or four minutes or five minutes. And I told minutes or five minutes. And I told minutes or five minutes. And I told myself, and I still tell myself, that it myself, and I still tell myself, that it myself, and I still tell myself, that it affords me some flexibility when affords me some flexibility when affords me some flexibility when something's happening in the moment and something's happening in the moment and something's happening in the moment and you want to get perspective. It's about you want to get perspective. It's about you want to get perspective. It's about getting out of that time domain and getting out of that time domain and getting out of that time domain and realizing this isn't going to go on realizing this isn't going to go on realizing this isn't going to go on forever even though it feels like it. forever even though it feels like it. forever even though it feels like it. So, I developed this as a bit of a So, I developed this as a bit of a So, I developed this as a bit of a practice for myself. practice for myself. practice for myself. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; because I felt like it's just a it's &gt;&gt; because I felt like it's just a it's &gt;&gt; because I felt like it's just a it's not a meditation. It's a perceptual not a meditation. It's a perceptual not a meditation. It's a perceptual exercise. Um, so what I'm curious about exercise. Um, so what I'm curious about exercise. Um, so what I'm curious about is the relationship between time is the relationship between time is the relationship between time perception and where we place our perception and where we place our perception and where we place our attention. That's the first question. attention. That's the first question. attention. That's the first question. And then you know maybe what we can do And then you know maybe what we can do And then you know maybe what we can do with this or could we evolve this uh with this or could we evolve this uh with this or could we evolve this uh perceptual exercise so that um I and perceptual exercise so that um I and perceptual exercise so that um I and others perhaps if they want to can start others perhaps if they want to can start others perhaps if they want to can start to access different um space-time to access different um space-time to access different um space-time representations which sounds so fancy representations which sounds so fancy representations which sounds so fancy but it's really just a way of like but it's really just a way of like but it's really just a way of like getting outside yourself or getting outside yourself or getting outside yourself or getting within yourself. Sorry if I'm being um within yourself. Sorry if I'm being um within yourself. Sorry if I'm being um choppy here but this is something choppy here but this is something choppy here but this is something that feels very important. that feels very important. that feels very important. &gt;&gt; I love that. I think that's brilliant. &gt;&gt; I love that. I think that's brilliant. &gt;&gt; I love that. I think that's brilliant. Um, one of the things that is so Um, one of the things that is so Um, one of the things that is so striking about time perception is that striking about time perception is that striking about time perception is that you don't have a single part of the you don't have a single part of the you don't have a single part of the brain that deals with that. You actually brain that deals with that. You actually brain that deals with that. You actually have different mechanisms that deal with have different mechanisms that deal with have different mechanisms that deal with thinking about long eras of time and thinking about long eras of time and thinking about long eras of time and seconds and subseconds. Um, totally seconds and subseconds. Um, totally seconds and subseconds. Um, totally different mechanisms going on here. Uh, different mechanisms going on here. Uh, different mechanisms going on here. Uh, and we can demonstrate this in the and we can demonstrate this in the and we can demonstrate this in the laboratory. So, time perception is laboratory. So, time perception is laboratory. So, time perception is something I've been studying since something I've been studying since something I've been studying since graduate school. And um you know I'm graduate school. And um you know I'm graduate school. And um you know I'm happy to say I've got papers in science happy to say I've got papers in science happy to say I've got papers in science and nature and you know the top journals and nature and you know the top journals and nature and you know the top journals on this topic. Why? Because it's such a on this topic. Why? Because it's such a on this topic. Why? Because it's such a weird thing that's so understudied about weird thing that's so understudied about weird thing that's so understudied about how why we perceive time the way we how why we perceive time the way we how why we perceive time the way we do. So um let me say a few things about do. So um let me say a few things about do. So um let me say a few things about it. One is that it is a these longer it. One is that it is a these longer it. One is that it is a these longer time scales what you're referring to time scales what you're referring to time scales what you're referring to thinking about being uh far away in thinking about being uh far away in thinking about being uh far away in space and time. This is a cognitive space and time. This is a cognitive space and time. This is a cognitive development. children can't do this well development. children can't do this well development. children can't do this well and they learn better and better. So, and they learn better and better. So, and they learn better and better. So, for example, if you talk to a seventh for example, if you talk to a seventh for example, if you talk to a seventh grader and you talk about the Roman grader and you talk about the Roman grader and you talk about the Roman Empire and what was happening 2,200 Empire and what was happening 2,200 Empire and what was happening 2,200 years ago, it's re it doesn't mean years ago, it's re it doesn't mean years ago, it's re it doesn't mean anything to, you know, it's like, okay, anything to, you know, it's like, okay, anything to, you know, it's like, okay, so that's the past and whatever. But as so that's the past and whatever. But as so that's the past and whatever. But as you get older, if you become, let's say, you get older, if you become, let's say, you get older, if you become, let's say, a professional historian, you get better a professional historian, you get better a professional historian, you get better and better at understanding that. Why? and better at understanding that. Why? and better at understanding that. Why? because you've lived decades and so now because you've lived decades and so now because you've lived decades and so now you can sort of think you can sort of you can sort of think you can sort of you can sort of think you can sort of feel what a century might look like and feel what a century might look like and feel what a century might look like and you can sort of with practice get better you can sort of with practice get better you can sort of with practice get better at these things. But the point is at these things. But the point is at these things. But the point is that is something we learn how to do that is something we learn how to do that is something we learn how to do both in space and time. Obviously when both in space and time. Obviously when both in space and time. Obviously when you're an infant in the crib, space is you're an infant in the crib, space is you're an infant in the crib, space is just a really close thing and eventually just a really close thing and eventually just a really close thing and eventually &gt;&gt; it's your whole world. &gt;&gt; it's your whole world. &gt;&gt; it's your whole world. &gt;&gt; It's your whole world and eventually you &gt;&gt; It's your whole world and eventually you &gt;&gt; It's your whole world and eventually you get outside and you look down long get outside and you look down long get outside and you look down long highways in Utah and you really highways in Utah and you really highways in Utah and you really start getting a better sense of this. start getting a better sense of this. start getting a better sense of this. Um, I to my knowledge there's no data on I to my knowledge there's no data on I to my knowledge there's no data on what it would be to sort of throw on what it would be to sort of throw on what it would be to sort of throw yourself back and forth between these yourself back and forth between these yourself back and forth between these different space-time uh scales. I love different space-time uh scales. I love different space-time uh scales. I love it though. One of the classes I teach at it though. One of the classes I teach at it though. One of the classes I teach at Stanford is called the brain and Stanford is called the brain and Stanford is called the brain and literature. Uh, I've always been a lover literature. Uh, I've always been a lover literature. Uh, I've always been a lover of literature and one of the things that of literature and one of the things that of literature and one of the things that I love is when authors do exactly this I love is when authors do exactly this I love is when authors do exactly this where they zoom in on something where they zoom in on something where they zoom in on something really tight and they're really paying really tight and they're really paying really tight and they're really paying attention and then they zoom way out. attention and then they zoom way out. attention and then they zoom way out. That is the most extraordinary sort of That is the most extraordinary sort of That is the most extraordinary sort of feeling. Um, so anyway, I commend you on feeling. Um, so anyway, I commend you on feeling. Um, so anyway, I commend you on coming up with that version of coming up with that version of coming up with that version of space-time meditation or whatever it is. space-time meditation or whatever it is. space-time meditation or whatever it is. That's very smart. Yeah, it was um it That's very smart. Yeah, it was um it That's very smart. Yeah, it was um it was born out of this thing, you know, was born out of this thing, you know, was born out of this thing, you know, the Victor Frankle thing like the Victor Frankle thing like the Victor Frankle thing like between stimulus and response, you know, between stimulus and response, you know, between stimulus and response, you know, and but there's something about the and but there's something about the and but there's something about the autonomic nervous system like when we're autonomic nervous system like when we're autonomic nervous system like when we're in a heightened state of stress. Um in a heightened state of stress. Um in a heightened state of stress. Um we're not good at getting outside of the we're not good at getting outside of the we're not good at getting outside of the moment, you know, people like take 10 moment, you know, people like take 10 moment, you know, people like take 10 breaths or whatever and it wasn't that I breaths or whatever and it wasn't that I breaths or whatever and it wasn't that I was having struggles with that. I just was having struggles with that. I just was having struggles with that. I just thought so interesting like you watch a thought so interesting like you watch a thought so interesting like you watch a movie and it seems to be placed in a movie and it seems to be placed in a movie and it seems to be placed in a different time domain in each scene or different time domain in each scene or different time domain in each scene or um and you know then you go for a walk um and you know then you go for a walk um and you know then you go for a walk or a hike and I have this obsession or a hike and I have this obsession or a hike and I have this obsession with the idea that when we see horizons with the idea that when we see horizons with the idea that when we see horizons we have a different time perception than we have a different time perception than we have a different time perception than when we uh can't see horizons um and when we uh can't see horizons um and when we uh can't see horizons um and there's too many variables to do this there's too many variables to do this there's too many variables to do this right you could do it in VR in a VR right you could do it in VR in a VR right you could do it in VR in a VR experiment but um because when there are experiment but um because when there are experiment but um because when there are close walls you have claustrophobia but close walls you have claustrophobia but close walls you have claustrophobia but there ways to do this correctly there ways to do this correctly there ways to do this correctly how you change your vision or how you change your vision or how you change your vision or visualization changes your time visualization changes your time visualization changes your time perception. So, I don't know. I just perception. So, I don't know. I just perception. So, I don't know. I just look at it as a flexibility exercise. look at it as a flexibility exercise. look at it as a flexibility exercise. And um and I'm a scientist and a weirdo, And um and I'm a scientist and a weirdo, And um and I'm a scientist and a weirdo, so I do these things. Um but uh so I do these things. Um but uh so I do these things. Um but uh you're the expert in time perception. you're the expert in time perception. you're the expert in time perception. So, I wanted to ask um and I also want So, I wanted to ask um and I also want So, I wanted to ask um and I also want to ask about time perception. Um how to ask about time perception. Um how to ask about time perception. Um how good are people at perceiving time? And good are people at perceiving time? And good are people at perceiving time? And um why am I always late? [laughter] um why am I always late? [laughter] um why am I always late? [laughter] &gt;&gt; The why are you always late? That has to &gt;&gt; The why are you always late? That has to &gt;&gt; The why are you always late? That has to do with Ulys's contract thing, which is do with Ulys's contract thing, which is do with Ulys's contract thing, which is just it requires a commitment to say, just it requires a commitment to say, just it requires a commitment to say, I'm going to be the kind of guy who's I'm going to be the kind of guy who's I'm going to be the kind of guy who's always on time. And the way to do that always on time. And the way to do that always on time. And the way to do that is to say, I'm going to commit to always is to say, I'm going to commit to always is to say, I'm going to commit to always being five minutes early. So, you get to being five minutes early. So, you get to being five minutes early. So, you get to a place early and you just hang out in a place early and you just hang out in a place early and you just hang out in your car and you, you know, take care of your car and you, you know, take care of your car and you, you know, take care of some texts or whatever. That's the way some texts or whatever. That's the way some texts or whatever. That's the way to be always on time. Okay. But are to be always on time. Okay. But are to be always on time. Okay. But are people good at perceiving time? No. people good at perceiving time? No. people good at perceiving time? No. We're actually quite terrible at it. Um, We're actually quite terrible at it. Um, We're actually quite terrible at it. Um, and some people are better than others. and some people are better than others. and some people are better than others. But one of the lessons that's emerged But one of the lessons that's emerged But one of the lessons that's emerged from my research on this stuff is that a from my research on this stuff is that a from my research on this stuff is that a lot of time is illusory. Um, so you lot of time is illusory. Um, so you lot of time is illusory. Um, so you may know I did this experiment years you may know I did this experiment years you may know I did this experiment years ago. I was very interested in this ago. I was very interested in this ago. I was very interested in this question of does time run in slow motion question of does time run in slow motion question of does time run in slow motion when you're in fear for your life? when you're in fear for your life? when you're in fear for your life? Because when I was a child, I fell off Because when I was a child, I fell off Because when I was a child, I fell off of a roof of a house. I almost died. I of a roof of a house. I almost died. I of a roof of a house. I almost died. I landed on my I landed in a push-up landed on my I landed in a push-up landed on my I landed in a push-up position and busted my nose so badly position and busted my nose so badly position and busted my nose so badly that they had to remove all the that they had to remove all the that they had to remove all the cartilage and so on. And I've had a cartilage and so on. And I've had a cartilage and so on. And I've had a terrible sense of smell ever since terrible sense of smell ever since terrible sense of smell ever since because I busted the cri cribopform because I busted the cri cribopform because I busted the cri cribopform plate and everything. But the part that plate and everything. But the part that plate and everything. But the part that interested me even as a child was that interested me even as a child was that interested me even as a child was that the whole fall seemed to take so long. the whole fall seemed to take so long. the whole fall seemed to take so long. It felt like, oh my god, that was this It felt like, oh my god, that was this It felt like, oh my god, that was this really long thing. Obviously, I was really long thing. Obviously, I was really long thing. Obviously, I was totally calm during it. I was thinking totally calm during it. I was thinking totally calm during it. I was thinking about Alice in Wonderland as I was about Alice in Wonderland as I was about Alice in Wonderland as I was falling and how this must have been what falling and how this must have been what falling and how this must have been what it was like for her to fall down the it was like for her to fall down the it was like for her to fall down the rabbit hole. Um, this is typical. I was rabbit hole. Um, this is typical. I was rabbit hole. Um, this is typical. I was 8 years old. 8 years old. 8 years old. &gt;&gt; Wow. And this is typical when people are &gt;&gt; Wow. And this is typical when people are &gt;&gt; Wow. And this is typical when people are in life-threatening situations is that in life-threatening situations is that in life-threatening situations is that there's a sense of total calmness and there's a sense of total calmness and there's a sense of total calmness and bizarre thought, but also it seems to bizarre thought, but also it seems to bizarre thought, but also it seems to have taken a long time. You know, people have taken a long time. You know, people have taken a long time. You know, people report this all the time when they're in report this all the time when they're in report this all the time when they're in car accidents. They say, "Oh, I car accidents. They say, "Oh, I car accidents. They say, "Oh, I watched the hood crumple and the watched the hood crumple and the watched the hood crumple and the rearview mirror fall off and I was rearview mirror fall off and I was rearview mirror fall off and I was looking at the face of the other guy and looking at the face of the other guy and looking at the face of the other guy and whatever." People experience this in whatever." People experience this in whatever." People experience this in gunfights like police officers and so gunfights like police officers and so gunfights like police officers and so on. Everything seems to take a longer on. Everything seems to take a longer on. Everything seems to take a longer time. What happened is when I grew up time. What happened is when I grew up time. What happened is when I grew up and became a neuroscientist, I realized and became a neuroscientist, I realized and became a neuroscientist, I realized no one had ever studied that. And I got no one had ever studied that. And I got no one had ever studied that. And I got really curious about is it the case that really curious about is it the case that really curious about is it the case that time seems to run in slow motion while time seems to run in slow motion while time seems to run in slow motion while you're experiencing it or is it a trick you're experiencing it or is it a trick you're experiencing it or is it a trick of memory somehow? So I ran what to my of memory somehow? So I ran what to my of memory somehow? So I ran what to my knowledge are still the only experiments knowledge are still the only experiments knowledge are still the only experiments that have ever been done on this. Do you that have ever been done on this. Do you that have ever been done on this. Do you know about this? So know about this? So know about this? So &gt;&gt; yes and no. Yes, I'm familiar with the &gt;&gt; yes and no. Yes, I'm familiar with the &gt;&gt; yes and no. Yes, I'm familiar with the paper. No, I've never heard it this way. paper. No, I've never heard it this way. paper. No, I've never heard it this way. So keep going. So keep going. So keep going. &gt;&gt; Okay, great. So what I did is I rounded &gt;&gt; Okay, great. So what I did is I rounded &gt;&gt; Okay, great. So what I did is I rounded up 23 volunteer subjects and I dropped up 23 volunteer subjects and I dropped up 23 volunteer subjects and I dropped them from 150ft tall tower in freefall them from 150ft tall tower in freefall them from 150ft tall tower in freefall backwards and they're caught by a net backwards and they're caught by a net backwards and they're caught by a net below going 70 m an hour. I want to be below going 70 m an hour. I want to be below going 70 m an hour. I want to be in your experiment. in your experiment. in your experiment. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you would have loved this. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you would have loved this. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you would have loved this. It's a re but it's terrif I did it It's a re but it's terrif I did it It's a re but it's terrif I did it myself three times first to make sure it myself three times first to make sure it myself three times first to make sure it was all running and it's equally was all running and it's equally was all running and it's equally terrifying all three times because terrifying all three times because terrifying all three times because you're falling backwards. Okay. What I you're falling backwards. Okay. What I you're falling backwards. Okay. What I did is I then built a device. My did is I then built a device. My did is I then built a device. My students, I built this device. It fits students, I built this device. It fits students, I built this device. It fits on people's wrist and it flashes on people's wrist and it flashes on people's wrist and it flashes information at them in such a way that information at them in such a way that information at them in such a way that we could measure the speed at which we could measure the speed at which we could measure the speed at which they're taking in information. they're taking in information. they're taking in information. Essentially, we're taking uh we're Essentially, we're taking uh we're Essentially, we're taking uh we're taking advantage of what's called taking advantage of what's called taking advantage of what's called flicker fusion frequency where we're flicker fusion frequency where we're flicker fusion frequency where we're flashing lights really quickly and you flashing lights really quickly and you flashing lights really quickly and you can see that at a certain rate of can see that at a certain rate of can see that at a certain rate of lights, you can see exactly what's going lights, you can see exactly what's going lights, you can see exactly what's going on. And just faster than that on. And just faster than that on. And just faster than that alternation rate, you can't see alternation rate, you can't see alternation rate, you can't see anything. Okay. So we draw people, we anything. Okay. So we draw people, we anything. Okay. So we draw people, we had them read the numbers on the had them read the numbers on the had them read the numbers on the wristband and we're finding out are wristband and we're finding out are wristband and we're finding out are people actually seeing in slow motion people actually seeing in slow motion people actually seeing in slow motion during a life-threatening situation. during a life-threatening situation. during a life-threatening situation. This is on 23 people, the results are This is on 23 people, the results are This is on 23 people, the results are very clear. People do not see any faster very clear. People do not see any faster very clear. People do not see any faster in a life-threatening situation. And yet in a life-threatening situation. And yet in a life-threatening situation. And yet when we ask people retrospectively with when we ask people retrospectively with when we ask people retrospectively with a stopwatch to judge how long their fall a stopwatch to judge how long their fall a stopwatch to judge how long their fall was versus watching someone else do the was versus watching someone else do the was versus watching someone else do the fall, their own fall felt much longer to fall, their own fall felt much longer to fall, their own fall felt much longer to them. Okay, turns out this is all a them. Okay, turns out this is all a them. Okay, turns out this is all a trick of memory, which is to say when trick of memory, which is to say when trick of memory, which is to say when you're in a life-threatening situation, you're in a life-threatening situation, you're in a life-threatening situation, you recruit not just your hippocampus you recruit not just your hippocampus you recruit not just your hippocampus for laying down memory, but a for laying down memory, but a for laying down memory, but a secondary memory track mediated by the secondary memory track mediated by the secondary memory track mediated by the amydala, you're you've got this amydala, you're you've got this amydala, you're you've got this emergency control center, and you're emergency control center, and you're emergency control center, and you're writing down memories in this other writing down memories in this other writing down memories in this other secondary track. When you read that back secondary track. When you read that back secondary track. When you read that back out, you say, "What just happened? What out, you say, "What just happened? What out, you say, "What just happened? What just happened?" You've got all this just happened?" You've got all this just happened?" You've got all this density of memory that you don't density of memory that you don't density of memory that you don't normally have because you've written normally have because you've written normally have because you've written down every detail. So your brain says, down every detail. So your brain says, down every detail. So your brain says, "Oh my gosh, this is what happened and "Oh my gosh, this is what happened and "Oh my gosh, this is what happened and the hood crumpled and so on." Um, but the hood crumpled and so on." Um, but the hood crumpled and so on." Um, but it's because all we're ever conscious of it's because all we're ever conscious of it's because all we're ever conscious of is our memory of an event, as in what is our memory of an event, as in what is our memory of an event, as in what happened during the event. So when happened during the event. So when happened during the event. So when you're in a life-threatening situation, you're in a life-threatening situation, you're in a life-threatening situation, you write more down. You think it took you write more down. You think it took you write more down. You think it took longer um to uh to transpire. And by the longer um to uh to transpire. And by the longer um to uh to transpire. And by the way, this issue about memory equals time way, this issue about memory equals time way, this issue about memory equals time explains a lot of things. For example, explains a lot of things. For example, explains a lot of things. For example, the issue of when you're a child and a the issue of when you're a child and a the issue of when you're a child and a summertime seems to take forever and summertime seems to take forever and summertime seems to take forever and then by the time you're our age, then by the time you're our age, then by the time you're our age, summertime seems to disappear. It's summertime seems to disappear. It's summertime seems to disappear. It's because as a child, you're figuring out because as a child, you're figuring out because as a child, you're figuring out the world. You're writing down lots and the world. You're writing down lots and the world. You're writing down lots and lots of memory during that summer. Oh, lots of memory during that summer. Oh, lots of memory during that summer. Oh, this is the first time I ever saw a this is the first time I ever saw a this is the first time I ever saw a waterfall and went hiking here and did waterfall and went hiking here and did waterfall and went hiking here and did this thing. But by the time you're our this thing. But by the time you're our this thing. But by the time you're our age, you've sort of seen all the age, you've sort of seen all the age, you've sort of seen all the patterns before. And so what we're, you patterns before. And so what we're, you patterns before. And so what we're, you know, when we look back at a summer, we know, when we look back at a summer, we know, when we look back at a summer, we don't have much new footage to sort of don't have much new footage to sort of don't have much new footage to sort of anchor on. So we say, "Oh, well was the anchor on. So we say, "Oh, well was the anchor on. So we say, "Oh, well was the winter, now it's the fall. Okay, fine. I winter, now it's the fall. Okay, fine. I winter, now it's the fall. Okay, fine. I guess that was really fast. guess that was really fast. guess that was really fast. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; So, this is why time speeds up as we as &gt;&gt; So, this is why time speeds up as we as &gt;&gt; So, this is why time speeds up as we as we grow older. we grow older. we grow older. &gt;&gt; Glucose is a key player in how our body &gt;&gt; Glucose is a key player in how our body &gt;&gt; Glucose is a key player in how our body functions, not just in the long term, functions, not just in the long term, functions, not just in the long term, but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain function, mood, and energy levels. And function, mood, and energy levels. And function, mood, and energy levels. And it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from Lingo. I absolutely love it and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it and I'm thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive and physical performance do too. In and physical performance do too. In and physical performance do too. In fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has clarity, and sustained energy. Lingo has helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what helped me to better understand what foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how foods to eat, when to eat, and how things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal things like a brief walk after a meal can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and can help keep my glucose stable, and much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, much more. If you'd like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast Lingo is offering Huberman podcast listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week listeners in the US 10% off a four-week Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Visit hellingo.com/huberman Visit hellingo.com/huberman Visit hellingo.com/huberman for more information. The Lingo glucose for more information. The Lingo glucose for more information. The Lingo glucose system is for users 18 and older, not on system is for users 18 and older, not on system is for users 18 and older, not on insulin. It is not intended for the insulin. It is not intended for the insulin. It is not intended for the diagnosis of diseases, including diagnosis of diseases, including diagnosis of diseases, including diabetes. Individual responses may vary. diabetes. Individual responses may vary. diabetes. Individual responses may vary. I mean, I feel like these are what I mean, I feel like these are what I mean, I feel like these are what you're covering today is uh like the you're covering today is uh like the you're covering today is uh like the most interesting things about life and most interesting things about life and most interesting things about life and experience. I have a question about um experience. I have a question about um experience. I have a question about um the fall experiment. the fall experiment. the fall experiment. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is it accurate to say that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is it accurate to say that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is it accurate to say that your perceptual frame rate during a your perceptual frame rate during a your perceptual frame rate during a highly stressful experience is not highly stressful experience is not highly stressful experience is not different? &gt;&gt; Is no different. &gt;&gt; Is no different. &gt;&gt; Is no different. &gt;&gt; You're not taking uh a um higher frame &gt;&gt; You're not taking uh a um higher frame &gt;&gt; You're not taking uh a um higher frame rate movie. Yeah. rate movie. Yeah. rate movie. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. Which is more frame rate is how &gt;&gt; Okay. Which is more frame rate is how &gt;&gt; Okay. Which is more frame rate is how they generate slow motion for instance. they generate slow motion for instance. they generate slow motion for instance. Makes sense. Like as opposed to strobe Makes sense. Like as opposed to strobe Makes sense. Like as opposed to strobe frame rate or you know just right. Um frame rate or you know just right. Um frame rate or you know just right. Um but that in some sense your unconscious but that in some sense your unconscious but that in some sense your unconscious frame rate is because the amydala is frame rate is because the amydala is frame rate is because the amydala is tracking more information than you tracking more information than you tracking more information than you normally would have access to in normally would have access to in normally would have access to in say a calm everyday experience and so say a calm everyday experience and so say a calm everyday experience and so the memory is higher frame rate but the memory is higher frame rate but the memory is higher frame rate but the experience is not you know yeah it's experience is not you know yeah it's experience is not you know yeah it's really close I wouldn't say I wouldn't really close I wouldn't say I wouldn't really close I wouldn't say I wouldn't use the term frame rate in there it's use the term frame rate in there it's use the term frame rate in there it's just that you have under normal just that you have under normal just that you have under normal circumstances you write down almost circumstances you write down almost circumstances you write down almost nothing you just everything's passing nothing you just everything's passing nothing you just everything's passing through you're not really remembering through you're not really remembering through you're not really remembering much but in an emergency situation, your much but in an emergency situation, your much but in an emergency situation, your amydala being the emergency control amydala being the emergency control amydala being the emergency control center says, "Everybody stop what you're center says, "Everybody stop what you're center says, "Everybody stop what you're doing. This is the most important thing doing. This is the most important thing doing. This is the most important thing going on. Everyone pay attention to going on. Everyone pay attention to going on. Everyone pay attention to this." So, you're noticing every detail this." So, you're noticing every detail this." So, you're noticing every detail and you're not used to that. So, just and you're not used to that. So, just and you're not used to that. So, just for anyone who knows what I'm referring for anyone who knows what I'm referring for anyone who knows what I'm referring to here as a basian issue, um you know, to here as a basian issue, um you know, to here as a basian issue, um you know, you your brain thinks, "Okay, a you your brain thinks, "Okay, a you your brain thinks, "Okay, a certain amount of memory must equal a certain amount of memory must equal a certain amount of memory must equal a certain amount of time." Now, you've got certain amount of time." Now, you've got certain amount of time." Now, you've got just a lot more detail. And so, it says, just a lot more detail. And so, it says, just a lot more detail. And so, it says, "Oh, well, that must have been, you "Oh, well, that must have been, you "Oh, well, that must have been, you know, six seconds or something." I what know, six seconds or something." I what know, six seconds or something." I what I did by the way I collected hundreds I did by the way I collected hundreds I did by the way I collected hundreds and hundreds of subjective reports from and hundreds of subjective reports from and hundreds of subjective reports from people who had been in accidents of people who had been in accidents of people who had been in accidents of various sorts. You this guy got in a various sorts. You this guy got in a various sorts. You this guy got in a motorcycle accident and had you know motorcycle accident and had you know motorcycle accident and had you know come off the motorcycle and had turned come off the motorcycle and had turned come off the motorcycle and had turned over and over and over on the road and over and over and over on the road and over and over and over on the road and he said as he was rolling over and over he said as he was rolling over and over he said as he was rolling over and over he was like composing a little diddy in he was like composing a little diddy in he was like composing a little diddy in his head like a little song to the sound his head like a little song to the sound his head like a little song to the sound of his helmet hitting the road and so on of his helmet hitting the road and so on of his helmet hitting the road and so on because this is the kind of bizarre because this is the kind of bizarre because this is the kind of bizarre thought that people have. But it seemed thought that people have. But it seemed thought that people have. But it seemed to have taken a long time and when he to have taken a long time and when he to have taken a long time and when he saw footage of it afterwards, you know, saw footage of it afterwards, you know, saw footage of it afterwards, you know, the whole thing took whatever a second the whole thing took whatever a second the whole thing took whatever a second or two, but it seemed to him to have or two, but it seemed to him to have or two, but it seemed to him to have taken six seconds. But again, it's in taken six seconds. But again, it's in taken six seconds. But again, it's in retrospect when he's thinking, what retrospect when he's thinking, what retrospect when he's thinking, what happened? What was the event like? Um, happened? What was the event like? Um, happened? What was the event like? Um, by the way, I'll just mention after I by the way, I'll just mention after I by the way, I'll just mention after I published this paper, sometimes people published this paper, sometimes people published this paper, sometimes people would come up to me after a talk and would come up to me after a talk and would come up to me after a talk and say, I know that's not true because I say, I know that's not true because I say, I know that's not true because I was in a car accident. I know it took a was in a car accident. I know it took a was in a car accident. I know it took a long time. And I said, "Okay, look, the long time. And I said, "Okay, look, the long time. And I said, "Okay, look, the person on the passenger seat next to the person on the passenger seat next to the person on the passenger seat next to you who was screaming no, did they did you who was screaming no, did they did you who was screaming no, did they did it actually sound like they were saying it actually sound like they were saying it actually sound like they were saying no?" Because if time were running in no?" Because if time were running in no?" Because if time were running in slow motion, that has to be the slow motion, that has to be the slow motion, that has to be the consequence that everything is spread consequence that everything is spread consequence that everything is spread out. And they had a allow that it didn't out. And they had a allow that it didn't out. And they had a allow that it didn't sound like sounds were distorted and so sound like sounds were distorted and so sound like sounds were distorted and so on. So um it is really about having more on. So um it is really about having more on. So um it is really about having more higher density of memory. higher density of memory. higher density of memory. &gt;&gt; Super interesting. What about for &gt;&gt; Super interesting. What about for &gt;&gt; Super interesting. What about for nonstressful, non life-threatening nonstressful, non life-threatening nonstressful, non life-threatening circumstances like let's pick a purely circumstances like let's pick a purely circumstances like let's pick a purely happy event? happy event? happy event? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; One would hope day of one's wedding. Um &gt;&gt; One would hope day of one's wedding. Um &gt;&gt; One would hope day of one's wedding. Um &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; you know, I was about to say birth of a &gt;&gt; you know, I was about to say birth of a &gt;&gt; you know, I was about to say birth of a child, but depending on how you know child, but depending on how you know child, but depending on how you know who's doing the majority of the work and who's doing the majority of the work and who's doing the majority of the work and how stressful it was, I mean, of course, how stressful it was, I mean, of course, how stressful it was, I mean, of course, the birth of a healthy child is a super the birth of a healthy child is a super the birth of a healthy child is a super wonderful event, but it can be very wonderful event, but it can be very wonderful event, but it can be very stressful, too, under certain stressful, too, under certain stressful, too, under certain circumstances. So, let's pick something circumstances. So, let's pick something circumstances. So, let's pick something purely happy, right? uh a terrific purely happy, right? uh a terrific purely happy, right? uh a terrific wedding, a great party, maybe a vacation wedding, a great party, maybe a vacation wedding, a great party, maybe a vacation with your spouse or family where it just with your spouse or family where it just with your spouse or family where it just is like bliss day. is like bliss day. is like bliss day. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Are you clocking more experiences? So, &gt;&gt; Are you clocking more experiences? So, &gt;&gt; Are you clocking more experiences? So, anytime you're doing something novel, anytime you're doing something novel, anytime you're doing something novel, and this actually ties back to the and this actually ties back to the and this actually ties back to the conversation we had before about seeking conversation we had before about seeking conversation we had before about seeking novelty, whenever you're doing something novelty, whenever you're doing something novelty, whenever you're doing something novel, you're writing down more memory. novel, you're writing down more memory. novel, you're writing down more memory. And that's the whole key. So, for And that's the whole key. So, for And that's the whole key. So, for example, if you spent your last weekend example, if you spent your last weekend example, if you spent your last weekend going off and doing something wacky going off and doing something wacky going off and doing something wacky you've never done before, parasailing you've never done before, parasailing you've never done before, parasailing and over sharks or whatever the thing and over sharks or whatever the thing and over sharks or whatever the thing is, you'd come back and you think, "Wow, is, you'd come back and you think, "Wow, is, you'd come back and you think, "Wow, it seems like it was so long since it seems like it was so long since it seems like it was so long since Friday. Now it's Monday. It's been Friday. Now it's Monday. It's been Friday. Now it's Monday. It's been forever since I was back in the studio." forever since I was back in the studio." forever since I was back in the studio." But if you have a normal weekend, we're But if you have a normal weekend, we're But if you have a normal weekend, we're not doing much of anything but surfing not doing much of anything but surfing not doing much of anything but surfing Instagram or something. Then you come Instagram or something. Then you come Instagram or something. Then you come back and you think, "God, it was just back and you think, "God, it was just back and you think, "God, it was just Friday." The difference is just how much memory The difference is just how much memory The difference is just how much memory you clocked and therefore you clocked and therefore you clocked and therefore what you can draw on in terms of what you can draw on in terms of what you can draw on in terms of footage. Um I actually think this footage. Um I actually think this footage. Um I actually think this happens with drugs where people, you happens with drugs where people, you happens with drugs where people, you know, people sometimes have the know, people sometimes have the know, people sometimes have the experience on marijuana where they experience on marijuana where they experience on marijuana where they think, "Wow, I've been standing here think, "Wow, I've been standing here think, "Wow, I've been standing here forever." And it's because they're forever." And it's because they're forever." And it's because they're having a hard time anchoring down on having a hard time anchoring down on having a hard time anchoring down on footage about like when did I arrive to footage about like when did I arrive to footage about like when did I arrive to the kitchen and when what happened since the kitchen and when what happened since the kitchen and when what happened since I've been here and so they just they I've been here and so they just they I've been here and so they just they don't know. But uh anyway, the point is don't know. But uh anyway, the point is don't know. But uh anyway, the point is sometimes people have this idea about sometimes people have this idea about sometimes people have this idea about time speeding up as you get older. They time speeding up as you get older. They time speeding up as you get older. They say, "Well, you know, to an to an say, "Well, you know, to an to an say, "Well, you know, to an to an eight-year-old, a summer is this fra big eight-year-old, a summer is this fra big eight-year-old, a summer is this fra big fraction of their life, but to a fraction of their life, but to a fraction of their life, but to a 50-year-old, it's a it's a smaller 50-year-old, it's a it's a smaller 50-year-old, it's a it's a smaller fraction." But I don't think that's it fraction." But I don't think that's it fraction." But I don't think that's it at all. It's that it's what you did at all. It's that it's what you did at all. It's that it's what you did this past weekend can make the weekend this past weekend can make the weekend this past weekend can make the weekend seem longer. When it comes to some great seem longer. When it comes to some great seem longer. When it comes to some great new event like the birth of a child or a new event like the birth of a child or a new event like the birth of a child or a wedding or whatever it is, it has to do wedding or whatever it is, it has to do wedding or whatever it is, it has to do with how much attention you're paying with how much attention you're paying with how much attention you're paying and how much memory you're writing down. and how much memory you're writing down. and how much memory you're writing down. And that means it is to some degree in And that means it is to some degree in And that means it is to some degree in our control. If we really attend to our control. If we really attend to our control. If we really attend to things and write down memories instead things and write down memories instead things and write down memories instead of letting life just wash over us, of letting life just wash over us, of letting life just wash over us, we can seem as though we've lived we can seem as though we've lived we can seem as though we've lived longer. I'm not talking about longevity. longer. I'm not talking about longevity. longer. I'm not talking about longevity. I'm just talking seeming as though I'm just talking seeming as though I'm just talking seeming as though you've lived longer, which is look, you've lived longer, which is look, you've lived longer, which is look, here's something that I try to do here's something that I try to do here's something that I try to do all the time is just switch stuff up. all the time is just switch stuff up. all the time is just switch stuff up. For example, brushing your teeth with For example, brushing your teeth with For example, brushing your teeth with your other hand. Not hard to do, but your other hand. Not hard to do, but your other hand. Not hard to do, but it's just one of a million ways of it's just one of a million ways of it's just one of a million ways of knocking yourself off a path. One thing knocking yourself off a path. One thing knocking yourself off a path. One thing I try to do every time I drive home from I try to do every time I drive home from I try to do every time I drive home from Stanford is I try to take a different Stanford is I try to take a different Stanford is I try to take a different drive home, a different route home. You drive home, a different route home. You drive home, a different route home. You know, waste an extra minute, whatever. know, waste an extra minute, whatever. know, waste an extra minute, whatever. But it's I'm seeing new things. I'm But it's I'm seeing new things. I'm But it's I'm seeing new things. I'm observing new things about the observing new things about the observing new things about the neighborhood or whatever that I hadn't neighborhood or whatever that I hadn't neighborhood or whatever that I hadn't noticed before. One thing that's very noticed before. One thing that's very noticed before. One thing that's very easy to do is just rearrange your easy to do is just rearrange your easy to do is just rearrange your office. like push your desk over here, office. like push your desk over here, office. like push your desk over here, take two paintings and just swap them on take two paintings and just swap them on take two paintings and just swap them on the wall. All this stuff is super easy, the wall. All this stuff is super easy, the wall. All this stuff is super easy, but it really matters. It's important but it really matters. It's important but it really matters. It's important because what it's doing is enhancing because what it's doing is enhancing because what it's doing is enhancing brain plasticity in the sense of just brain plasticity in the sense of just brain plasticity in the sense of just challenging, you know, your challenging, you know, your challenging, you know, your internal model says, "Okay, I've got internal model says, "Okay, I've got internal model says, "Okay, I've got I've got this world." And then suddenly I've got this world." And then suddenly I've got this world." And then suddenly says, "Oh, there's something new. says, "Oh, there's something new. says, "Oh, there's something new. There's something interesting going on There's something interesting going on There's something interesting going on in this world." And it makes it seem as in this world." And it makes it seem as in this world." And it makes it seem as though you've lived longer because though you've lived longer because though you've lived longer because you're writing down more memories about you're writing down more memories about you're writing down more memories about everything. &gt;&gt; Gosh. Uh this time perception thing, uh &gt;&gt; Gosh. Uh this time perception thing, uh &gt;&gt; Gosh. Uh this time perception thing, uh I spend way too much time thinking about I spend way too much time thinking about I spend way too much time thinking about it. And um and I'm still trying to wrap it. And um and I'm still trying to wrap it. And um and I'm still trying to wrap my head around how much time we my head around how much time we my head around how much time we should spend trying to be present. So I should spend trying to be present. So I should spend trying to be present. So I have a and this is not an official have a and this is not an official have a and this is not an official definition but my kind of um definition but my kind of um definition but my kind of um understanding of the dopamine system and understanding of the dopamine system and understanding of the dopamine system and addiction as I say uh and people have addiction as I say uh and people have addiction as I say uh and people have heard me say before you know an heard me say before you know an heard me say before you know an addiction is an progressive narrowing of addiction is an progressive narrowing of addiction is an progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. It the things that bring you pleasure. It the things that bring you pleasure. It also involves continued use or uh or also involves continued use or uh or also involves continued use or uh or behavior despite negative consequences. behavior despite negative consequences. behavior despite negative consequences. But but I mentioned the other But but I mentioned the other But but I mentioned the other definition of addiction uh progressive definition of addiction uh progressive definition of addiction uh progressive narrowing of the things that bring you narrowing of the things that bring you narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure because I was trying to come up pleasure because I was trying to come up pleasure because I was trying to come up with some um at least semi at least with some um at least semi at least with some um at least semi at least accurate if not but not exhaustive accurate if not but not exhaustive accurate if not but not exhaustive definition of kind of like enlightenment definition of kind of like enlightenment definition of kind of like enlightenment when people talk about enlightenment when people talk about enlightenment when people talk about enlightenment right all these monks who are so get so right all these monks who are so get so right all these monks who are so get so present through all this meditation or present through all this meditation or present through all this meditation or people go to big su and they get you people go to big su and they get you people go to big su and they get you know they're so present know they're so present know they're so present enlightenment I think of one definition enlightenment I think of one definition enlightenment I think of one definition might be okay I'm not the authority on might be okay I'm not the authority on might be okay I'm not the authority on this but might be a progressive of this but might be a progressive of this but might be a progressive of expansion of the things that bring you expansion of the things that bring you expansion of the things that bring you pleasure. But to really get pleasure out pleasure. But to really get pleasure out pleasure. But to really get pleasure out of a sip of water. I'm not terribly of a sip of water. I'm not terribly of a sip of water. I'm not terribly thirsty right now. If I take a sip of thirsty right now. If I take a sip of thirsty right now. If I take a sip of water, it doesn't taste anything like if water, it doesn't taste anything like if water, it doesn't taste anything like if I were very thirsty. But we need to pay I were very thirsty. But we need to pay I were very thirsty. But we need to pay attention. We need to be in the pre what attention. We need to be in the pre what attention. We need to be in the pre what is paying attention? It's being is paying attention? It's being is paying attention? It's being &gt;&gt; most of the time in the present, right? &gt;&gt; most of the time in the present, right? &gt;&gt; most of the time in the present, right? Paying attention to these things. But if Paying attention to these things. But if Paying attention to these things. But if we spend all our time in the present, we spend all our time in the present, we spend all our time in the present, we um we eliminate Ulyses contract. um we eliminate Ulyses contract. um we eliminate Ulyses contract. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So the extremes can't be good. But I &gt;&gt; So the extremes can't be good. But I &gt;&gt; So the extremes can't be good. But I think it examining the extremes like the think it examining the extremes like the think it examining the extremes like the freef fall experiment, they're useful uh freef fall experiment, they're useful uh freef fall experiment, they're useful uh windows into time perception and how and windows into time perception and how and windows into time perception and how and how we measure life. It could be that by how we measure life. It could be that by how we measure life. It could be that by establishing Ulys's contracts in many establishing Ulys's contracts in many establishing Ulys's contracts in many aspects of our lives, we get more of an aspects of our lives, we get more of an aspects of our lives, we get more of an opportunity to be in the present because opportunity to be in the present because opportunity to be in the present because we know, look, I don't have to worry we know, look, I don't have to worry we know, look, I don't have to worry about my future self. I'm not going to about my future self. I'm not going to about my future self. I'm not going to eat that cookie. I am going to go to the eat that cookie. I am going to go to the eat that cookie. I am going to go to the gym, whatever, because I've already set gym, whatever, because I've already set gym, whatever, because I've already set up these contracts. I don't have any up these contracts. I don't have any up these contracts. I don't have any cookies in my house. I'm meeting my cookies in my house. I'm meeting my cookies in my house. I'm meeting my buddy at the gym. Whatever. Then you buddy at the gym. Whatever. Then you buddy at the gym. Whatever. Then you have more of an opportunity to be in the have more of an opportunity to be in the have more of an opportunity to be in the present. Um, you don't have to simulate present. Um, you don't have to simulate present. Um, you don't have to simulate all kinds of futures. Um, yeah, I think all kinds of futures. Um, yeah, I think all kinds of futures. Um, yeah, I think paying attention to things matters a paying attention to things matters a paying attention to things matters a lot, but we have to be smart about what lot, but we have to be smart about what lot, but we have to be smart about what we pay attention to. I mean, it might be we pay attention to. I mean, it might be we pay attention to. I mean, it might be lovely to really love the water and so lovely to really love the water and so lovely to really love the water and so on, but not, you know, your Instagram on, but not, you know, your Instagram on, but not, you know, your Instagram feed or something. So, it's just a feed or something. So, it's just a feed or something. So, it's just a matter of uh of thinking clearly about matter of uh of thinking clearly about matter of uh of thinking clearly about what you want to pay attention to and what you want to pay attention to and what you want to pay attention to and devote your memories to. And this devote your memories to. And this devote your memories to. And this translates into what you set up. Like, translates into what you set up. Like, translates into what you set up. Like, I'm going to set up a dinner at my I'm going to set up a dinner at my I'm going to set up a dinner at my house. So, I'm going to invite my close house. So, I'm going to invite my close house. So, I'm going to invite my close friends and I'm going to have this friends and I'm going to have this friends and I'm going to have this dinner and pay 100% attention to this dinner and pay 100% attention to this dinner and pay 100% attention to this dinner. I'm going to be present at this dinner. I'm going to be present at this dinner. I'm going to be present at this thing because that's the stuff of life. thing because that's the stuff of life. thing because that's the stuff of life. &gt;&gt; Where I'm getting to with this is that &gt;&gt; Where I'm getting to with this is that &gt;&gt; Where I'm getting to with this is that there's um beauty and there's tragedy at there's um beauty and there's tragedy at there's um beauty and there's tragedy at every spatial scale and every temporal every spatial scale and every temporal every spatial scale and every temporal scale, right? I unfortunately in my scale, right? I unfortunately in my scale, right? I unfortunately in my neighborhood, you know, this issue has neighborhood, you know, this issue has neighborhood, you know, this issue has not been resolved. Um, in many places, not been resolved. Um, in many places, not been resolved. Um, in many places, you know, we have a we have a you know, we have a we have a you know, we have a we have a homelessness and drugaddicted and mental homelessness and drugaddicted and mental homelessness and drugaddicted and mental illness population and those intersect illness population and those intersect illness population and those intersect in very complicated ways that is so in very complicated ways that is so in very complicated ways that is so extreme that you can see people who are extreme that you can see people who are extreme that you can see people who are um paying immense amount of attention to um paying immense amount of attention to um paying immense amount of attention to what anyone else would consider trivial what anyone else would consider trivial what anyone else would consider trivial like the you know bits of dirt in like the you know bits of dirt in like the you know bits of dirt in the on the sidewalk and so and we and the on the sidewalk and so and we and the on the sidewalk and so and we and it's so tragic, right? We can see that it's so tragic, right? We can see that it's so tragic, right? We can see that that's not a good use of one's time, that's not a good use of one's time, that's not a good use of one's time, attention and focus, right? But there's attention and focus, right? But there's attention and focus, right? But there's also beauty at all sorts of scales, also beauty at all sorts of scales, also beauty at all sorts of scales, right? I think one of the obsessions right? I think one of the obsessions right? I think one of the obsessions that people have with like fractals and that people have with like fractals and that people have with like fractals and you know these um organization at very you know these um organization at very you know these um organization at very small scales all the way up to very small scales all the way up to very small scales all the way up to very large scales is it brings us to this large scales is it brings us to this large scales is it brings us to this like relationship with life like there's like relationship with life like there's like relationship with life like there's all this stuff we can't see and it's all this stuff we can't see and it's all this stuff we can't see and it's beauty at every scale, tragedy at every beauty at every scale, tragedy at every beauty at every scale, tragedy at every scale, right? I mean there I don't even scale, right? I mean there I don't even scale, right? I mean there I don't even have to mention a tragedy at massive have to mention a tragedy at massive have to mention a tragedy at massive scale because they're all over the world scale because they're all over the world scale because they're all over the world and they have been throughout human and they have been throughout human and they have been throughout human history frankly. By the way, I was just history frankly. By the way, I was just history frankly. By the way, I was just I was just in Las Vegas at CES uh giving I was just in Las Vegas at CES uh giving I was just in Las Vegas at CES uh giving a talk yesterday and as I was leaving, I a talk yesterday and as I was leaving, I a talk yesterday and as I was leaving, I looked out the window and there was, you looked out the window and there was, you looked out the window and there was, you know, this uh Chinese lion statue and know, this uh Chinese lion statue and know, this uh Chinese lion statue and there was this homeless woman smoking a there was this homeless woman smoking a there was this homeless woman smoking a cigarette and she was rubbing this thing cigarette and she was rubbing this thing cigarette and she was rubbing this thing very vigorously and the guy driving the very vigorously and the guy driving the very vigorously and the guy driving the car told me, "Oh, that's good luck if car told me, "Oh, that's good luck if car told me, "Oh, that's good luck if you rub the statue," which is of course you rub the statue," which is of course you rub the statue," which is of course ridiculous. But the woman was rubbing ridiculous. But the woman was rubbing ridiculous. But the woman was rubbing and rubbing and that we're at a red and rubbing and that we're at a red and rubbing and that we're at a red light and I watched her for, you know, light and I watched her for, you know, light and I watched her for, you know, like 60 seconds doing this. And yeah, like 60 seconds doing this. And yeah, like 60 seconds doing this. And yeah, and it was tragic to me because her and it was tragic to me because her and it was tragic to me because her brain has set up an association which is brain has set up an association which is brain has set up an association which is if I do this action, there will be this if I do this action, there will be this if I do this action, there will be this result. That's what her future result. That's what her future result. That's what her future simulation is telling her. And as far as simulation is telling her. And as far as simulation is telling her. And as far as we can tell, that's not true that she'll we can tell, that's not true that she'll we can tell, that's not true that she'll have good luck from doing that. But have good luck from doing that. But have good luck from doing that. But yeah, that was an example of tragedy. yeah, that was an example of tragedy. yeah, that was an example of tragedy. Yeah, it's almost like the uh the Yeah, it's almost like the uh the Yeah, it's almost like the uh the worst thing for any human uh suffering worst thing for any human uh suffering worst thing for any human uh suffering from mental illness or not is to from mental illness or not is to from mental illness or not is to proverate on one spatial or time scale proverate on one spatial or time scale proverate on one spatial or time scale to like get in the tunnel of the thing to like get in the tunnel of the thing to like get in the tunnel of the thing that's right in front of you or to be that's right in front of you or to be that's right in front of you or to be lost out. You know, you we see people lost out. You know, you we see people lost out. You know, you we see people and we even know some people are and we even know some people are and we even know some people are arguably a little bit strange and they arguably a little bit strange and they arguably a little bit strange and they don't not maybe perhaps to the extent of don't not maybe perhaps to the extent of don't not maybe perhaps to the extent of full pathology, but they got their head full pathology, but they got their head full pathology, but they got their head in the clouds all the time. You can't in the clouds all the time. You can't in the clouds all the time. You can't really function in life. They need really function in life. They need really function in life. They need handlers, right? I know some creative handlers, right? I know some creative handlers, right? I know some creative people like this. The only reason why people like this. The only reason why people like this. The only reason why they are not like the first person I they are not like the first person I they are not like the first person I described is because they have handlers described is because they have handlers described is because they have handlers to handle all the stuff that's at closer to handle all the stuff that's at closer to handle all the stuff that's at closer spatial scale. Get the get organized. spatial scale. Get the get organized. spatial scale. Get the get organized. Get you know and but uh actually a good Get you know and but uh actually a good Get you know and but uh actually a good examp I'll just give a concrete example examp I'll just give a concrete example examp I'll just give a concrete example because he was so awesome. I didn't know because he was so awesome. I didn't know because he was so awesome. I didn't know him personally but Shane McGawan the him personally but Shane McGawan the him personally but Shane McGawan the singer for the Poges singer for the Poges singer for the Poges &gt;&gt; who had severe this is not a secret had &gt;&gt; who had severe this is not a secret had &gt;&gt; who had severe this is not a secret had severe issues with alcohol. Um all his severe issues with alcohol. Um all his severe issues with alcohol. Um all his teeth had rotted out. Later in life they teeth had rotted out. Later in life they teeth had rotted out. Later in life they gave him teeth. I was once going to see gave him teeth. I was once going to see gave him teeth. I was once going to see the Pogues in San Francisco. I love the Pogues in San Francisco. I love the Pogues in San Francisco. I love the Pogues. And that day I got I got to the Pogues. And that day I got I got to the Pogues. And that day I got I got to the city early. I brought my work up there city early. I brought my work up there city early. I brought my work up there and I see this guy walking along Giri. I and I see this guy walking along Giri. I and I see this guy walking along Giri. I didn't know who it was at the time. He's didn't know who it was at the time. He's didn't know who it was at the time. He's got like this really nice like it looked got like this really nice like it looked got like this really nice like it looked like almost like a silk shirt and the like almost like a silk shirt and the like almost like a silk shirt and the tag is still on it and he's just tag is still on it and he's just tag is still on it and he's just shuffling out into traffic and I'm like, shuffling out into traffic and I'm like, shuffling out into traffic and I'm like, "Oh my god, this guy's going to get "Oh my god, this guy's going to get "Oh my god, this guy's going to get killed." So I get out. It's Shane killed." So I get out. It's Shane killed." So I get out. It's Shane McGowan. And then his team comes running McGowan. And then his team comes running McGowan. And then his team comes running over like, "Oh, we got to get him back." over like, "Oh, we got to get him back." over like, "Oh, we got to get him back." And he was so blasted he didn't even And he was so blasted he didn't even And he was so blasted he didn't even know where he was. And apparently that's know where he was. And apparently that's know where he was. And apparently that's how he was much of his life. how he was much of his life. how he was much of his life. that evening he got on stage, barely that evening he got on stage, barely that evening he got on stage, barely made it to the microphone and gave a made it to the microphone and gave a made it to the microphone and gave a legendary one of many legendary Pogue legendary one of many legendary Pogue legendary one of many legendary Pogue shows, right? I mean, it's just um and shows, right? I mean, it's just um and shows, right? I mean, it's just um and for those that don't know the Pogues, for those that don't know the Pogues, for those that don't know the Pogues, you should look it up. And if you do, I you should look it up. And if you do, I you should look it up. And if you do, I mean, they there tons of movies and the mean, they there tons of movies and the mean, they there tons of movies and the Love You Till the End song that's in Love You Till the End song that's in Love You Till the End song that's in every romantic comedy, that's them. And every romantic comedy, that's them. And every romantic comedy, that's them. And you know, it's just so there are people you know, it's just so there are people you know, it's just so there are people like that. And oftentimes that ultra like that. And oftentimes that ultra like that. And oftentimes that ultra creatives they're a drift but creatives they're a drift but creatives they're a drift but you can in it seems to I'm not you can in it seems to I'm not you can in it seems to I'm not suggesting the alcohol but they but to suggesting the alcohol but they but to suggesting the alcohol but they but to be able to kind of pull all that into be able to kind of pull all that into be able to kind of pull all that into the moment seems to be their super the moment seems to be their super the moment seems to be their super skill. Most people it seems and I skill. Most people it seems and I skill. Most people it seems and I wonder if you think a definition of wonder if you think a definition of wonder if you think a definition of mental health is the ability to switch mental health is the ability to switch mental health is the ability to switch out from these different time domains out from these different time domains out from these different time domains because you also don't want to be in a because you also don't want to be in a because you also don't want to be in a watchmaker mode all the time. That watchmaker mode all the time. That watchmaker mode all the time. That watchmaker needs to pay attention to his watchmaker needs to pay attention to his watchmaker needs to pay attention to his or her kids. Well, I tell you, Albert or her kids. Well, I tell you, Albert or her kids. Well, I tell you, Albert Einstein said that he really enjoyed Einstein said that he really enjoyed Einstein said that he really enjoyed tasks like fixing a doorork knob in his tasks like fixing a doorork knob in his tasks like fixing a doorork knob in his house or something. And I knew that all house or something. And I knew that all house or something. And I knew that all the time. I did lots of I live in this the time. I did lots of I live in this the time. I did lots of I live in this very old house and I'm doing lots of very old house and I'm doing lots of very old house and I'm doing lots of little dinky repairs all the time. And I little dinky repairs all the time. And I little dinky repairs all the time. And I love that just crossing these scales. love that just crossing these scales. love that just crossing these scales. But I do want to say something about But I do want to say something about But I do want to say something about addiction because I think this is an addiction because I think this is an addiction because I think this is an awesome example about brain plasticity awesome example about brain plasticity awesome example about brain plasticity and something that I wrote about in and something that I wrote about in and something that I wrote about in my book Livewired about this, which is my book Livewired about this, which is my book Livewired about this, which is addiction is all about brain plasticity. addiction is all about brain plasticity. addiction is all about brain plasticity. put a certain drug in your system and put a certain drug in your system and put a certain drug in your system and what your brain does is it upregulates what your brain does is it upregulates what your brain does is it upregulates the receptors for that drug which is its the receptors for that drug which is its the receptors for that drug which is its way of saying oh I didn't know the world way of saying oh I didn't know the world way of saying oh I didn't know the world consisted of this stuff good I'm going consisted of this stuff good I'm going consisted of this stuff good I'm going to prepare for this now and I expect to prepare for this now and I expect to prepare for this now and I expect more of it so then you give it more and more of it so then you give it more and more of it so then you give it more and this is great I'm going to upregulate this is great I'm going to upregulate this is great I'm going to upregulate the receptors again and it comes to the receptors again and it comes to the receptors again and it comes to expect that this is in the world and expect that this is in the world and expect that this is in the world and then if you stop you have these awful then if you stop you have these awful then if you stop you have these awful drug withdrawal symptoms precisely drug withdrawal symptoms precisely drug withdrawal symptoms precisely because you've changed your system now because you've changed your system now because you've changed your system now it's expecting the world to have that. it's expecting the world to have that. it's expecting the world to have that. So I draw an analogy between that and So I draw an analogy between that and So I draw an analogy between that and heartbreak because when somebody that heartbreak because when somebody that heartbreak because when somebody that you love let's say dies or leaves town you love let's say dies or leaves town you love let's say dies or leaves town or whatever the thing is um your brain or whatever the thing is um your brain or whatever the thing is um your brain has come to expect the presence of that has come to expect the presence of that has come to expect the presence of that person in your world has thought okay person in your world has thought okay person in your world has thought okay the world consists of this and now that the world consists of this and now that the world consists of this and now that person is gone and heartbreak is a person is gone and heartbreak is a person is gone and heartbreak is a really painful physiological thing that really painful physiological thing that really painful physiological thing that you have to go through as your brain you have to go through as your brain you have to go through as your brain readjusts to the world without that readjusts to the world without that readjusts to the world without that something that uh I would hope no one something that uh I would hope no one something that uh I would hope no one would have to experience, but everyone would have to experience, but everyone would have to experience, but everyone loses people uh at some point um or a loses people uh at some point um or a loses people uh at some point um or a pet or both. Um, do you think that uh pet or both. Um, do you think that uh pet or both. Um, do you think that uh constant engagement in um, let's just constant engagement in um, let's just constant engagement in um, let's just say like Tik Tok type social media with say like Tik Tok type social media with say like Tik Tok type social media with it um, upregulates the quote unquote it um, upregulates the quote unquote it um, upregulates the quote unquote receptors or of expectation for it that receptors or of expectation for it that receptors or of expectation for it that make it harder for people to stop make it harder for people to stop make it harder for people to stop using it because the drug an addiction using it because the drug an addiction using it because the drug an addiction definition you gave, which I love, um, definition you gave, which I love, um, definition you gave, which I love, um, you know, dopamine receptors for you know, dopamine receptors for you know, dopamine receptors for methamphetamine or for cocaine or and so methamphetamine or for cocaine or and so methamphetamine or for cocaine or and so on, but uh, for an experience, for on, but uh, for an experience, for on, but uh, for an experience, for gambling, for social media, um, the gambling, for social media, um, the gambling, for social media, um, the receptors there's become more like receptors there's become more like receptors there's become more like circuit activations or like the circuits circuit activations or like the circuits circuit activations or like the circuits of the brain anticipate it and if they of the brain anticipate it and if they of the brain anticipate it and if they don't get it, do you think that there's don't get it, do you think that there's don't get it, do you think that there's a kind of a withdrawal like effect? a kind of a withdrawal like effect? a kind of a withdrawal like effect? &gt;&gt; I don't know how I feel about this. I &gt;&gt; I don't know how I feel about this. I &gt;&gt; I don't know how I feel about this. I wonder when we were growing up, people wonder when we were growing up, people wonder when we were growing up, people said, "Oh, it's the television. It's the said, "Oh, it's the television. It's the said, "Oh, it's the television. It's the television is ruining everyone's television is ruining everyone's television is ruining everyone's attention span." attention span." attention span." &gt;&gt; It'll rot your brain. I remember your &gt;&gt; It'll rot your brain. I remember your &gt;&gt; It'll rot your brain. I remember your brain. &gt;&gt; My mom would kick us out. &gt;&gt; My mom would kick us out. &gt;&gt; My mom would kick us out. &gt;&gt; This was very common. She'd say, "You &gt;&gt; This was very common. She'd say, "You &gt;&gt; This was very common. She'd say, "You got to go outside." She would lock us got to go outside." She would lock us got to go outside." She would lock us out of the house. We weren't allowed out of the house. We weren't allowed out of the house. We weren't allowed back in. She said, "Don't come back in. She said, "Don't come back in. She said, "Don't come back until dark." until dark." until dark." &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. We we did not have the &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. We we did not have the &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. We we did not have the option to watch cartoons or for more option to watch cartoons or for more option to watch cartoons or for more than a couple minutes after school. We than a couple minutes after school. We than a couple minutes after school. We were forbidden so she could get peace were forbidden so she could get peace were forbidden so she could get peace and we could get activity. and we could get activity. and we could get activity. &gt;&gt; Exactly. And younger people might not &gt;&gt; Exactly. And younger people might not &gt;&gt; Exactly. And younger people might not know the telder was called the boob tube know the telder was called the boob tube know the telder was called the boob tube where a boob was like an idiot and that where a boob was like an idiot and that where a boob was like an idiot and that was the idea. That's where the term was the idea. That's where the term was the idea. That's where the term YouTube you know was a funny derivation YouTube you know was a funny derivation YouTube you know was a funny derivation of that. But the um right so now what of that. But the um right so now what of that. But the um right so now what kids are watching is lots of content. I kids are watching is lots of content. I kids are watching is lots of content. I mean we're all watching lots of content mean we're all watching lots of content mean we're all watching lots of content on Instagram, Tik Tok, much of which is on Instagram, Tik Tok, much of which is on Instagram, Tik Tok, much of which is great. It's well produced. It's matched great. It's well produced. It's matched great. It's well produced. It's matched to our interests. And so I don't, you to our interests. And so I don't, you to our interests. And so I don't, you know, are we addicted? Yes. Is it an know, are we addicted? Yes. Is it an know, are we addicted? Yes. Is it an addiction because it's offering better addiction because it's offering better addiction because it's offering better content than many other things in our content than many other things in our content than many other things in our life? In some sense, yes. So, I'm a life? In some sense, yes. So, I'm a life? In some sense, yes. So, I'm a little torn on it. The other thing that little torn on it. The other thing that little torn on it. The other thing that we've all noticed though is that people we've all noticed though is that people we've all noticed though is that people don't seem to be happy when they spend don't seem to be happy when they spend don't seem to be happy when they spend time scrolling on it. They're kind of time scrolling on it. They're kind of time scrolling on it. They're kind of tempted to do it, but when they finish, tempted to do it, but when they finish, tempted to do it, but when they finish, they never feel like, "Wow, that was they never feel like, "Wow, that was they never feel like, "Wow, that was really a great experience." Um, they're really a great experience." Um, they're really a great experience." Um, they're kind of drained from it. So, in that kind of drained from it. So, in that kind of drained from it. So, in that sense, it has the characteristics of an sense, it has the characteristics of an sense, it has the characteristics of an addiction where you keep going back to addiction where you keep going back to addiction where you keep going back to it, even though you're not getting the it, even though you're not getting the it, even though you're not getting the high from it that you did the first high from it that you did the first high from it that you did the first time. &gt;&gt; I will say, um, as long as I use it &gt;&gt; I will say, um, as long as I use it &gt;&gt; I will say, um, as long as I use it properly, I love social media and properly, I love social media and properly, I love social media and YouTube. I'm not just saying that as a YouTube. I'm not just saying that as a YouTube. I'm not just saying that as a political statement. Got to teach on political statement. Got to teach on political statement. Got to teach on YouTube. I learned from you, I learned YouTube. I learned from you, I learned YouTube. I learned from you, I learned from others. Like the other day, I from others. Like the other day, I from others. Like the other day, I wanted to um learn about architecture. wanted to um learn about architecture. wanted to um learn about architecture. It's not like during my workout, I put It's not like during my workout, I put It's not like during my workout, I put on a YouTube thing and just listen to on a YouTube thing and just listen to on a YouTube thing and just listen to it. Uh, like a basic history of certain it. Uh, like a basic history of certain it. Uh, like a basic history of certain architects in the United States. was architects in the United States. was architects in the United States. was like, I learned so much. Like, we like, I learned so much. Like, we like, I learned so much. Like, we couldn't do that when we were kids. It's couldn't do that when we were kids. It's couldn't do that when we were kids. It's awesome. It's just awesome. And then awesome. It's just awesome. And then awesome. It's just awesome. And then that set off in the algorithm some that set off in the algorithm some that set off in the algorithm some really good suggestions of some other really good suggestions of some other really good suggestions of some other things. &gt;&gt; And then when I didn't watch those, it &gt;&gt; And then when I didn't watch those, it &gt;&gt; And then when I didn't watch those, it offered some other and I'm like down the offered some other and I'm like down the offered some other and I'm like down the rabbit hole of stuff that I never ever rabbit hole of stuff that I never ever rabbit hole of stuff that I never ever would have encountered. It's really ever would have encountered. It's really ever would have encountered. It's really cool. &gt;&gt; This is precisely why all these kids &gt;&gt; This is precisely why all these kids &gt;&gt; This is precisely why all these kids have the opportunity, I think, to be so have the opportunity, I think, to be so have the opportunity, I think, to be so much smarter than we were. Yeah. I'm much smarter than we were. Yeah. I'm much smarter than we were. Yeah. I'm just I'm just super enthusiastic about just I'm just super enthusiastic about just I'm just super enthusiastic about it. And now with AI, it can be even a it. And now with AI, it can be even a it. And now with AI, it can be even a whole different level. I mentioned this whole different level. I mentioned this whole different level. I mentioned this thing before about, you know, using AI thing before about, you know, using AI thing before about, you know, using AI to debate, but just even in general, to debate, but just even in general, to debate, but just even in general, just saying, "Hey, I'm curious about just saying, "Hey, I'm curious about just saying, "Hey, I'm curious about this." How does this, you know, how does this." How does this, you know, how does this." How does this, you know, how does a flying buttress work or something? a flying buttress work or something? a flying buttress work or something? Hey, chat GPT. Hey, Clyde, blah blah. Hey, chat GPT. Hey, Clyde, blah blah. Hey, chat GPT. Hey, Clyde, blah blah. And you get the answer. Wow, what a And you get the answer. Wow, what a And you get the answer. Wow, what a great what a great opportunity for kids great what a great opportunity for kids great what a great opportunity for kids growing up. growing up. growing up. &gt;&gt; Are you using YouTube to try and help uh &gt;&gt; Are you using YouTube to try and help uh &gt;&gt; Are you using YouTube to try and help uh you fix up these uh things in your you fix up these uh things in your you fix up these uh things in your house? &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. Everything I fix, I learn how &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. Everything I fix, I learn how &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. Everything I fix, I learn how to do it on YouTube first. Yeah. to do it on YouTube first. Yeah. to do it on YouTube first. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Very cool. &gt;&gt; Very cool. &gt;&gt; Very cool. &gt;&gt; Now I'm using AI to do it. I I've got &gt;&gt; Now I'm using AI to do it. I I've got &gt;&gt; Now I'm using AI to do it. I I've got this lighting thing and I couldn't this lighting thing and I couldn't this lighting thing and I couldn't figure out. So, I took pictures and I figure out. So, I took pictures and I figure out. So, I took pictures and I said, "What am I looking at here and said, "What am I looking at here and said, "What am I looking at here and where's the box and the transformer or where's the box and the transformer or where's the box and the transformer or whatever?" And it was pretty good at whatever?" And it was pretty good at whatever?" And it was pretty good at telling me what to do next. telling me what to do next. telling me what to do next. &gt;&gt; That's awesome. Um, you have a company. &gt;&gt; That's awesome. Um, you have a company. &gt;&gt; That's awesome. Um, you have a company. This is not a promotional anytime you This is not a promotional anytime you This is not a promotional anytime you mention. &gt;&gt; Actually, wait, can I pause? Yeah. &gt;&gt; Actually, wait, can I pause? Yeah. &gt;&gt; Actually, wait, can I pause? Yeah. Neoensory I actually sold six months Neoensory I actually sold six months Neoensory I actually sold six months ago, so I don't have it anymore. Just ago, so I don't have it anymore. Just ago, so I don't have it anymore. Just &gt;&gt; Yeah. All right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. All right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. All right. &gt;&gt; So, had a company. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, had a company. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, had a company. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Congratulations. &gt;&gt; Congratulations. &gt;&gt; Congratulations. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; But Neoensory was a really neat idea of &gt;&gt; But Neoensory was a really neat idea of &gt;&gt; But Neoensory was a really neat idea of combining different senses. um people combining different senses. um people combining different senses. um people wearing bracelets so they could feel wearing bracelets so they could feel wearing bracelets so they could feel sounds and um and so forth. Um can sounds and um and so forth. Um can sounds and um and so forth. Um can anyone do this even if they're not anyone do this even if they're not anyone do this even if they're not deficient in vision or in hearing um or deficient in vision or in hearing um or deficient in vision or in hearing um or in some other modality? in some other modality? in some other modality? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I got I just got really &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I got I just got really &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I got I just got really interested in this topic about pushing interested in this topic about pushing interested in this topic about pushing information into the brain via unusual information into the brain via unusual information into the brain via unusual sensory channels. So for example, as you sensory channels. So for example, as you sensory channels. So for example, as you referenced, I you know I built a referenced, I you know I built a referenced, I you know I built a wristband that captures sound and turns wristband that captures sound and turns wristband that captures sound and turns sound into patterns of vibration on the sound into patterns of vibration on the sound into patterns of vibration on the skin. This is for people who are deaf skin. This is for people who are deaf skin. This is for people who are deaf and deaf people could learn how to hear and deaf people could learn how to hear and deaf people could learn how to hear that way. Why? Because this is the same that way. Why? Because this is the same that way. Why? Because this is the same thing that your inner ear, your coia thing that your inner ear, your coia thing that your inner ear, your coia does. It's just capturing vibrations on does. It's just capturing vibrations on does. It's just capturing vibrations on the eardrum and translate breaking that the eardrum and translate breaking that the eardrum and translate breaking that up into different frequencies, shipping up into different frequencies, shipping up into different frequencies, shipping that off to the brain in terms of that off to the brain in terms of that off to the brain in terms of spikes, just these, you know, voltage spikes, just these, you know, voltage spikes, just these, you know, voltage spikes along nerves. Um, we're doing the spikes along nerves. Um, we're doing the spikes along nerves. Um, we're doing the same thing except we're pushing it in same thing except we're pushing it in same thing except we're pushing it in through the skin. It goes up the spinal through the skin. It goes up the spinal through the skin. It goes up the spinal cord to a different part of the brain. cord to a different part of the brain. cord to a different part of the brain. But the brain can figure that out. How? But the brain can figure that out. How? But the brain can figure that out. How? Because it's doing correlations. it sees Because it's doing correlations. it sees Because it's doing correlations. it sees somebody's mouth move. It's feeling the somebody's mouth move. It's feeling the somebody's mouth move. It's feeling the sound and it figures out how to hear sound and it figures out how to hear sound and it figures out how to hear that way. Now, this idea of sensory that way. Now, this idea of sensory that way. Now, this idea of sensory substitution, um I, you know, I wish I'd invented um I, you know, I wish I'd invented um I, you know, I wish I'd invented that, but it actually has a long that, but it actually has a long that, but it actually has a long history. The more I research, I found history. The more I research, I found history. The more I research, I found out it goes back to the 1800s, um when out it goes back to the 1800s, um when out it goes back to the 1800s, um when people first started asking, hey, can people first started asking, hey, can people first started asking, hey, can you push information into the brain in a you push information into the brain in a you push information into the brain in a weird way? So, the very first one was in weird way? So, the very first one was in weird way? So, the very first one was in the 1880s. Um they had a little uh a the 1880s. Um they had a little uh a the 1880s. Um they had a little uh a little camera lens that would just little camera lens that would just little camera lens that would just detect light and dark and it would get detect light and dark and it would get detect light and dark and it would get translated into a buzzing on your translated into a buzzing on your translated into a buzzing on your forehead and um for people who were forehead and um for people who were forehead and um for people who were blind they could tell you know okay well blind they could tell you know okay well blind they could tell you know okay well there's a wall over here and there's a wall over here and there's a wall over here and then there's an opening over here and so then there's an opening over here and so then there's an opening over here and so on and then people worked on this. The on and then people worked on this. The on and then people worked on this. The first major paper was in 1969 in nature. first major paper was in 1969 in nature. first major paper was in 1969 in nature. A guy named Paul Bockyita took blind A guy named Paul Bockyita took blind A guy named Paul Bockyita took blind people and he put them in a dental chair people and he put them in a dental chair people and he put them in a dental chair and he had this thing that would poke and he had this thing that would poke and he had this thing that would poke them in the back. A grid of 40x40 little them in the back. A grid of 40x40 little them in the back. A grid of 40x40 little solenoids that would poke you in the solenoids that would poke you in the solenoids that would poke you in the back and he set up a video camera. back and he set up a video camera. back and he set up a video camera. Whatever the camera saw, you would feel Whatever the camera saw, you would feel Whatever the camera saw, you would feel that in your back. So if it's looking at that in your back. So if it's looking at that in your back. So if it's looking at a triangle, you feel that triangle poked a triangle, you feel that triangle poked a triangle, you feel that triangle poked in your back. If it's looking at a face, in your back. If it's looking at a face, in your back. If it's looking at a face, you feel the face by. So blind people you feel the face by. So blind people you feel the face by. So blind people got pretty good at doing this, got pretty good at doing this, got pretty good at doing this, especially once he let them control the especially once he let them control the especially once he let them control the camera. So they could move the camera camera. So they could move the camera camera. So they could move the camera any way they wanted. People got really any way they wanted. People got really any way they wanted. People got really good at being able to tell what was good at being able to tell what was good at being able to tell what was going on. going on. going on. &gt;&gt; So it was following them around as they &gt;&gt; So it was following them around as they &gt;&gt; So it was following them around as they move through the world. move through the world. move through the world. &gt;&gt; No, they were sitting in this dental &gt;&gt; No, they were sitting in this dental &gt;&gt; No, they were sitting in this dental chair. Um and that's exactly it. In chair. Um and that's exactly it. In chair. Um and that's exactly it. In 1969, the technology was really clunky 1969, the technology was really clunky 1969, the technology was really clunky and heavy and got hot and whatever and heavy and got hot and whatever and heavy and got hot and whatever and there was no way to make it portable in there was no way to make it portable in there was no way to make it portable in a meaningful way. But as time has gone a meaningful way. But as time has gone a meaningful way. But as time has gone on, we've been able to do that now. And on, we've been able to do that now. And on, we've been able to do that now. And so Paul Bakyita's research, he passed so Paul Bakyita's research, he passed so Paul Bakyita's research, he passed away some years ago, but his research away some years ago, but his research away some years ago, but his research has continued with something called the has continued with something called the has continued with something called the brainport, which is again for blind brainport, which is again for blind brainport, which is again for blind people. So with the brain port, the way people. So with the brain port, the way people. So with the brain port, the way this works is you're wearing this little this works is you're wearing this little this works is you're wearing this little camera on your head on glasses. And camera on your head on glasses. And camera on your head on glasses. And you've got this uh little electrical you've got this uh little electrical you've got this uh little electrical grid on your tongue. And so whatever the grid on your tongue. And so whatever the grid on your tongue. And so whatever the camera is seeing, you feel that on your camera is seeing, you feel that on your camera is seeing, you feel that on your tongue. It feels like pop rocks. So if tongue. It feels like pop rocks. So if tongue. It feels like pop rocks. So if I'm looking at the coffee cup in front I'm looking at the coffee cup in front I'm looking at the coffee cup in front of me, I'm feeling the outline of the of me, I'm feeling the outline of the of me, I'm feeling the outline of the coffee cup. And blind people can get so coffee cup. And blind people can get so coffee cup. And blind people can get so good at this, they can do things like, good at this, they can do things like, good at this, they can do things like, you know, throw a ball into a basket or you know, throw a ball into a basket or you know, throw a ball into a basket or navigate a complex obstacle course. navigate a complex obstacle course. navigate a complex obstacle course. &gt;&gt; Whoa. &gt;&gt; Whoa. &gt;&gt; Whoa. &gt;&gt; It sounds crazy, but the thing to &gt;&gt; It sounds crazy, but the thing to &gt;&gt; It sounds crazy, but the thing to remember is the way you normally see is remember is the way you normally see is remember is the way you normally see is your eyeballs are, you know, these your eyeballs are, you know, these your eyeballs are, you know, these devices embedded in your skull here that devices embedded in your skull here that devices embedded in your skull here that are capturing photons and turning that are capturing photons and turning that are capturing photons and turning that into spikes that race into the darkness into spikes that race into the darkness into spikes that race into the darkness of your brain. Electrical signals. of your brain. Electrical signals. of your brain. Electrical signals. Exactly. And so this is just turning Exactly. And so this is just turning Exactly. And so this is just turning what your tongue is feeling into spikes, what your tongue is feeling into spikes, what your tongue is feeling into spikes, these electrical signals that race into these electrical signals that race into these electrical signals that race into the darkness of your brain. And you can the darkness of your brain. And you can the darkness of your brain. And you can figure it out. You can learn how to see figure it out. You can learn how to see figure it out. You can learn how to see that way. And again, it's with that way. And again, it's with that way. And again, it's with correlation because you feel something correlation because you feel something correlation because you feel something with your fingers. Maybe you hear with your fingers. Maybe you hear with your fingers. Maybe you hear something also. And so you're putting something also. And so you're putting something also. And so you're putting that together and your brain says, "Oh, that together and your brain says, "Oh, that together and your brain says, "Oh, okay. I got it. There's a visual thing okay. I got it. There's a visual thing okay. I got it. There's a visual thing out there in the world." And the really out there in the world." And the really out there in the world." And the really wacky part I'll just mention is that wacky part I'll just mention is that wacky part I'll just mention is that people using the brain port who let's people using the brain port who let's people using the brain port who let's say used to have sight and lost it they say used to have sight and lost it they say used to have sight and lost it they will report it is like sight. They say I will report it is like sight. They say I will report it is like sight. They say I remember seeing and this is like seeing remember seeing and this is like seeing remember seeing and this is like seeing even though it's coming through their even though it's coming through their even though it's coming through their tongue and with the neoensory wristband tongue and with the neoensory wristband tongue and with the neoensory wristband that we built um you know I interviewed that we built um you know I interviewed that we built um you know I interviewed a guy after he'd been wearing about six a guy after he'd been wearing about six a guy after he'd been wearing about six months and I said look when you hear a months and I said look when you hear a months and I said look when you hear a dog bark do you feel the buzzing on your dog bark do you feel the buzzing on your dog bark do you feel the buzzing on your wrist and then you think okay that must wrist and then you think okay that must wrist and then you think okay that must be a dog bark. He said, "No, no, I hear be a dog bark. He said, "No, no, I hear be a dog bark. He said, "No, no, I hear the dog bark out there." Which sounds the dog bark out there." Which sounds the dog bark out there." Which sounds crazy, but obviously that's the same crazy, but obviously that's the same crazy, but obviously that's the same crazy thing happening with our ears. You crazy thing happening with our ears. You crazy thing happening with our ears. You know, we've got this whole mechanism know, we've got this whole mechanism know, we've got this whole mechanism going on that we're very used to. And going on that we're very used to. And going on that we're very used to. And so, we say, "Oh, of course the dog is so, we say, "Oh, of course the dog is so, we say, "Oh, of course the dog is out there." But in fact, it's all out there." But in fact, it's all out there." But in fact, it's all happening in here in the darkness of the happening in here in the darkness of the happening in here in the darkness of the skull. I'd like to take a quick break skull. I'd like to take a quick break skull. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, and acknowledge one of our sponsors, and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. Recently, I've been um listening to a Recently, I've been um listening to a Recently, I've been um listening to a book that I read previously, which uh I book that I read previously, which uh I book that I read previously, which uh I love, by the way. I love Livewire. Thank love, by the way. I love Livewire. Thank love, by the way. I love Livewire. Thank you. I'm not just saying I've read it you. I'm not just saying I've read it you. I'm not just saying I've read it like three times um when it came out. I like three times um when it came out. I like three times um when it came out. I need to revisit it. I like to reread need to revisit it. I like to reread need to revisit it. I like to reread books. Yeah. I believe in rereading books. Yeah. I believe in rereading books. Yeah. I believe in rereading books. Um Ed Young uh wrote a book books. Um Ed Young uh wrote a book books. Um Ed Young uh wrote a book called An Immense World. Um he's not a called An Immense World. Um he's not a called An Immense World. Um he's not a scientist, but he's a science writer, scientist, but he's a science writer, scientist, but he's a science writer, and it's about different um sensory and it's about different um sensory and it's about different um sensory modalities that different animals use. modalities that different animals use. modalities that different animals use. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And for an animal lover like me, it's I &gt;&gt; And for an animal lover like me, it's I &gt;&gt; And for an animal lover like me, it's I found it really spectacular. But he found it really spectacular. But he found it really spectacular. But he says something that I totally agree says something that I totally agree says something that I totally agree with, which is that we shouldn't think with, which is that we shouldn't think with, which is that we shouldn't think so much about whether or not um a given so much about whether or not um a given so much about whether or not um a given animal is good at smell and bad at animal is good at smell and bad at animal is good at smell and bad at vision or really good hearing or the vision or really good hearing or the vision or really good hearing or the valuations of these things are really valuations of these things are really valuations of these things are really tough. With visual acuity, we can do it tough. With visual acuity, we can do it tough. With visual acuity, we can do it like you know an eagle resolution like you know an eagle resolution like you know an eagle resolution and you know versus human resolution. and you know versus human resolution. and you know versus human resolution. But when it comes to things like smell But when it comes to things like smell But when it comes to things like smell or touch, the better question uh he says or touch, the better question uh he says or touch, the better question uh he says and I agree is um how much does a given and I agree is um how much does a given and I agree is um how much does a given organism or person rely on a given sense organism or person rely on a given sense organism or person rely on a given sense will tell you sort of their abilities will tell you sort of their abilities will tell you sort of their abilities with that sense. with that sense. with that sense. &gt;&gt; I mean there's some bounds on that, &gt;&gt; I mean there's some bounds on that, &gt;&gt; I mean there's some bounds on that, right? I can't echolocate like a bat, right? I can't echolocate like a bat, right? I can't echolocate like a bat, but &gt;&gt; I'm guessing that if I had to in order &gt;&gt; I'm guessing that if I had to in order &gt;&gt; I'm guessing that if I had to in order to navigate an environment, I could to navigate an environment, I could to navigate an environment, I could learn to echolocate. And I think there learn to echolocate. And I think there learn to echolocate. And I think there are there are individuals who have are there are individuals who have are there are individuals who have learned to echoloccate. learned to echoloccate. learned to echoloccate. &gt;&gt; Exactly. In fact, the term was coined in &gt;&gt; Exactly. In fact, the term was coined in &gt;&gt; Exactly. In fact, the term was coined in 1930 in a science paper this gentleman 1930 in a science paper this gentleman 1930 in a science paper this gentleman wrote called echolocation in bats and wrote called echolocation in bats and wrote called echolocation in bats and blind men. And uh blind people since at blind men. And uh blind people since at blind men. And uh blind people since at least almost a hundred years now can do least almost a hundred years now can do least almost a hundred years now can do this thing where they use clicks of this thing where they use clicks of this thing where they use clicks of their tongue or the tap of their cane or their tongue or the tap of their cane or their tongue or the tap of their cane or any kind of sound that they make and any kind of sound that they make and any kind of sound that they make and they listen very carefully for what's they listen very carefully for what's they listen very carefully for what's bouncing back to them and they can bouncing back to them and they can bouncing back to them and they can echolocate. It also turns out that echolocate. It also turns out that echolocate. It also turns out that seeing people can echolocate if it is seeing people can echolocate if it is seeing people can echolocate if it is relevant to them. you know, if you relevant to them. you know, if you relevant to them. you know, if you really want to put the effort into it, really want to put the effort into it, really want to put the effort into it, you can learn how to do it. Again, this you can learn how to do it. Again, this you can learn how to do it. Again, this just points to the plasticity of the just points to the plasticity of the just points to the plasticity of the brain, how good it is at doing this. brain, how good it is at doing this. brain, how good it is at doing this. Some years ago, I suggested this Mr. Some years ago, I suggested this Mr. Some years ago, I suggested this Mr. Potato Head theory about thinking about Potato Head theory about thinking about Potato Head theory about thinking about the brain, which is whatever senses you the brain, which is whatever senses you the brain, which is whatever senses you plug in to a brain, it'll figure out plug in to a brain, it'll figure out plug in to a brain, it'll figure out what to do with that information. And what to do with that information. And what to do with that information. And so, when we look across the animal so, when we look across the animal so, when we look across the animal kingdom, we find all kinds of very weird kingdom, we find all kinds of very weird kingdom, we find all kinds of very weird stuff. Not only you know eagle eyes and stuff. Not only you know eagle eyes and stuff. Not only you know eagle eyes and so on but we find um you know many so on but we find um you know many so on but we find um you know many animals like let's say snakes they pick animals like let's say snakes they pick animals like let's say snakes they pick up on infrared range of vision which up on infrared range of vision which up on infrared range of vision which is invisible to us. Um you've got which is invisible to us. Um you've got which is invisible to us. Um you've got lots of fish that pick up on lots of fish that pick up on lots of fish that pick up on perturbations and electrical fields. perturbations and electrical fields. perturbations and electrical fields. They have electro reception. Um you have They have electro reception. Um you have They have electro reception. Um you have this animal called the starnosed mole this animal called the starnosed mole this animal called the starnosed mole which has this nose with 22 fingers on which has this nose with 22 fingers on which has this nose with 22 fingers on it. It feels its way through these it. It feels its way through these it. It feels its way through these tunnels with like these 22 fingers. this tunnels with like these 22 fingers. this tunnels with like these 22 fingers. this weird thing. Lots of birds and animals weird thing. Lots of birds and animals weird thing. Lots of birds and animals and in uh birds and cows and insects and in uh birds and cows and insects and in uh birds and cows and insects have um magneto reception so they can have um magneto reception so they can have um magneto reception so they can pick up on the magnetic field of the pick up on the magnetic field of the pick up on the magnetic field of the earth and they can navigate that way. earth and they can navigate that way. earth and they can navigate that way. For years I was staring at this stuff For years I was staring at this stuff For years I was staring at this stuff and figuring out how in the world does and figuring out how in the world does and figuring out how in the world does evolution happen so quickly that you can evolution happen so quickly that you can evolution happen so quickly that you can do all this. And this is what led me to do all this. And this is what led me to do all this. And this is what led me to this theory that mother nature really this theory that mother nature really this theory that mother nature really only had to invent the brain once. only had to invent the brain once. only had to invent the brain once. Figure out the principles of brain Figure out the principles of brain Figure out the principles of brain operation. And after that, she could operation. And after that, she could operation. And after that, she could spend all of her time tweaking the spend all of her time tweaking the spend all of her time tweaking the genetics to make all these weird genetics to make all these weird genetics to make all these weird peripheral devices that you plug in. And peripheral devices that you plug in. And peripheral devices that you plug in. And it's all plug-andplay. Whatever weird it's all plug-andplay. Whatever weird it's all plug-andplay. Whatever weird thing you come up with, you just say, thing you come up with, you just say, thing you come up with, you just say, "Okay, cool. I'm going to plug this in." "Okay, cool. I'm going to plug this in." "Okay, cool. I'm going to plug this in." And I and I'm sure the brain will figure And I and I'm sure the brain will figure And I and I'm sure the brain will figure this out. And it always does. And that's this out. And it always does. And that's this out. And it always does. And that's exactly why we can do sensory exactly why we can do sensory exactly why we can do sensory substitution. And by the way, sensory substitution. And by the way, sensory substitution. And by the way, sensory enhancement or sensory addition where enhancement or sensory addition where enhancement or sensory addition where you can add completely new senses. One you can add completely new senses. One you can add completely new senses. One example is uh my colleagues at Ozna example is uh my colleagues at Ozna example is uh my colleagues at Ozna Brookke built this belt that you Brookke built this belt that you Brookke built this belt that you wear that's got vibratory motors all wear that's got vibratory motors all wear that's got vibratory motors all around it and this is a little digital around it and this is a little digital around it and this is a little digital compass on it so it can tell where north compass on it so it can tell where north compass on it so it can tell where north is. So whenever you're you know is. So whenever you're you know is. So whenever you're you know whichever direction north is on your whichever direction north is on your whichever direction north is on your body you feel that motor buzzing. So it body you feel that motor buzzing. So it body you feel that motor buzzing. So it might be on my left hip if north is that might be on my left hip if north is that might be on my left hip if north is that way but if I turn around I'll feel that way but if I turn around I'll feel that way but if I turn around I'll feel that on my right hip and so on. And people on my right hip and so on. And people on my right hip and so on. And people get really good at being able to detect get really good at being able to detect get really good at being able to detect which way north is. Just as one example, which way north is. Just as one example, which way north is. Just as one example, it's really easy to add new senses like it's really easy to add new senses like it's really easy to add new senses like magneto reception in this case. And magneto reception in this case. And magneto reception in this case. And people can figure this stuff out. people can figure this stuff out. people can figure this stuff out. &gt;&gt; So cool. Uh as a fan of the X-Men in &gt;&gt; So cool. Uh as a fan of the X-Men in &gt;&gt; So cool. Uh as a fan of the X-Men in particular, I mean, you mentioned particular, I mean, you mentioned particular, I mean, you mentioned Magneto, but that's uh but in general, I Magneto, but that's uh but in general, I Magneto, but that's uh but in general, I mean, yeah, different mutations give mean, yeah, different mutations give mean, yeah, different mutations give rise to different abilities, and that rise to different abilities, and that rise to different abilities, and that whole series of the X-Men is really whole series of the X-Men is really whole series of the X-Men is really about kind of extremes of genetic about kind of extremes of genetic about kind of extremes of genetic mutations giving abilities. And and mutations giving abilities. And and mutations giving abilities. And and there's some social discussion in there, there's some social discussion in there, there's some social discussion in there, too. But um let's talk about dreaming too. But um let's talk about dreaming too. But um let's talk about dreaming because you mentioned that um you know because you mentioned that um you know because you mentioned that um you know everything that we perceive as out there everything that we perceive as out there everything that we perceive as out there uh beyond our reach um is occurring by uh beyond our reach um is occurring by uh beyond our reach um is occurring by virtue of electrical and chemical events virtue of electrical and chemical events virtue of electrical and chemical events in our brain. It's all vaulted in our brain. It's all vaulted in our brain. It's all vaulted in there. Um dreams are a unique there. Um dreams are a unique there. Um dreams are a unique situation where typically people's eyes situation where typically people's eyes situation where typically people's eyes are closed when they sleep and um are closed when they sleep and um are closed when they sleep and um they're often paralyzed during REM they're often paralyzed during REM they're often paralyzed during REM sleep. Um, and yet we have very visual sleep. Um, and yet we have very visual sleep. Um, and yet we have very visual dreams. I know you talked about this in dreams. I know you talked about this in dreams. I know you talked about this in LiveWire, but please share with us what LiveWire, but please share with us what LiveWire, but please share with us what you think is the origin of the you think is the origin of the you think is the origin of the visual component of dreams, and I'm visual component of dreams, and I'm visual component of dreams, and I'm curious if it relates back to the um uh curious if it relates back to the um uh curious if it relates back to the um uh the visual imagery um continuum that you the visual imagery um continuum that you the visual imagery um continuum that you mentioned earlier. Do some people just mentioned earlier. Do some people just mentioned earlier. Do some people just tend to have more visual dreams and tend to have more visual dreams and tend to have more visual dreams and other people don't? other people don't? other people don't? &gt;&gt; Let me answer that second part first. &gt;&gt; Let me answer that second part first. &gt;&gt; Let me answer that second part first. We're not sure about that. I ask people We're not sure about that. I ask people We're not sure about that. I ask people all the time who are aphantasic oric, all the time who are aphantasic oric, all the time who are aphantasic oric, hyperfantasic about their dreams. It's hyperfantasic about their dreams. It's hyperfantasic about their dreams. It's hard to tell. I don't see something hard to tell. I don't see something hard to tell. I don't see something obvious there, which is to say when obvious there, which is to say when obvious there, which is to say when there's dreams, you're getting this there's dreams, you're getting this there's dreams, you're getting this activity blasted into your visual activity blasted into your visual activity blasted into your visual cortex. So, it's like vision. So, so let cortex. So, it's like vision. So, so let cortex. So, it's like vision. So, so let me back up to answer the question about me back up to answer the question about me back up to answer the question about uh my new theory about why we dream uh my new theory about why we dream uh my new theory about why we dream because this has everything to do with because this has everything to do with because this has everything to do with brain plasticity. So, here's where this brain plasticity. So, here's where this brain plasticity. So, here's where this got started. Um, by about 2013, some of got started. Um, by about 2013, some of got started. Um, by about 2013, some of our colleagues at Harvard did this our colleagues at Harvard did this our colleagues at Harvard did this experiment where they put people on the experiment where they put people on the experiment where they put people on the scanner and they blindfolded them scanner and they blindfolded them scanner and they blindfolded them tightly and they were looking at what tightly and they were looking at what tightly and they were looking at what was going on in the brain and um, you was going on in the brain and um, you was going on in the brain and um, you know, with touch and with sounds. know, with touch and with sounds. know, with touch and with sounds. And it turns out that if you're And it turns out that if you're And it turns out that if you're blindfolded after about an hour, you blindfolded after about an hour, you blindfolded after about an hour, you start seeing a little bit of activity in start seeing a little bit of activity in start seeing a little bit of activity in the visual cortex when you are touched the visual cortex when you are touched the visual cortex when you are touched or when you uh, hear something. Now, or when you uh, hear something. Now, or when you uh, hear something. Now, this was crazy because we know that if this was crazy because we know that if this was crazy because we know that if somebody goes blind, you know, hearing somebody goes blind, you know, hearing somebody goes blind, you know, hearing and touch will take over that territory. and touch will take over that territory. and touch will take over that territory. But we thought that was on the scale of But we thought that was on the scale of But we thought that was on the scale of years. And and here what they were years. And and here what they were years. And and here what they were demonstrating is that within 60 to 90 demonstrating is that within 60 to 90 demonstrating is that within 60 to 90 minutes, you start seeing little blips minutes, you start seeing little blips minutes, you start seeing little blips of activity. Why? It's because you've of activity. Why? It's because you've of activity. Why? It's because you've got all this crossmodal wiring. In other got all this crossmodal wiring. In other got all this crossmodal wiring. In other words, you've got neurons, let's say, in words, you've got neurons, let's say, in words, you've got neurons, let's say, in the auditory cortex that actually reach the auditory cortex that actually reach the auditory cortex that actually reach all the way over to the visual cortex. all the way over to the visual cortex. all the way over to the visual cortex. And same with touch neurons and so on. And same with touch neurons and so on. And same with touch neurons and so on. These are normally silent. They don't These are normally silent. They don't These are normally silent. They don't normally do anything, but they are normally do anything, but they are normally do anything, but they are ready. They're like silent sentinels ready. They're like silent sentinels ready. They're like silent sentinels that say, "Hey, just in case this that say, "Hey, just in case this that say, "Hey, just in case this territory stops getting used, I'm taking territory stops getting used, I'm taking territory stops getting used, I'm taking over." Okay, so here's what my student over." Okay, so here's what my student over." Okay, so here's what my student and I realized is that because we live and I realized is that because we live and I realized is that because we live on a planet that rotates into darkness on a planet that rotates into darkness on a planet that rotates into darkness every night, the visual system is at a every night, the visual system is at a every night, the visual system is at a unique disadvantage. Because when it's unique disadvantage. Because when it's unique disadvantage. Because when it's dark, you can still hear and smell and dark, you can still hear and smell and dark, you can still hear and smell and touch and taste, but you can't see. And touch and taste, but you can't see. And touch and taste, but you can't see. And obviously I'm talking about evolutionary obviously I'm talking about evolutionary obviously I'm talking about evolutionary time before the invention of lights time before the invention of lights time before the invention of lights which was the last nanocond of which was the last nanocond of which was the last nanocond of evolutionary history. Um it was really evolutionary history. Um it was really evolutionary history. Um it was really dark at night and you can't see and so dark at night and you can't see and so dark at night and you can't see and so you know you'd go into the corner of a you know you'd go into the corner of a you know you'd go into the corner of a cave and curl up and go to sleep. But cave and curl up and go to sleep. But cave and curl up and go to sleep. But the key is that the visual system was in the key is that the visual system was in the key is that the visual system was in danger of getting taken over during this danger of getting taken over during this danger of getting taken over during this long extended period of darkness. So long extended period of darkness. So long extended period of darkness. So what we hypothesize is that dreams are what we hypothesize is that dreams are what we hypothesize is that dreams are the brain's way of defending the visual the brain's way of defending the visual the brain's way of defending the visual cortex against takeover from the other cortex against takeover from the other cortex against takeover from the other senses. And when you look at the senses. And when you look at the senses. And when you look at the circuitry, it's this very specific circuitry, it's this very specific circuitry, it's this very specific circuitry. Starts in the midbrain, goes circuitry. Starts in the midbrain, goes circuitry. Starts in the midbrain, goes to an area called the lateral geniculate to an area called the lateral geniculate to an area called the lateral geniculate nucleus, and plugs straight into the nucleus, and plugs straight into the nucleus, and plugs straight into the primary visual cortex. And that's it. primary visual cortex. And that's it. primary visual cortex. And that's it. Every 90 minutes, you have this volley Every 90 minutes, you have this volley Every 90 minutes, you have this volley of activity that just slams into the of activity that just slams into the of activity that just slams into the primary visual cortex. It doesn't go primary visual cortex. It doesn't go primary visual cortex. It doesn't go anywhere else in the brain. And so every anywhere else in the brain. And so every anywhere else in the brain. And so every 90 minutes, you've got this automated 90 minutes, you've got this automated 90 minutes, you've got this automated way of making activity happen there. And way of making activity happen there. And way of making activity happen there. And because we are visual creatures, we see because we are visual creatures, we see because we are visual creatures, we see that as a dream. We see a whole story. that as a dream. We see a whole story. that as a dream. We see a whole story. And because the brain is a, you know, a And because the brain is a, you know, a And because the brain is a, you know, a storyteller, we impose plot, meaning, storyteller, we impose plot, meaning, storyteller, we impose plot, meaning, and we have emotion that goes with that. and we have emotion that goes with that. and we have emotion that goes with that. Um, but the key is this is the brain's Um, but the key is this is the brain's Um, but the key is this is the brain's way of defending territory in the dark. way of defending territory in the dark. way of defending territory in the dark. And so what we did then is we examined And so what we did then is we examined And so what we did then is we examined very carefully 25 species of primates very carefully 25 species of primates very carefully 25 species of primates and looked at their brain plasticity. Um and looked at their brain plasticity. Um and looked at their brain plasticity. Um and you can measure this with different and you can measure this with different and you can measure this with different proxies like you know when they start to proxies like you know when they start to proxies like you know when they start to walk and when they get to reproduction walk and when they get to reproduction walk and when they get to reproduction age and so on and um you know some age and so on and um you know some age and so on and um you know some creatures like the grey mouse lemur creatures like the grey mouse lemur creatures like the grey mouse lemur which is a type of monkey um you know he which is a type of monkey um you know he which is a type of monkey um you know he uh they are born let's just say uh they are born let's just say uh they are born let's just say pre-programmed you know they pop pre-programmed you know they pop pre-programmed you know they pop out they're really quick to stop you out they're really quick to stop you out they're really quick to stop you know to wean and uh and reach know to wean and uh and reach know to wean and uh and reach juvenile age and reproduce and so on. juvenile age and reproduce and so on. juvenile age and reproduce and so on. Whereas you look at homo sapiens we're Whereas you look at homo sapiens we're Whereas you look at homo sapiens we're super slow. We've got these extended super slow. We've got these extended super slow. We've got these extended infies and we take a long time to learn infies and we take a long time to learn infies and we take a long time to learn how to walk and so on. Okay, because how to walk and so on. Okay, because how to walk and so on. Okay, because we're very plastic, we end up in the we're very plastic, we end up in the we're very plastic, we end up in the world halfbaked. Okay, well it turns out world halfbaked. Okay, well it turns out world halfbaked. Okay, well it turns out if you plot how much REM sleep each of if you plot how much REM sleep each of if you plot how much REM sleep each of these animals get, the more plastic the these animals get, the more plastic the these animals get, the more plastic the animal, like homo sapiens, we've got animal, like homo sapiens, we've got animal, like homo sapiens, we've got tons of REM sleep. And by the way, this tons of REM sleep. And by the way, this tons of REM sleep. And by the way, this is mostly in infancy. Infants spend 50% is mostly in infancy. Infants spend 50% is mostly in infancy. Infants spend 50% of their time in REM sleep. As you get of their time in REM sleep. As you get of their time in REM sleep. As you get older and your brain becomes less older and your brain becomes less older and your brain becomes less plastic, you have a drop off in REM plastic, you have a drop off in REM plastic, you have a drop off in REM sleep. And by the way, when you look across And by the way, when you look across And by the way, when you look across animal species of all types, you find animal species of all types, you find animal species of all types, you find that the animals that are born with that the animals that are born with that the animals that are born with extended infies and need to figure out extended infies and need to figure out extended infies and need to figure out how to do stuff in the world, um they how to do stuff in the world, um they how to do stuff in the world, um they all have much more REM sleep, like eight all have much more REM sleep, like eight all have much more REM sleep, like eight times more REM sleep than animals that times more REM sleep than animals that times more REM sleep than animals that are born essentially mature, like you are born essentially mature, like you are born essentially mature, like you know, cows and giraffes and zebras and know, cows and giraffes and zebras and know, cows and giraffes and zebras and whatever. You know, they show up, they whatever. You know, they show up, they whatever. You know, they show up, they start walking in 40 minutes and so on. start walking in 40 minutes and so on. start walking in 40 minutes and so on. Um they have much less REM sleep than we Um they have much less REM sleep than we Um they have much less REM sleep than we do. So anyway, this is our hypothesis do. So anyway, this is our hypothesis do. So anyway, this is our hypothesis about why we dream and it's the only about why we dream and it's the only about why we dream and it's the only hypothesis that makes quantitative hypothesis that makes quantitative hypothesis that makes quantitative predictions across species. predictions across species. predictions across species. &gt;&gt; Super interesting. Um and we know that &gt;&gt; Super interesting. Um and we know that &gt;&gt; Super interesting. Um and we know that REM associated dreams are much more uh REM associated dreams are much more uh REM associated dreams are much more uh elaborate than deep sleep dreams. than deep sleep dreams. than deep sleep dreams. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the important part here of &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the important part here of &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the important part here of course is they're more visually course is they're more visually course is they're more visually elaborate. Um you know there are elaborate. Um you know there are elaborate. Um you know there are dreams that people can have in deep dreams that people can have in deep dreams that people can have in deep sleep. Obviously, the way that this gets sleep. Obviously, the way that this gets sleep. Obviously, the way that this gets studied is, you know, is you rouse the studied is, you know, is you rouse the studied is, you know, is you rouse the sleeper and you say, "Hey, what were you sleeper and you say, "Hey, what were you sleeper and you say, "Hey, what were you just dreaming about? What were you just dreaming about? What were you just dreaming about? What were you just thinking about?" And so, if you do that thinking about?" And so, if you do that thinking about?" And so, if you do that during REM sleep where their eyes are during REM sleep where their eyes are during REM sleep where their eyes are moving around, uh they'll say, "Whoa, I moving around, uh they'll say, "Whoa, I moving around, uh they'll say, "Whoa, I was just, you know, riding across a was just, you know, riding across a was just, you know, riding across a meadow on a camel and this was what was meadow on a camel and this was what was meadow on a camel and this was what was going on." If you wake somebody during going on." If you wake somebody during going on." If you wake somebody during other stages of sleep, deep sleep, other stages of sleep, deep sleep, other stages of sleep, deep sleep, they'll, you know, they sometimes have they'll, you know, they sometimes have they'll, you know, they sometimes have something like, "I was just considering something like, "I was just considering something like, "I was just considering this feeling I had of whatever, but it's this feeling I had of whatever, but it's this feeling I had of whatever, but it's not as visual. not as visual. not as visual. &gt;&gt; It's not as rich." By the way, people &gt;&gt; It's not as rich." By the way, people &gt;&gt; It's not as rich." By the way, people who are blind still have dreams, but who are blind still have dreams, but who are blind still have dreams, but their dreams are not visual. They have a their dreams are not visual. They have a their dreams are not visual. They have a dream like, "Oh, I was, you know, dream like, "Oh, I was, you know, dream like, "Oh, I was, you know, feeling my way around the living room, feeling my way around the living room, feeling my way around the living room, but all the furniture was rearranged and but all the furniture was rearranged and but all the furniture was rearranged and then I felt in the corner and it was a then I felt in the corner and it was a then I felt in the corner and it was a jaguar and the jaguar started chasing me jaguar and the jaguar started chasing me jaguar and the jaguar started chasing me and I was trying to get away from it and I was trying to get away from it and I was trying to get away from it and so on." But it's sound, it's touch, it's so on." But it's sound, it's touch, it's so on." But it's sound, it's touch, it's things like that. Why? Because their things like that. Why? Because their things like that. Why? Because their occipital lobe at the back of their head occipital lobe at the back of their head occipital lobe at the back of their head is not visual. It's coming for these is not visual. It's coming for these is not visual. It's coming for these other things. So the dreaming circuitry other things. So the dreaming circuitry other things. So the dreaming circuitry which is very ancient is just blasting which is very ancient is just blasting which is very ancient is just blasting activity into that area of the occipital activity into that area of the occipital activity into that area of the occipital lobe and so they experience whatever lobe and so they experience whatever lobe and so they experience whatever that correlates with. that correlates with. that correlates with. &gt;&gt; So cool. Um I want to move on to uh &gt;&gt; So cool. Um I want to move on to uh &gt;&gt; So cool. Um I want to move on to uh questions that I have about science and questions that I have about science and questions that I have about science and the law. But before I do, I just um I the law. But before I do, I just um I the law. But before I do, I just um I was told by a very talented m um was told by a very talented m um was told by a very talented m um magician uh mentalist recently that magician uh mentalist recently that magician uh mentalist recently that there's a guy down in Brazil who does um there's a guy down in Brazil who does um there's a guy down in Brazil who does um magic tricks for blind people using only magic tricks for blind people using only magic tricks for blind people using only the auditory domain. the auditory domain. the auditory domain. &gt;&gt; And um apparently if you blindfold &gt;&gt; And um apparently if you blindfold &gt;&gt; And um apparently if you blindfold yourself and you spend a bit of time yourself and you spend a bit of time yourself and you spend a bit of time around him, you can start to uh hear around him, you can start to uh hear around him, you can start to uh hear these magic tricks. And they're not just these magic tricks. And they're not just these magic tricks. And they're not just illusions of like sound leaping. Uh illusions of like sound leaping. Uh illusions of like sound leaping. Uh and so I said, "Well, give me an and so I said, "Well, give me an and so I said, "Well, give me an example." He said, "You have to just example." He said, "You have to just example." He said, "You have to just experience this. This is something we experience this. This is something we experience this. This is something we should we should meet this person. We should we should meet this person. We should we should meet this person. We should meet this person." Um just a should meet this person." Um just a should meet this person." Um just a complete perceptual bend to try and get complete perceptual bend to try and get complete perceptual bend to try and get one's head around that. By the way, one's head around that. By the way, one's head around that. By the way, counselors who are at these who deal counselors who are at these who deal counselors who are at these who deal with these uh blind students at these with these uh blind students at these with these uh blind students at these blind schools, they're generally blind schools, they're generally blind schools, they're generally encouraged to blindfold themselves for encouraged to blindfold themselves for encouraged to blindfold themselves for like seven days and they absolutely like seven days and they absolutely like seven days and they absolutely start having totally different start having totally different start having totally different experiences. Their brain starts, you experiences. Their brain starts, you experiences. Their brain starts, you know, changing. know, changing. know, changing. &gt;&gt; I still won't do one of those darkness &gt;&gt; I still won't do one of those darkness &gt;&gt; I still won't do one of those darkness cave retreats. People have tried to cave retreats. People have tried to cave retreats. People have tried to persuade me to do those. I have no persuade me to do those. I have no persuade me to do those. I have no interest. Um I love sunlight. I want to interest. Um I love sunlight. I want to interest. Um I love sunlight. I want to keep my circadian rhythm entrainment keep my circadian rhythm entrainment keep my circadian rhythm entrainment intact. I uh you know if that's what intact. I uh you know if that's what intact. I uh you know if that's what people want to do. Also I heard about people want to do. Also I heard about people want to do. Also I heard about someone going to do it and then they someone going to do it and then they someone going to do it and then they flipped on the lights at the end. They flipped on the lights at the end. They flipped on the lights at the end. They went back into seed and the place was went back into seed and the place was went back into seed and the place was covered with spiders. So clean the place covered with spiders. So clean the place covered with spiders. So clean the place up. Um science and the law. Earlier we up. Um science and the law. Earlier we up. Um science and the law. Earlier we were talking about how under stressful were talking about how under stressful were talking about how under stressful circumstances frame rate of perception circumstances frame rate of perception circumstances frame rate of perception is not increased but memory density is not increased but memory density is not increased but memory density is higher. &gt;&gt; Yes. Can I therefore take the leap that &gt;&gt; Yes. Can I therefore take the leap that &gt;&gt; Yes. Can I therefore take the leap that let's just let's just say um and these let's just let's just say um and these let's just let's just say um and these are usually tragic circumstances. If are usually tragic circumstances. If are usually tragic circumstances. If there are two individuals, it's limited there are two individuals, it's limited there are two individuals, it's limited to two for sake of example in a high to two for sake of example in a high to two for sake of example in a high stress, highly traumatic interaction, stress, highly traumatic interaction, stress, highly traumatic interaction, but one is more stressed than the other. but one is more stressed than the other. but one is more stressed than the other. maybe they're the victim in that case maybe they're the victim in that case maybe they're the victim in that case that their density of memory is higher that their density of memory is higher that their density of memory is higher and therefore even though there's a and therefore even though there's a and therefore even though there's a perceptual difference um perhaps more perceptual difference um perhaps more perceptual difference um perhaps more accurate than uh for the person who was accurate than uh for the person who was accurate than uh for the person who was calmer or is there a threshold at which calmer or is there a threshold at which calmer or is there a threshold at which stress limits memory and therefore the stress limits memory and therefore the stress limits memory and therefore the person who is calmer has a more accurate person who is calmer has a more accurate person who is calmer has a more accurate memory? &gt;&gt; Great question. Well, it turns out first &gt;&gt; Great question. Well, it turns out first &gt;&gt; Great question. Well, it turns out first of all what victims often have is what's of all what victims often have is what's of all what victims often have is what's called weapon focus. So if the other called weapon focus. So if the other called weapon focus. So if the other person has a knife or a gun, that's all person has a knife or a gun, that's all person has a knife or a gun, that's all they remember. They, you know, describe they remember. They, you know, describe they remember. They, you know, describe the guy's face. I don't remember the guy's face. I don't remember the guy's face. I don't remember the guy's face because I was staring at the guy's face because I was staring at the guy's face because I was staring at the gun. So it turns out that what they pay gun. So it turns out that what they pay gun. So it turns out that what they pay attention to is sort of the wrong thing attention to is sort of the wrong thing attention to is sort of the wrong thing for forensics purposes. Um, that's for forensics purposes. Um, that's for forensics purposes. Um, that's number one. But number two is this much number one. But number two is this much number one. But number two is this much deeper issue that even amygdala memories deeper issue that even amygdala memories deeper issue that even amygdala memories are not necessarily accurate. So um you are not necessarily accurate. So um you are not necessarily accurate. So um you know our colleague Elizabeth Phelps um know our colleague Elizabeth Phelps um know our colleague Elizabeth Phelps um did this experiment right after 911 in did this experiment right after 911 in did this experiment right after 911 in 2001 shortly after the event happened. 2001 shortly after the event happened. 2001 shortly after the event happened. She went and interviewed lots of people She went and interviewed lots of people She went and interviewed lots of people in downtown and Midtown New York about in downtown and Midtown New York about in downtown and Midtown New York about what they saw on September 11th and she what they saw on September 11th and she what they saw on September 11th and she was smart enough to interview them also was smart enough to interview them also was smart enough to interview them also about what they remembered from about what they remembered from about what they remembered from September 10th. You know what they ate September 10th. You know what they ate September 10th. You know what they ate for breakfast the day and so on. Okay. for breakfast the day and so on. Okay. for breakfast the day and so on. Okay. She then found them three months later. She then found them three months later. She then found them three months later. She followed up a year later. She ended She followed up a year later. She ended She followed up a year later. She ended up doing that 10 years later as well. up doing that 10 years later as well. up doing that 10 years later as well. What they found is that the traumatic What they found is that the traumatic What they found is that the traumatic memories of 9/11, even though those are memories of 9/11, even though those are memories of 9/11, even though those are amigdula memories, they drifted just as amigdula memories, they drifted just as amigdula memories, they drifted just as much as the memories of, you know, what much as the memories of, you know, what much as the memories of, you know, what they ate for lunch on September 10th. they ate for lunch on September 10th. they ate for lunch on September 10th. Um, and so an unfortunate fact for the Um, and so an unfortunate fact for the Um, and so an unfortunate fact for the law is that memories are not accurate. law is that memories are not accurate. law is that memories are not accurate. They drift. Every time we check in on They drift. Every time we check in on They drift. Every time we check in on memories, we're changing them. And it memories, we're changing them. And it memories, we're changing them. And it becomes kind of like the operator game becomes kind of like the operator game becomes kind of like the operator game where one person says something next in where one person says something next in where one person says something next in the other person's ear and the next the other person's ear and the next the other person's ear and the next person repeats that next person repeats person repeats that next person repeats person repeats that next person repeats that. There's a sense in which we're that. There's a sense in which we're that. There's a sense in which we're always playing the operator game with always playing the operator game with always playing the operator game with ourselves. You know, each time we pull ourselves. You know, each time we pull ourselves. You know, each time we pull up a memory, it's changing and it gets up a memory, it's changing and it gets up a memory, it's changing and it gets modified and colored by new information modified and colored by new information modified and colored by new information that we have. So that's the bad news for that we have. So that's the bad news for that we have. So that's the bad news for the legal system. And so the legal the legal system. And so the legal the legal system. And so the legal system has gotten really smart about system has gotten really smart about system has gotten really smart about this over the last 30 years and tried to this over the last 30 years and tried to this over the last 30 years and tried to make sure that they take care of things make sure that they take care of things make sure that they take care of things that happen, let's say, with eyewitness that happen, let's say, with eyewitness that happen, let's say, with eyewitness identification. So one thing is, you identification. So one thing is, you identification. So one thing is, you know, police suggestability. So if I if know, police suggestability. So if I if know, police suggestability. So if I if I'm looking at a lineup and I say, gosh, I'm looking at a lineup and I say, gosh, I'm looking at a lineup and I say, gosh, you know, I think that's the guy, and you know, I think that's the guy, and you know, I think that's the guy, and the police officer says, yeah, I think the police officer says, yeah, I think the police officer says, yeah, I think that's the guy, you know, I agree with that's the guy, you know, I agree with that's the guy, you know, I agree with you on that. Then what happens is when I you on that. Then what happens is when I you on that. Then what happens is when I go to court three months later, I say go to court three months later, I say go to court three months later, I say to the judge, "Yeah, I'm 100% to the judge, "Yeah, I'm 100% to the judge, "Yeah, I'm 100% confident." Even though at the time of confident." Even though at the time of confident." Even though at the time of the lineup, I wasn't confident at all, the lineup, I wasn't confident at all, the lineup, I wasn't confident at all, but I come to think I am. There are many but I come to think I am. There are many but I come to think I am. There are many ways uh that things get implemented many ways uh that things get implemented many ways uh that things get implemented so that we can try to work around uh how so that we can try to work around uh how so that we can try to work around uh how lousy our memories are. One thing is lousy our memories are. One thing is lousy our memories are. One thing is separating witnesses right away because separating witnesses right away because separating witnesses right away because if you and I witness a crime and then if you and I witness a crime and then if you and I witness a crime and then you say, "Oh my god, you know, I think you say, "Oh my god, you know, I think you say, "Oh my god, you know, I think the guy had long hair." and I say, "No, the guy had long hair." and I say, "No, the guy had long hair." and I say, "No, no, I think it was uh short hair or no, I think it was uh short hair or no, I think it was uh short hair or whatever." We're influencing each whatever." We're influencing each whatever." We're influencing each other's memory. And things that we say other's memory. And things that we say other's memory. And things that we say end up changing what the other believes end up changing what the other believes end up changing what the other believes to be true. One of the classes I teach to be true. One of the classes I teach to be true. One of the classes I teach is uh the brain and the law. And I do is uh the brain and the law. And I do is uh the brain and the law. And I do this thing every year. I sort of hate to this thing every year. I sort of hate to this thing every year. I sort of hate to give this away on a podcast, but here give this away on a podcast, but here give this away on a podcast, but here here's what I do. I'm teaching the class here's what I do. I'm teaching the class here's what I do. I'm teaching the class and a woman busts into the back of the and a woman busts into the back of the and a woman busts into the back of the classroom, starts screaming at me, says, classroom, starts screaming at me, says, classroom, starts screaming at me, says, "Are you Dr. Eagleman?" I say, "Yeah." I "Are you Dr. Eagleman?" I say, "Yeah." I "Are you Dr. Eagleman?" I say, "Yeah." I say, "Excuse me, I'm teaching a class." say, "Excuse me, I'm teaching a class." say, "Excuse me, I'm teaching a class." She says, "I've been sending you emails She says, "I've been sending you emails She says, "I've been sending you emails and you haven't written back and blah and you haven't written back and blah and you haven't written back and blah blah." I say, "Excuse me. I am teaching blah." I say, "Excuse me. I am teaching blah." I say, "Excuse me. I am teaching a class. I'm happy to talk to you a class. I'm happy to talk to you a class. I'm happy to talk to you afterwards. I'm sorry I don't get to all afterwards. I'm sorry I don't get to all afterwards. I'm sorry I don't get to all my emails." And she says, "Well, I'm my emails." And she says, "Well, I'm my emails." And she says, "Well, I'm going to wait for you." Okay. So, then I going to wait for you." Okay. So, then I going to wait for you." Okay. So, then I keep teaching the class. And then after, keep teaching the class. And then after, keep teaching the class. And then after, you know, 20 minutes or so, I say to the you know, 20 minutes or so, I say to the you know, 20 minutes or so, I say to the class, "Look, I'm going to call class, "Look, I'm going to call class, "Look, I'm going to call security, but I don't know what she security, but I don't know what she security, but I don't know what she looked like. I need you guys to write looked like. I need you guys to write looked like. I need you guys to write down what you remember about her." I down what you remember about her." I down what you remember about her." I said, "All I remember is that she had a said, "All I remember is that she had a said, "All I remember is that she had a big mole on her left cheek, and uh, you big mole on her left cheek, and uh, you big mole on her left cheek, and uh, you know, that's all I was able to really know, that's all I was able to really know, that's all I was able to really see." And so everyone writes down their see." And so everyone writes down their see." And so everyone writes down their stuff. Now, not surprisingly, eyewitness stuff. Now, not surprisingly, eyewitness stuff. Now, not surprisingly, eyewitness identification is terrible. Everyone identification is terrible. Everyone identification is terrible. Everyone comes up with extraordinarily different comes up with extraordinarily different comes up with extraordinarily different descriptions of what the woman looked descriptions of what the woman looked descriptions of what the woman looked like. One thing they tend to have in like. One thing they tend to have in like. One thing they tend to have in common is this mole on left cheek, which common is this mole on left cheek, which common is this mole on left cheek, which I made up. The woman doesn't have that, I made up. The woman doesn't have that, I made up. The woman doesn't have that, but it's a demonstration that um but it's a demonstration that um but it's a demonstration that um planting something even accidentally, in planting something even accidentally, in planting something even accidentally, in my case, on purpose, will influence your my case, on purpose, will influence your my case, on purpose, will influence your memory of what you think happened. memory of what you think happened. memory of what you think happened. Obviously, it's a it's an actor that I Obviously, it's a it's an actor that I Obviously, it's a it's an actor that I hire every year, but it demonstrates how hire every year, but it demonstrates how hire every year, but it demonstrates how poorly we remember things. how poorly we remember things. how poorly we remember things. &gt;&gt; How does the legal system deal with re &gt;&gt; How does the legal system deal with re &gt;&gt; How does the legal system deal with re forget eyewitness account just uh of uh forget eyewitness account just uh of uh forget eyewitness account just uh of uh potential perpetrators, but just like potential perpetrators, but just like potential perpetrators, but just like recollection in general? recollection in general? recollection in general? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, this spent all the way &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, this spent all the way &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, this spent all the way up to the Supreme Court because some guy up to the Supreme Court because some guy up to the Supreme Court because some guy some guy was accused from a, you know, some guy was accused from a, you know, some guy was accused from a, you know, he got sent to jail based on the he got sent to jail based on the he got sent to jail based on the eyewitness testimony of a woman who was eyewitness testimony of a woman who was eyewitness testimony of a woman who was up on the second floor seeing him from up on the second floor seeing him from up on the second floor seeing him from there and it was dark out and he said, there and it was dark out and he said, there and it was dark out and he said, "Look, that can't be reliable eyewitness "Look, that can't be reliable eyewitness "Look, that can't be reliable eyewitness testimony." So this went to the Supreme testimony." So this went to the Supreme testimony." So this went to the Supreme Court and they said, "Look, sorry, but Court and they said, "Look, sorry, but Court and they said, "Look, sorry, but we can't guarantee uh reliable we can't guarantee uh reliable we can't guarantee uh reliable eyewitness testimony and if we were to eyewitness testimony and if we were to eyewitness testimony and if we were to ever try to legislate that, that would ever try to legislate that, that would ever try to legislate that, that would ruin most court cases because most ruin most court cases because most ruin most court cases because most things are predicated on eyewitness things are predicated on eyewitness things are predicated on eyewitness testimony. So what the legal system testimony. So what the legal system testimony. So what the legal system tries to do is just educate jurors about tries to do is just educate jurors about tries to do is just educate jurors about this, about how seriously to take it this, about how seriously to take it this, about how seriously to take it because um and by the way, I should because um and by the way, I should because um and by the way, I should mention unfortunately people are very swayed by unfortunately people are very swayed by unfortunately people are very swayed by this. jurors are meaning you know a this. jurors are meaning you know a this. jurors are meaning you know a scientist might get up and say look scientist might get up and say look scientist might get up and say look there's this information or that but there's this information or that but there's this information or that but then some I would assess you know I then some I would assess you know I then some I would assess you know I witness comes up on the stand and says witness comes up on the stand and says witness comes up on the stand and says look I don't know about all that science look I don't know about all that science look I don't know about all that science stuff but I know what I saw and the jury stuff but I know what I saw and the jury stuff but I know what I saw and the jury is swayed by that um so it's not easy to is swayed by that um so it's not easy to is swayed by that um so it's not easy to educate jurors on this because people educate jurors on this because people educate jurors on this because people fundamentally even after education feel fundamentally even after education feel fundamentally even after education feel like okay but I know that my memory is like okay but I know that my memory is like okay but I know that my memory is like a video camera um so anyway but like a video camera um so anyway but like a video camera um so anyway but that's one thing that the legal that's one thing that the legal that's one thing that the legal system tries to do and tries not to take system tries to do and tries not to take system tries to do and tries not to take it as gospel. it as gospel. it as gospel. &gt;&gt; Are kids versus adults more prone to &gt;&gt; Are kids versus adults more prone to &gt;&gt; Are kids versus adults more prone to making up stories under these making up stories under these making up stories under these circumstances? Exactly. I think that I circumstances? Exactly. I think that I circumstances? Exactly. I think that I like most per I'm not going to speak for like most per I'm not going to speak for like most per I'm not going to speak for most people. I assume that kids tell the most people. I assume that kids tell the most people. I assume that kids tell the truth. I mean, kids don't always tell truth. I mean, kids don't always tell truth. I mean, kids don't always tell the truth, but that they don't the truth, but that they don't the truth, but that they don't understand all the incentives systems understand all the incentives systems understand all the incentives systems around lying that some adults do. And around lying that some adults do. And around lying that some adults do. And so, I think we tend to believe what kids so, I think we tend to believe what kids so, I think we tend to believe what kids say. Oh, but kids are actually more say. Oh, but kids are actually more say. Oh, but kids are actually more susceptible to memory manipulation. So, susceptible to memory manipulation. So, susceptible to memory manipulation. So, Elizabeth Loftess at Irvine ran these Elizabeth Loftess at Irvine ran these Elizabeth Loftess at Irvine ran these studies years ago where um she uh well, studies years ago where um she uh well, studies years ago where um she uh well, here's sorry, this is slightly here's sorry, this is slightly here's sorry, this is slightly different, but what she's doing in these different, but what she's doing in these different, but what she's doing in these cases is she says to someone, "Hey, I cases is she says to someone, "Hey, I cases is she says to someone, "Hey, I talked to your parents." She she talked to your parents." She she talked to your parents." She she actually did talk to the person and she actually did talk to the person and she actually did talk to the person and she says, "I found out a story from when you says, "I found out a story from when you says, "I found out a story from when you were younger about the time you got lost were younger about the time you got lost were younger about the time you got lost in the mall and you were uh found by in the mall and you were uh found by in the mall and you were uh found by this woman in a red hat who then, you this woman in a red hat who then, you this woman in a red hat who then, you know, found your parents and so on." And know, found your parents and so on." And know, found your parents and so on." And it turns out she can make these stories it turns out she can make these stories it turns out she can make these stories completely up and people will come to completely up and people will come to completely up and people will come to believe these. And when she interviews believe these. And when she interviews believe these. And when she interviews them a week later, they that is just them a week later, they that is just them a week later, they that is just part of the fact of their life resume is part of the fact of their life resume is part of the fact of their life resume is that they were lost in the mall and that they were lost in the mall and that they were lost in the mall and found this woman in the red hat and so found this woman in the red hat and so found this woman in the red hat and so on. &gt;&gt; I mean, that has huge implications for &gt;&gt; I mean, that has huge implications for &gt;&gt; I mean, that has huge implications for therapy to unear, you know, repressed therapy to unear, you know, repressed therapy to unear, you know, repressed memories and um so-called repressed memories and um so-called repressed memories and um so-called repressed memories. Exactly. Maybe we need dogs to memories. Exactly. Maybe we need dogs to memories. Exactly. Maybe we need dogs to just uh you know who are completely just uh you know who are completely just uh you know who are completely unbiased to uh evaluate um the uh unbiased to uh evaluate um the uh unbiased to uh evaluate um the uh veracity of some of these claims. veracity of some of these claims. veracity of some of these claims. &gt;&gt; Well, here's what I think. Look, you and &gt;&gt; Well, here's what I think. Look, you and &gt;&gt; Well, here's what I think. Look, you and I grew up in a slightly different world I grew up in a slightly different world I grew up in a slightly different world where if I count the number of childhood where if I count the number of childhood where if I count the number of childhood photos that I have that I see, you know, photos that I have that I see, you know, photos that I have that I see, you know, I've got like little landmarks every I've got like little landmarks every I've got like little landmarks every couple of years. Oh, that was me at 8 couple of years. Oh, that was me at 8 couple of years. Oh, that was me at 8 years old standing in front of my house years old standing in front of my house years old standing in front of my house in Albuquerque and that was me at 10 in Albuquerque and that was me at 10 in Albuquerque and that was me at 10 years old and so on. But now, you know, years old and so on. But now, you know, years old and so on. But now, you know, we have an Alexa in our kitchen and it's we have an Alexa in our kitchen and it's we have an Alexa in our kitchen and it's constantly cycling through the pictures constantly cycling through the pictures constantly cycling through the pictures of my kids who see that every day. They of my kids who see that every day. They of my kids who see that every day. They say, "Oh, that was me a few years ago. say, "Oh, that was me a few years ago. say, "Oh, that was me a few years ago. That was me last month." And so on. I That was me last month." And so on. I That was me last month." And so on. I think kids are now much more tightly think kids are now much more tightly think kids are now much more tightly tied to their memory in a way that might tied to their memory in a way that might tied to their memory in a way that might prove very useful. Unuseful in the sense prove very useful. Unuseful in the sense prove very useful. Unuseful in the sense that maybe you can't get away from your that maybe you can't get away from your that maybe you can't get away from your childhood, but useful in the sense that childhood, but useful in the sense that childhood, but useful in the sense that at least your memor is going to be at least your memor is going to be at least your memor is going to be slightly more accurate because you're slightly more accurate because you're slightly more accurate because you're getting, you know, uh, repetition. getting, you know, uh, repetition. getting, you know, uh, repetition. You're getting space repetition on it. a You're getting space repetition on it. a You're getting space repetition on it. a previous guest hypothesized, I don't previous guest hypothesized, I don't previous guest hypothesized, I don't think this was based on real data, think this was based on real data, think this was based on real data, hypothesized that, you know, like if you hypothesized that, you know, like if you hypothesized that, you know, like if you go to a concert now, everyone's taking go to a concert now, everyone's taking go to a concert now, everyone's taking photos of the concert. Yeah. Um, as photos of the concert. Yeah. Um, as photos of the concert. Yeah. Um, as opposed to just experiencing the opposed to just experiencing the opposed to just experiencing the concert, they hypothesized that, uh, concert, they hypothesized that, uh, concert, they hypothesized that, uh, perhaps people have more memory of the perhaps people have more memory of the perhaps people have more memory of the photo taking experience and the photo taking experience and the photo taking experience and the photo than the actual experience, which is a than the actual experience, which is a than the actual experience, which is a kind of an interesting divergence like kind of an interesting divergence like kind of an interesting divergence like of like the perceptual window that of like the perceptual window that of like the perceptual window that you're taking in information through. you're taking in information through. you're taking in information through. I'm not telling people not to take I'm not telling people not to take I'm not telling people not to take photos, but it is or videos, but it is photos, but it is or videos, but it is photos, but it is or videos, but it is sort of interesting that you're at a sort of interesting that you're at a sort of interesting that you're at a concert that, you know, thousands of concert that, you know, thousands of concert that, you know, thousands of people are at. Um, and everyone's taping people are at. Um, and everyone's taping people are at. Um, and everyone's taping it and projecting them. Maybe it's it and projecting them. Maybe it's it and projecting them. Maybe it's because people want to project because people want to project because people want to project themselves into the concert for themselves into the concert for themselves into the concert for their friends and followers to see. their friends and followers to see. their friends and followers to see. &gt;&gt; I suspect it's a social issue. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I suspect it's a social issue. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I suspect it's a social issue. Yeah. Everyone wants to prove that they were Everyone wants to prove that they were Everyone wants to prove that they were there. You know, I went and saw the Mona there. You know, I went and saw the Mona there. You know, I went and saw the Mona Lisa at the Louv recently and every Lisa at the Louv recently and every Lisa at the Louv recently and every person there was just taking a picture person there was just taking a picture person there was just taking a picture of it instead of standing there looking of it instead of standing there looking of it instead of standing there looking at the damn Mona Lisa. But here's my at the damn Mona Lisa. But here's my at the damn Mona Lisa. But here's my suspicion is that they might have a suspicion is that they might have a suspicion is that they might have a slightly less present experience at the slightly less present experience at the slightly less present experience at the moment, but maybe it also lasts longer moment, but maybe it also lasts longer moment, but maybe it also lasts longer in the sense that every once in a while in the sense that every once in a while in the sense that every once in a while they're they see that picture of they're they see that picture of they're they see that picture of themselves at the concert and they themselves at the concert and they themselves at the concert and they remember it. So maybe the area under the remember it. So maybe the area under the remember it. So maybe the area under the curve is the same. curve is the same. curve is the same. &gt;&gt; We live in a um polarized uh world right &gt;&gt; We live in a um polarized uh world right &gt;&gt; We live in a um polarized uh world right now. Uh I think it was always polarized, now. Uh I think it was always polarized, now. Uh I think it was always polarized, but it seems increasingly so. Um is it but it seems increasingly so. Um is it but it seems increasingly so. Um is it more polarized? and you've done some more polarized? and you've done some more polarized? and you've done some interesting work on um the neuroscience interesting work on um the neuroscience interesting work on um the neuroscience around polarization and uh I think it's around polarization and uh I think it's around polarization and uh I think it's just important for us to be aware of the just important for us to be aware of the just important for us to be aware of the fact that we're all prone to this. fact that we're all prone to this. fact that we're all prone to this. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And perhaps also I would hope to also &gt;&gt; And perhaps also I would hope to also &gt;&gt; And perhaps also I would hope to also push back on it. push back on it. push back on it. &gt;&gt; I also feel like people like to be in &gt;&gt; I also feel like people like to be in &gt;&gt; I also feel like people like to be in the echo chamber that there might be the echo chamber that there might be the echo chamber that there might be some uh dopamine reward or other neurom some uh dopamine reward or other neurom some uh dopamine reward or other neurom modulator reward for kind of verifying modulator reward for kind of verifying modulator reward for kind of verifying what we think to be true. I also think what we think to be true. I also think what we think to be true. I also think this is a social thing. I think you this is a social thing. I think you this is a social thing. I think you can't even talk about beliefs that we can't even talk about beliefs that we can't even talk about beliefs that we hold without talking about what that hold without talking about what that hold without talking about what that means for our identity and for what team means for our identity and for what team means for our identity and for what team we're on. we're on. we're on. &gt;&gt; Okay, so let me back up. I think we're &gt;&gt; Okay, so let me back up. I think we're &gt;&gt; Okay, so let me back up. I think we're not any more polarized than ever before. not any more polarized than ever before. not any more polarized than ever before. Just as an example, look at the 20th Just as an example, look at the 20th Just as an example, look at the 20th century. You've got, you know, if you century. You've got, you know, if you century. You've got, you know, if you look really what happened with Nazism in look really what happened with Nazism in look really what happened with Nazism in Europe or in Germany or fascism in Europe or in Germany or fascism in Europe or in Germany or fascism in Italy or what happened in Cambodia with Italy or what happened in Cambodia with Italy or what happened in Cambodia with Paul Potter or in Rwanda or the Chinese Paul Potter or in Rwanda or the Chinese Paul Potter or in Rwanda or the Chinese and com the Chinese and Russian and com the Chinese and Russian and com the Chinese and Russian communist revolutions. All these things communist revolutions. All these things communist revolutions. All these things were extraordinarily polarized moments were extraordinarily polarized moments were extraordinarily polarized moments where people took up arms and killed where people took up arms and killed where people took up arms and killed their neighbors. Um, and that was all their neighbors. Um, and that was all their neighbors. Um, and that was all pre-ocial media. So, I don't think that pre-ocial media. So, I don't think that pre-ocial media. So, I don't think that has much to do with it except that I do has much to do with it except that I do has much to do with it except that I do think maybe we're more aware because it think maybe we're more aware because it think maybe we're more aware because it used to be that everyone was in their used to be that everyone was in their used to be that everyone was in their echo chambers. also nothing new there echo chambers. also nothing new there echo chambers. also nothing new there but you know all of your friends and but you know all of your friends and but you know all of your friends and neighbors and whatever all believed in neighbors and whatever all believed in neighbors and whatever all believed in whatever and so you didn't realize there whatever and so you didn't realize there whatever and so you didn't realize there were other people who believed other were other people who believed other were other people who believed other things but I think now we're just more things but I think now we're just more things but I think now we're just more much more exposed to that okay so much more exposed to that okay so much more exposed to that okay so polarization nothing really knew about polarization nothing really knew about polarization nothing really knew about that but it's very important for us to that but it's very important for us to that but it's very important for us to understand this so um one of the understand this so um one of the understand this so um one of the experiments we did in my lab was the experiments we did in my lab was the experiments we did in my lab was the following we put people in the brain following we put people in the brain following we put people in the brain scanner fMRI they see six hands on the scanner fMRI they see six hands on the scanner fMRI they see six hands on the screen all the hands look pretty much screen all the hands look pretty much screen all the hands look pretty much alike and The computer goes around doot alike and The computer goes around doot alike and The computer goes around doot and it picks one of the hands and then and it picks one of the hands and then and it picks one of the hands and then you see that hand get stabbed with a you see that hand get stabbed with a you see that hand get stabbed with a syringe needle. What happens is you have syringe needle. What happens is you have syringe needle. What happens is you have this empathic response specifically this empathic response specifically this empathic response specifically this uh network of areas that we summarize as uh network of areas that we summarize as uh network of areas that we summarize as the pain matrix comes online. It's not the pain matrix comes online. It's not the pain matrix comes online. It's not your hand getting stabbed. Nonetheless, your hand getting stabbed. Nonetheless, your hand getting stabbed. Nonetheless, you're watching a hand getting stabbed you're watching a hand getting stabbed you're watching a hand getting stabbed and you this is the neural basis of and you this is the neural basis of and you this is the neural basis of empathy. You're feeling what would it empathy. You're feeling what would it empathy. You're feeling what would it feel like if that were my hand? Great. feel like if that were my hand? Great. feel like if that were my hand? Great. Okay. Now, what we do is we put a Okay. Now, what we do is we put a Okay. Now, what we do is we put a one-word label on each hand. Christian, one-word label on each hand. Christian, one-word label on each hand. Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Scientologist, Hindu, Jewish, Muslim, Scientologist, Hindu, Jewish, Muslim, Scientologist, Hindu, atheist. Computer goes around, picks a atheist. Computer goes around, picks a atheist. Computer goes around, picks a hand, you see that hand get stabbed. And hand, you see that hand get stabbed. And hand, you see that hand get stabbed. And the question is, does your brain care as the question is, does your brain care as the question is, does your brain care as much if it's a member of one of your much if it's a member of one of your much if it's a member of one of your outroups versus your in-group? Turns out outroups versus your in-group? Turns out outroups versus your in-group? Turns out the answer, depressingly, is that your the answer, depressingly, is that your the answer, depressingly, is that your brain cares much less? So, the size of brain cares much less? So, the size of brain cares much less? So, the size of the empathic response, if it's your the empathic response, if it's your the empathic response, if it's your in-group, is enhanced from what it was. in-group, is enhanced from what it was. in-group, is enhanced from what it was. And if it's any one of your outroups, And if it's any one of your outroups, And if it's any one of your outroups, it's diminished. By the way, this is not it's diminished. By the way, this is not it's diminished. By the way, this is not a criticism of religion because we find a criticism of religion because we find a criticism of religion because we find exactly the same thing with atheists. exactly the same thing with atheists. exactly the same thing with atheists. People who profess themselves as People who profess themselves as People who profess themselves as atheists really care when they see the atheists really care when they see the atheists really care when they see the atheist handstep. atheist handstep. atheist handstep. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's everything about in-groups &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's everything about in-groups &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's everything about in-groups and outroups. and outroups. and outroups. &gt;&gt; So, it turns out this is such a &gt;&gt; So, it turns out this is such a &gt;&gt; So, it turns out this is such a low-level response. Now, happily, this low-level response. Now, happily, this low-level response. Now, happily, this doesn't necessarily map on to how you doesn't necessarily map on to how you doesn't necessarily map on to how you act as a person. This is just your first act as a person. This is just your first act as a person. This is just your first response. You care more about your response. You care more about your response. You care more about your inroups. Other labs like Tanya Singer inroups. Other labs like Tanya Singer inroups. Other labs like Tanya Singer and others have shown very similar and others have shown very similar and others have shown very similar versions of this with even things like versions of this with even things like versions of this with even things like sports teams. In fact, one of the sports teams. In fact, one of the sports teams. In fact, one of the experiments we did was um we brought experiments we did was um we brought experiments we did was um we brought fresh people in and we said, "Hey, I fresh people in and we said, "Hey, I fresh people in and we said, "Hey, I want you to toss a coin. If it's heads, want you to toss a coin. If it's heads, want you to toss a coin. If it's heads, you're a Justinian. If it's tails, you're a Justinian. If it's tails, you're a Justinian. If it's tails, you're an Augustinian." So, they toss you're an Augustinian." So, they toss you're an Augustinian." So, they toss the coin. They find out what they are. the coin. They find out what they are. the coin. They find out what they are. We give them a wristband that reminds We give them a wristband that reminds We give them a wristband that reminds them that they're Justinian or them that they're Justinian or them that they're Justinian or Augustinian. Then, they go in the Augustinian. Then, they go in the Augustinian. Then, they go in the scanner and they see Justinian or scanner and they see Justinian or scanner and they see Justinian or Augustinian hands getting stabbed. And Augustinian hands getting stabbed. And Augustinian hands getting stabbed. And it turns out they have a bigger response it turns out they have a bigger response it turns out they have a bigger response predicated on their team. Completely predicated on their team. Completely predicated on their team. Completely arbitrary label that doesn't mean arbitrary label that doesn't mean arbitrary label that doesn't mean anything. But this is how we are wired. anything. But this is how we are wired. anything. But this is how we are wired. very much very strongly for in-groups very much very strongly for in-groups very much very strongly for in-groups and outgroups. Obviously, this is a real and outgroups. Obviously, this is a real and outgroups. Obviously, this is a real problem for everything we're witnessing problem for everything we're witnessing problem for everything we're witnessing around us. Um, around us. Um, around us. Um, &gt;&gt; can I ask you a question? Um, I have a &gt;&gt; can I ask you a question? Um, I have a &gt;&gt; can I ask you a question? Um, I have a theory unsubstantiated by any laboratory theory unsubstantiated by any laboratory theory unsubstantiated by any laboratory data that uh we all naturally feel some data that uh we all naturally feel some data that uh we all naturally feel some degree of empathy for both inroup or degree of empathy for both inroup or degree of empathy for both inroup or common group and other group except for common group and other group except for common group and other group except for groups that we really despise. Okay. I groups that we really despise. Okay. I groups that we really despise. Okay. I think there are some people who don't think there are some people who don't think there are some people who don't provided that the other person isn't provided that the other person isn't provided that the other person isn't being tortured or killed, they're sort being tortured or killed, they're sort being tortured or killed, they're sort of like, oh well, dislike them anyway. of like, oh well, dislike them anyway. of like, oh well, dislike them anyway. But I think we tend to feel um we know But I think we tend to feel um we know But I think we tend to feel um we know how we feel about someone or a group how we feel about someone or a group how we feel about someone or a group when something good happens for them. To when something good happens for them. To when something good happens for them. To me, it's a much stronger indicator. So, me, it's a much stronger indicator. So, me, it's a much stronger indicator. So, is the reverse experiment ever been done is the reverse experiment ever been done is the reverse experiment ever been done where instead of the hand getting where instead of the hand getting where instead of the hand getting stabbed with a syringe, um the person of stabbed with a syringe, um the person of stabbed with a syringe, um the person of same group or outside group is being same group or outside group is being same group or outside group is being given something that is of value. Um, given something that is of value. Um, given something that is of value. Um, &gt;&gt; that's interesting. I don't know. I &gt;&gt; that's interesting. I don't know. I &gt;&gt; that's interesting. I don't know. I don't think anyone's run that experiment don't think anyone's run that experiment don't think anyone's run that experiment to my knowledge to my knowledge to my knowledge &gt;&gt; because if I tell you like, okay, if I &gt;&gt; because if I tell you like, okay, if I &gt;&gt; because if I tell you like, okay, if I if I were to have access to your uh your if I were to have access to your uh your if I were to have access to your uh your thoughts and I could find like a hundred thoughts and I could find like a hundred thoughts and I could find like a hundred people that you uh like on and arrange people that you uh like on and arrange people that you uh like on and arrange that you know in your mind and arrange that you know in your mind and arrange that you know in your mind and arrange them on the continuum of really them on the continuum of really them on the continuum of really adore this person all the way to like adore this person all the way to like adore this person all the way to like actually really I'm not going to use the actually really I'm not going to use the actually really I'm not going to use the word hate, but like really word hate, but like really word hate, but like really dislike this person. And I tell you, you dislike this person. And I tell you, you dislike this person. And I tell you, you know, um and give any one of them uh know, um and give any one of them uh know, um and give any one of them uh stage three pancreatic cancer. I imagine stage three pancreatic cancer. I imagine stage three pancreatic cancer. I imagine as an empathic person, you're gonna be as an empathic person, you're gonna be as an empathic person, you're gonna be like, "Ah, that sucks." But if I instead like, "Ah, that sucks." But if I instead like, "Ah, that sucks." But if I instead flip it and say, "Okay, you know, this flip it and say, "Okay, you know, this flip it and say, "Okay, you know, this person you really you really like, um, person you really you really like, um, person you really you really like, um, they had something spectacular happened they had something spectacular happened they had something spectacular happened to them versus somebody that you to them versus somebody that you to them versus somebody that you dislike, something spect there's a dislike, something spect there's a dislike, something spect there's a there's a there's a little bit of a of a there's a there's a little bit of a of a there's a there's a little bit of a of a of a twist on the feeling of happiness of a twist on the feeling of happiness of a twist on the feeling of happiness for somebody that you don't like for somebody that you don't like for somebody that you don't like receiving something that maybe you think receiving something that maybe you think receiving something that maybe you think they didn't deserve or and I think we they didn't deserve or and I think we they didn't deserve or and I think we are all wired this way to some extent." are all wired this way to some extent." are all wired this way to some extent." &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's a really interesting point. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's a really interesting point. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's a really interesting point. To my knowledge, no one has done that To my knowledge, no one has done that To my knowledge, no one has done that experiment. And it's in a sense, it's experiment. And it's in a sense, it's experiment. And it's in a sense, it's because this issue of when something bad because this issue of when something bad because this issue of when something bad happens to someone, we naturally have an happens to someone, we naturally have an happens to someone, we naturally have an empathic response if it's a stranger. empathic response if it's a stranger. empathic response if it's a stranger. Look at the issue of, I don't know, Look at the issue of, I don't know, Look at the issue of, I don't know, let's say some older gentleman gets, you let's say some older gentleman gets, you let's say some older gentleman gets, you know, his nose broken because someone know, his nose broken because someone know, his nose broken because someone attacks him at outdoors at a park. You attacks him at outdoors at a park. You attacks him at outdoors at a park. You would feel empathy for that. But now if would feel empathy for that. But now if would feel empathy for that. But now if I tell you, oh look, he was at a I tell you, oh look, he was at a I tell you, oh look, he was at a Democrat rally or a Republican rally, Democrat rally or a Republican rally, Democrat rally or a Republican rally, depending on your perspective on the depending on your perspective on the depending on your perspective on the world, you might have differential world, you might have differential world, you might have differential empathy uh predicated on on, you know, empathy uh predicated on on, you know, empathy uh predicated on on, you know, how strongly you feel on one team or the how strongly you feel on one team or the how strongly you feel on one team or the other. Um, other. Um, other. Um, here's the thing. Even with pancreatic here's the thing. Even with pancreatic here's the thing. Even with pancreatic cancer, there's a whole lot of cancer, there's a whole lot of cancer, there's a whole lot of experiments from my lab and other labs experiments from my lab and other labs experiments from my lab and other labs that shows that sometimes when something that shows that sometimes when something that shows that sometimes when something happens to someone that we don't like, happens to someone that we don't like, happens to someone that we don't like, the reward system actually comes on. the reward system actually comes on. the reward system actually comes on. This was Tanya Singh had a nature paper This was Tanya Singh had a nature paper This was Tanya Singh had a nature paper on this um showing that you actually on this um showing that you actually on this um showing that you actually show reward system activation when show reward system activation when show reward system activation when something happens uh which is awful but something happens uh which is awful but something happens uh which is awful but um one thing I have always noticed in um one thing I have always noticed in um one thing I have always noticed in the movies is that you're watching the movies is that you're watching the movies is that you're watching the James Bond movie or whatever and the bad James Bond movie or whatever and the bad James Bond movie or whatever and the bad guy you know falls from a 500 foot guy you know falls from a 500 foot guy you know falls from a 500 foot building and splats on the ground and building and splats on the ground and building and splats on the ground and you like you know eat your popcorn and you like you know eat your popcorn and you like you know eat your popcorn you don't care at all that something you don't care at all that something you don't care at all that something awful happened to somebody whereas if awful happened to somebody whereas if awful happened to somebody whereas if James Bond you know gets grazed by a James Bond you know gets grazed by a James Bond you know gets grazed by a bullet if YOU'RE LIKE OH OW poor guy bullet if YOU'RE LIKE OH OW poor guy bullet if YOU'RE LIKE OH OW poor guy it's weird how much we can dial this it's weird how much we can dial this it's weird how much we can dial this around where we simply don't care when around where we simply don't care when around where we simply don't care when bad things happen to other people. I bad things happen to other people. I bad things happen to other people. I &gt;&gt; what you're describing provides a very &gt;&gt; what you're describing provides a very &gt;&gt; what you're describing provides a very useful filter for what we see out there useful filter for what we see out there useful filter for what we see out there in the media and you know just recently in the media and you know just recently in the media and you know just recently there was this event that's being there was this event that's being there was this event that's being debated very uh intensely from both debated very uh intensely from both debated very uh intensely from both sides. Someone was shot, whose fault was sides. Someone was shot, whose fault was sides. Someone was shot, whose fault was it? What were they were in their rights it? What were they were in their rights it? What were they were in their rights to shoot her? etc. I mean it's like to shoot her? etc. I mean it's like to shoot her? etc. I mean it's like it's this immediate polarization around it's this immediate polarization around it's this immediate polarization around that you know that you know that you know &gt;&gt; same collection of videos two totally &gt;&gt; same collection of videos two totally &gt;&gt; same collection of videos two totally different interpretations different interpretations different interpretations &gt;&gt; right because was that woman your &gt;&gt; right because was that woman your &gt;&gt; right because was that woman your protagonist or your antagonist and just protagonist or your antagonist and just protagonist or your antagonist and just like in the movies we have a completely like in the movies we have a completely like in the movies we have a completely different uh empathic response based on different uh empathic response based on different uh empathic response based on that &gt;&gt; in the um sort of hypothetical example &gt;&gt; in the um sort of hypothetical example &gt;&gt; in the um sort of hypothetical example of an experiment where people that are of an experiment where people that are of an experiment where people that are either same group or different group are either same group or different group are either same group or different group are rewarded I feel like it gets to an issue rewarded I feel like it gets to an issue rewarded I feel like it gets to an issue that's a little bit more subtle than that's a little bit more subtle than that's a little bit more subtle than when people are harmed. Um because it when people are harmed. Um because it when people are harmed. Um because it gets to this zero this notion of zero gets to this zero this notion of zero gets to this zero this notion of zero sum like if somebody else gets something sum like if somebody else gets something sum like if somebody else gets something does that mean anything was taken from does that mean anything was taken from does that mean anything was taken from you? Not necessarily, right? But there you? Not necessarily, right? But there you? Not necessarily, right? But there are some people who go through life are some people who go through life are some people who go through life seeing people get things and they feel seeing people get things and they feel seeing people get things and they feel the pain of what they didn't get by the pain of what they didn't get by the pain of what they didn't get by virtue of someone else getting virtue of someone else getting virtue of someone else getting something. And um it's got to be a very something. And um it's got to be a very something. And um it's got to be a very difficult place to live. And yet I've difficult place to live. And yet I've difficult place to live. And yet I've known people like that. Um they you known people like that. Um they you known people like that. Um they you know there are people who hate rich know there are people who hate rich know there are people who hate rich people. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um if and they hate them for a number of &gt;&gt; Um if and they hate them for a number of &gt;&gt; Um if and they hate them for a number of reasons. maybe they were treated poorly reasons. maybe they were treated poorly reasons. maybe they were treated poorly etc. Um they hate famous people, they etc. Um they hate famous people, they etc. Um they hate famous people, they hate beautiful people, they hate you can hate beautiful people, they hate you can hate beautiful people, they hate you can see this, right? And what aspect of see this, right? And what aspect of see this, right? And what aspect of self other in-group outgroup does that self other in-group outgroup does that self other in-group outgroup does that relate to because it gets to this notion relate to because it gets to this notion relate to because it gets to this notion of how much resource there is to go of how much resource there is to go of how much resource there is to go around something for someone else is around something for someone else is around something for someone else is something taken from us is a very something taken from us is a very something taken from us is a very different perspective. different perspective. different perspective. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's right. I don't know the &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's right. I don't know the &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's right. I don't know the answer to that except that people answer to that except that people answer to that except that people clearly are wired differently on that in clearly are wired differently on that in clearly are wired differently on that in terms of whether they think it's a zero- terms of whether they think it's a zero- terms of whether they think it's a zero- sum game or there's you know infinite sum game or there's you know infinite sum game or there's you know infinite resources. &gt;&gt; Do we see it in animals? &gt;&gt; Do we see it in animals? &gt;&gt; Do we see it in animals? &gt;&gt; Yes, actually there are experiments on &gt;&gt; Yes, actually there are experiments on &gt;&gt; Yes, actually there are experiments on capuchin monkeys where um the monkey on capuchin monkeys where um the monkey on capuchin monkeys where um the monkey does something and then gets a piece of does something and then gets a piece of does something and then gets a piece of banana and then uh the other monkey does banana and then uh the other monkey does banana and then uh the other monkey does something in the neighboring cage and something in the neighboring cage and something in the neighboring cage and gets a piece of banana. And so they're gets a piece of banana. And so they're gets a piece of banana. And so they're doing this but then the other they're doing this but then the other they're doing this but then the other monkey doing it gets a grape which is a monkey doing it gets a grape which is a monkey doing it gets a grape which is a big treat for the monkey. And the first big treat for the monkey. And the first big treat for the monkey. And the first monkey goes nuts and is shaking the bar. monkey goes nuts and is shaking the bar. monkey goes nuts and is shaking the bar. he's so angry that the other monkey got he's so angry that the other monkey got he's so angry that the other monkey got a better reward. Um, we there's this a better reward. Um, we there's this a better reward. Um, we there's this sense of fairness that's actually quite sense of fairness that's actually quite sense of fairness that's actually quite deep in our evolution about what's deep in our evolution about what's deep in our evolution about what's unfair and so on. But I want to come unfair and so on. But I want to come unfair and so on. But I want to come back to this issue about rewarding back to this issue about rewarding back to this issue about rewarding people versus punishing. To my mind, the people versus punishing. To my mind, the people versus punishing. To my mind, the reason I care so much about this issue reason I care so much about this issue reason I care so much about this issue of harm happening to people and when we of harm happening to people and when we of harm happening to people and when we don't care don't care don't care &gt;&gt; is because of when we look at what &gt;&gt; is because of when we look at what &gt;&gt; is because of when we look at what happens around the world, I'm not even happens around the world, I'm not even happens around the world, I'm not even talking right now. Let's just take the talking right now. Let's just take the talking right now. Let's just take the 20th century. Um, 20th century. Um, 20th century. Um, we constantly see people murdering their we constantly see people murdering their we constantly see people murdering their neighbors for all kinds of reasons, for neighbors for all kinds of reasons, for neighbors for all kinds of reasons, for religious reasons, for atheist, religious reasons, for atheist, religious reasons, for atheist, communist, you know, uh, secular communist, you know, uh, secular communist, you know, uh, secular reasons, for all kinds of reasons. reasons, for all kinds of reasons. reasons, for all kinds of reasons. People are perfectly willing to take People are perfectly willing to take People are perfectly willing to take their friends and neighbors. Look at the their friends and neighbors. Look at the their friends and neighbors. Look at the Hoouu and Tootsie in Rwanda. They had Hoouu and Tootsie in Rwanda. They had Hoouu and Tootsie in Rwanda. They had lived together. They were friends. There lived together. They were friends. There lived together. They were friends. There was inner marriage. And then the Hutu, was inner marriage. And then the Hutu, was inner marriage. And then the Hutu, you know, uh, you know, raised up their you know, uh, you know, raised up their you know, uh, you know, raised up their machetes and slaughtered Tootszie at a machetes and slaughtered Tootszie at a machetes and slaughtered Tootszie at a rate faster than the Germans were able rate faster than the Germans were able rate faster than the Germans were able to do with gas chambers and Jews. Um, to do with gas chambers and Jews. Um, to do with gas chambers and Jews. Um, how these things happen. It's so how these things happen. It's so how these things happen. It's so important for us to understand what are important for us to understand what are important for us to understand what are the elements that lead to in-roup and the elements that lead to in-roup and the elements that lead to in-roup and outgroup stuff. One of the things I've outgroup stuff. One of the things I've outgroup stuff. One of the things I've been very interested in is propaganda. been very interested in is propaganda. been very interested in is propaganda. And it turns out across place and time, And it turns out across place and time, And it turns out across place and time, all governments do propaganda in exactly all governments do propaganda in exactly all governments do propaganda in exactly the same way, which is you simply the same way, which is you simply the same way, which is you simply dehumanize the other group by calling dehumanize the other group by calling dehumanize the other group by calling them an animal or any like a virus, them an animal or any like a virus, them an animal or any like a virus, you know, a pestilence. Uh rats you know, a pestilence. Uh rats you know, a pestilence. Uh rats nowadays, you can even call them robots, nowadays, you can even call them robots, nowadays, you can even call them robots, whatever. Anything that's not human that whatever. Anything that's not human that whatever. Anything that's not human that turns off these networks that we have in turns off these networks that we have in turns off these networks that we have in the prefrontal lobe that care about the prefrontal lobe that care about the prefrontal lobe that care about other humans and how to interact with other humans and how to interact with other humans and how to interact with other humans. Our colleague Lana Harris other humans. Our colleague Lana Harris other humans. Our colleague Lana Harris has studied this stuff. And what happens has studied this stuff. And what happens has studied this stuff. And what happens is when you're dealing with an object is when you're dealing with an object is when you're dealing with an object now like oh the Tootsie the famous now like oh the Tootsie the famous now like oh the Tootsie the famous thing that happened in Rwanda is the thing that happened in Rwanda is the thing that happened in Rwanda is the Tootsie were described as cockroaches Tootsie were described as cockroaches Tootsie were described as cockroaches and the radio was blaring that all the and the radio was blaring that all the and the radio was blaring that all the time the Tootsie are cockroaches. So you time the Tootsie are cockroaches. So you time the Tootsie are cockroaches. So you know killing a cockroach isn't so hard know killing a cockroach isn't so hard know killing a cockroach isn't so hard to do. So you grab your machete and you to do. So you grab your machete and you to do. So you grab your machete and you go do that. And that's the kind of thing go do that. And that's the kind of thing go do that. And that's the kind of thing I am essentially dedicating my life to I am essentially dedicating my life to I am essentially dedicating my life to this kind of thing is an education this kind of thing is an education this kind of thing is an education about this such that when the next about this such that when the next about this such that when the next generation hears propaganda about any generation hears propaganda about any generation hears propaganda about any group, they say, "Wait a minute. I've group, they say, "Wait a minute. I've group, they say, "Wait a minute. I've heard that trick before. I know what heard that trick before. I know what heard that trick before. I know what this is. This is just calling the other this is. This is just calling the other this is. This is just calling the other group. Oh, they're not like us. They're group. Oh, they're not like us. They're group. Oh, they're not like us. They're not human." And so I'm dialing down not human." And so I'm dialing down not human." And so I'm dialing down these networks that care about other these networks that care about other these networks that care about other humans. Therefore, I don't care about humans. Therefore, I don't care about humans. Therefore, I don't care about them as much. I don't have empathy for them as much. I don't have empathy for them as much. I don't have empathy for them as much. I'm only to take up arms them as much. I'm only to take up arms them as much. I'm only to take up arms against them. against them. against them. &gt;&gt; Many years ago, um I was at a meeting &gt;&gt; Many years ago, um I was at a meeting &gt;&gt; Many years ago, um I was at a meeting and one of our colleagues, I'll let them and one of our colleagues, I'll let them and one of our colleagues, I'll let them remain anonymous for soon to be obvious remain anonymous for soon to be obvious remain anonymous for soon to be obvious reasons, um made stood up and made a reasons, um made stood up and made a reasons, um made stood up and made a really strong case for not referring to really strong case for not referring to really strong case for not referring to um the mice. And at that time, um the mice. And at that time, um the mice. And at that time, experiments were still done on cats experiments were still done on cats experiments were still done on cats and um and non-human primates. I mean, and um and non-human primates. I mean, and um and non-human primates. I mean, those are still used, but to a lesser those are still used, but to a lesser those are still used, but to a lesser extent now, but still um to not refer to extent now, but still um to not refer to extent now, but still um to not refer to them as animal models. um because he them as animal models. um because he them as animal models. um because he felt that it was de not dehumanizing felt that it was de not dehumanizing felt that it was de not dehumanizing them, it was it was um removing the them, it was it was um removing the them, it was it was um removing the sense that they were real beings and um sense that they were real beings and um sense that they were real beings and um you know uh as someone who has worked on you know uh as someone who has worked on you know uh as someone who has worked on a number of species including humans um a number of species including humans um a number of species including humans um and frankly I'm I'll say this and frankly I'm I'll say this and frankly I'm I'll say this proudly. I'm relieved to not do proudly. I'm relieved to not do proudly. I'm relieved to not do experiments on animals anymore. I really experiments on animals anymore. I really experiments on animals anymore. I really did not like that aspect. I did like did not like that aspect. I did like did not like that aspect. I did like working with humans we say not on humans working with humans we say not on humans working with humans we say not on humans um because they can sign up and uh um because they can sign up and uh um because they can sign up and uh consent and that sort of thing. I think consent and that sort of thing. I think consent and that sort of thing. I think every uh profession has this, you know, every uh profession has this, you know, every uh profession has this, you know, they uh my friends who are they uh my friends who are they uh my friends who are psychologists, you said your dad was a psychologists, you said your dad was a psychologists, you said your dad was a psychiatrist. I always ask people psychiatrist. I always ask people psychiatrist. I always ask people psychologists and psych, do you refer to psychologists and psych, do you refer to psychologists and psych, do you refer to your uh um the people that you treat as your uh um the people that you treat as your uh um the people that you treat as clients or as patients? like the clients or as patients? like the clients or as patients? like the language doesn't always matter so much, language doesn't always matter so much, language doesn't always matter so much, but I think when it comes to animal but I think when it comes to animal but I think when it comes to animal experimentation, when it comes to um experimentation, when it comes to um experimentation, when it comes to um people and professional relationships, people and professional relationships, people and professional relationships, it actually does matter because I think it actually does matter because I think it actually does matter because I think as you pointed out, certain circuits in as you pointed out, certain circuits in as you pointed out, certain circuits in the brain get turned off or on depending the brain get turned off or on depending the brain get turned off or on depending on how we refer to people. on how we refer to people. on how we refer to people. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I know it's I'm starting to sound &gt;&gt; Yeah. I know it's I'm starting to sound &gt;&gt; Yeah. I know it's I'm starting to sound a little bit like this is some like a little bit like this is some like a little bit like this is some like political statement, but it's not. It's political statement, but it's not. It's political statement, but it's not. It's just like I think that words matter. just like I think that words matter. just like I think that words matter. They they really do. They they really do. They they really do. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Oh, I totally agree. I think this &gt;&gt; Yeah. Oh, I totally agree. I think this &gt;&gt; Yeah. Oh, I totally agree. I think this political statement does matter because political statement does matter because political statement does matter because when the society reaches a point where when the society reaches a point where when the society reaches a point where some group of people is referred to some group of people is referred to some group of people is referred to essentially as nonhuman, essentially as nonhuman, essentially as nonhuman, um that's when things get really um that's when things get really um that's when things get really dangerous really fast. The Tootsie as dangerous really fast. The Tootsie as dangerous really fast. The Tootsie as cockroaches, the Jews as pestilence in cockroaches, the Jews as pestilence in cockroaches, the Jews as pestilence in Germany and what you know um all these Germany and what you know um all these Germany and what you know um all these things make a difference. And by the things make a difference. And by the things make a difference. And by the way, you know, in Germany in the rich in way, you know, in Germany in the rich in way, you know, in Germany in the rich in 1934, all the people elected to the rich year all the people elected to the rich year all the people elected to the rich year were either far-right Nazi party or were either far-right Nazi party or were either far-right Nazi party or far-left communist party. It was like a far-left communist party. It was like a far-left communist party. It was like a really polarized time. And the part really polarized time. And the part really polarized time. And the part that's so scary about polarization of that's so scary about polarization of that's so scary about polarization of that extreme is that it just takes a that extreme is that it just takes a that extreme is that it just takes a moment for one party to eat the other. moment for one party to eat the other. moment for one party to eat the other. It just it goes really fast. And um It just it goes really fast. And um It just it goes really fast. And um suddenly you know when Hitler took power suddenly you know when Hitler took power suddenly you know when Hitler took power when the president von Hindenberg died when the president von Hindenberg died when the president von Hindenberg died Hitler just declared himself the furer Hitler just declared himself the furer Hitler just declared himself the furer and rounded up all the communists and rounded up all the communists and rounded up all the communists and put him in jail in concentration camps put him in jail in concentration camps put him in jail in concentration camps right away and um so that's why right away and um so that's why right away and um so that's why polarization if there are things we can polarization if there are things we can polarization if there are things we can do as a society to work on that to try do as a society to work on that to try do as a society to work on that to try to get better models of the other person to get better models of the other person to get better models of the other person to have meaningful debates and listen to have meaningful debates and listen to have meaningful debates and listen to the other side it doesn't mean coming to the other side it doesn't mean coming to the other side it doesn't mean coming to agree with them or whatever but it means agree with them or whatever but it means agree with them or whatever but it means saying okay I'm going to assume saying okay I'm going to assume saying okay I'm going to assume the other person is speaking genuinely. the other person is speaking genuinely. the other person is speaking genuinely. What is their reason for holding this What is their reason for holding this What is their reason for holding this political position also by the way political position also by the way political position also by the way having a better notion of our own having a better notion of our own having a better notion of our own internal models which is that we are internal models which is that we are internal models which is that we are extraordinarily limited. This is extraordinarily limited. This is extraordinarily limited. This is actually what my next book is actually what my next book is actually what my next book is about. It's called Empire of the about. It's called Empire of the about. It's called Empire of the Invisible and it's about why we all Invisible and it's about why we all Invisible and it's about why we all believe our own internal models. We've believe our own internal models. We've believe our own internal models. We've all taken very thin trajectories through all taken very thin trajectories through all taken very thin trajectories through space and time and we've collected up space and time and we've collected up space and time and we've collected up our little scraps of data and we think, our little scraps of data and we think, our little scraps of data and we think, "Oh, I know the truth. I know how to "Oh, I know the truth. I know how to "Oh, I know the truth. I know how to think about the world and these think about the world and these think about the world and these political issues." And if I could just political issues." And if I could just political issues." And if I could just shout in all capital letters on X loudly shout in all capital letters on X loudly shout in all capital letters on X loudly enough, everyone would come to agree enough, everyone would come to agree enough, everyone would come to agree with me. Essentially, everyone thinks with me. Essentially, everyone thinks with me. Essentially, everyone thinks this deep down irrespective of what this deep down irrespective of what this deep down irrespective of what their political position is. And that's their political position is. And that's their political position is. And that's weird that we can't see the fence lines weird that we can't see the fence lines weird that we can't see the fence lines of our own internal models. So I think of our own internal models. So I think of our own internal models. So I think it's really important that this gets it's really important that this gets it's really important that this gets built all the way down into our built all the way down into our built all the way down into our education system at the high school education system at the high school education system at the high school level, maybe even junior high, where we level, maybe even junior high, where we level, maybe even junior high, where we understand the limitations of our own understand the limitations of our own understand the limitations of our own model. We understand how to try to model. We understand how to try to model. We understand how to try to understand other people's models. We understand other people's models. We understand other people's models. We understand when it's appropriate to understand when it's appropriate to understand when it's appropriate to blind our biases um at you know in the blind our biases um at you know in the blind our biases um at you know in the way that for example symphony orchestras way that for example symphony orchestras way that for example symphony orchestras have been doing this for decades now have been doing this for decades now have been doing this for decades now where they do a blind audition of where they do a blind audition of where they do a blind audition of musician behind a curtain. So you musician behind a curtain. So you musician behind a curtain. So you can't have the opportunity for can't have the opportunity for can't have the opportunity for discrimination based on gender or race discrimination based on gender or race discrimination based on gender or race or anything else. You're just hearing oh or anything else. You're just hearing oh or anything else. You're just hearing oh that was a great obo player and so you that was a great obo player and so you that was a great obo player and so you um things like that. Um, and I also um things like that. Um, and I also um things like that. Um, and I also think that there's another technique think that there's another technique think that there's another technique that might be super useful here, which that might be super useful here, which that might be super useful here, which is, and this is I've been exploring is, and this is I've been exploring is, and this is I've been exploring this a lot lately, what I'm calling the this a lot lately, what I'm calling the this a lot lately, what I'm calling the complexification of relationships. complexification of relationships. complexification of relationships. meaning um meaning um meaning um if you have something in common with if you have something in common with if you have something in common with someone and then you find out later someone and then you find out later someone and then you find out later that person has a very different that person has a very different that person has a very different opinion than you do on some hot button opinion than you do on some hot button opinion than you do on some hot button political issue, you're more willing to political issue, you're more willing to political issue, you're more willing to listen to them because you're already listen to them because you're already listen to them because you're already pals on, you know, you go surfing pals on, you know, you go surfing pals on, you know, you go surfing together, you whatever, you like the together, you whatever, you like the together, you whatever, you like the same sports team or whatever, you're same sports team or whatever, you're same sports team or whatever, you're more willing to listen. Um my example more willing to listen. Um my example more willing to listen. Um my example for this is the Iricquay Native for this is the Iricquay Native for this is the Iricquay Native Americans who were up in sort of Americans who were up in sort of Americans who were up in sort of northern Wisconsin area, five tribes, northern Wisconsin area, five tribes, northern Wisconsin area, five tribes, they all killed each other for years and they all killed each other for years and they all killed each other for years and years. They had a new leader come in. years. They had a new leader come in. years. They had a new leader come in. This guy uh Dana Gawada who came to be This guy uh Dana Gawada who came to be This guy uh Dana Gawada who came to be known as the great peacemaker. What he known as the great peacemaker. What he known as the great peacemaker. What he did is he said, "Look, you've got these did is he said, "Look, you've got these did is he said, "Look, you've got these five tribes. I'm going to assign each five tribes. I'm going to assign each five tribes. I'm going to assign each person membership in a in a clan." So, person membership in a in a clan." So, person membership in a in a clan." So, uh let's say we're in the same tribe, uh let's say we're in the same tribe, uh let's say we're in the same tribe, but you're a member of the Beaver Clan. but you're a member of the Beaver Clan. but you're a member of the Beaver Clan. I'm a member of the Eagle Clan and so I'm a member of the Eagle Clan and so I'm a member of the Eagle Clan and so on. And and these clan memberships are on. And and these clan memberships are on. And and these clan memberships are crosscutting such that now you say, crosscutting such that now you say, crosscutting such that now you say, "Hey, let's go invade that tribe over "Hey, let's go invade that tribe over "Hey, let's go invade that tribe over the hill." And I say, "Oh, you know, I the hill." And I say, "Oh, you know, I the hill." And I say, "Oh, you know, I don't know. that guy's a member of the don't know. that guy's a member of the don't know. that guy's a member of the Eagle Clan and so am I. You know, I've Eagle Clan and so am I. You know, I've Eagle Clan and so am I. You know, I've got these crosscutting relationships now got these crosscutting relationships now got these crosscutting relationships now and I'm less likely, I'm less willing to and I'm less likely, I'm less willing to and I'm less likely, I'm less willing to do that. And this ties back to the do that. And this ties back to the do that. And this ties back to the experiments we did that I mentioned with experiments we did that I mentioned with experiments we did that I mentioned with the handstabbing. What we now do is we the handstabbing. What we now do is we the handstabbing. What we now do is we say the year is 2029 and these three say the year is 2029 and these three say the year is 2029 and these three religions have teamed up against these religions have teamed up against these religions have teamed up against these three religions. And now you see the three religions. And now you see the three religions. And now you see the different hands get stabbed. But the different hands get stabbed. But the different hands get stabbed. But the ones who I just told you in one sentence ones who I just told you in one sentence ones who I just told you in one sentence are your allies now. You care more are your allies now. You care more are your allies now. You care more about them. just because I arbitrarily about them. just because I arbitrarily about them. just because I arbitrarily told you that they're your allies. And told you that they're your allies. And told you that they're your allies. And so when things get complexified like so when things get complexified like so when things get complexified like this, we suddenly care more about this, we suddenly care more about this, we suddenly care more about certain groups and so on. Anyway, I certain groups and so on. Anyway, I certain groups and so on. Anyway, I think this is a really important thing think this is a really important thing think this is a really important thing to do. So I've patented a new social to do. So I've patented a new social to do. So I've patented a new social media algorithm which essentially works media algorithm which essentially works media algorithm which essentially works simply by simply by simply by surfacing what people have in common. So surfacing what people have in common. So surfacing what people have in common. So if you and I are both on this algorithm, if you and I are both on this algorithm, if you and I are both on this algorithm, it oh, we've got this in common, that in it oh, we've got this in common, that in it oh, we've got this in common, that in common, and all those things get common, and all those things get common, and all those things get surfaced and we come to know each other surfaced and we come to know each other surfaced and we come to know each other and like each other. And only later, and like each other. And only later, and like each other. And only later, temporally down the line, do we hear, temporally down the line, do we hear, temporally down the line, do we hear, "Oh, wow. I didn't I didn't realize you "Oh, wow. I didn't I didn't realize you "Oh, wow. I didn't I didn't realize you felt so differently about gun control or felt so differently about gun control or felt so differently about gun control or abortion or whatever." We learn that abortion or whatever." We learn that abortion or whatever." We learn that later. And and then we're more willing later. And and then we're more willing later. And and then we're more willing to lean in and talk. to lean in and talk. to lean in and talk. &gt;&gt; Fascinating. I thought for a while &gt;&gt; Fascinating. I thought for a while &gt;&gt; Fascinating. I thought for a while that the solution to polarization was that the solution to polarization was that the solution to polarization was going to be um it sounds like an going to be um it sounds like an going to be um it sounds like an laboratory experiment, but the laboratory experiment, but the laboratory experiment, but the interbreeding across um you know interbreeding across um you know interbreeding across um you know first genetic but also um and geographic first genetic but also um and geographic first genetic but also um and geographic but also you know racial and cultural but also you know racial and cultural but also you know racial and cultural and ethnic boundaries, right? And and ethnic boundaries, right? And and ethnic boundaries, right? And when you have people mixing and having when you have people mixing and having when you have people mixing and having children that are mixed, you can no children that are mixed, you can no children that are mixed, you can no longer assign identity in a way that um longer assign identity in a way that um longer assign identity in a way that um that allows people to continue to uh that allows people to continue to uh that allows people to continue to uh hurt and harm one another. Because I do hurt and harm one another. Because I do hurt and harm one another. Because I do think that the one thing that runs very think that the one thing that runs very think that the one thing that runs very deep in our species is this evolutionary deep in our species is this evolutionary deep in our species is this evolutionary drive. And there are other sources of drive. And there are other sources of drive. And there are other sources of this, of course, but to make more of this, of course, but to make more of this, of course, but to make more of ourselves and to protect our young. And ourselves and to protect our young. And ourselves and to protect our young. And if those young are uh you know of if those young are uh you know of if those young are uh you know of several different races or religions etc several different races or religions etc several different races or religions etc you know then you really don't have any you know then you really don't have any you know then you really don't have any uh anywhere to go uh anywhere to go uh anywhere to go &gt;&gt; you know in terms of violence and &gt;&gt; you know in terms of violence and &gt;&gt; you know in terms of violence and of course I started thinking and of course I started thinking and of course I started thinking about this in the way that when I grew about this in the way that when I grew about this in the way that when I grew up it wasn't that long ago I was born in up it wasn't that long ago I was born in up it wasn't that long ago I was born in 75 um but it was 50 years ago that you 75 um but it was 50 years ago that you 75 um but it was 50 years ago that you saw less in marriage across races you saw less in marriage across races you saw less in marriage across races you just did right you it was it happened just did right you it was it happened just did right you it was it happened but far less frequently than it does now but far less frequently than it does now but far less frequently than it does now across religions even across cultures across religions even across cultures across religions even across cultures and um and now things are quite and um and now things are quite and um and now things are quite different but the polarization different but the polarization different but the polarization continues. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I wish I shared that optimism on &gt;&gt; Yeah, I wish I shared that optimism on &gt;&gt; Yeah, I wish I shared that optimism on that on that front but you know the fact that on that front but you know the fact that on that front but you know the fact is in Rwanda Hutu and Tootsie had been is in Rwanda Hutu and Tootsie had been is in Rwanda Hutu and Tootsie had been intermaring for a long time. In Germany, intermaring for a long time. In Germany, intermaring for a long time. In Germany, Jews and Christians had been intermaring Jews and Christians had been intermaring Jews and Christians had been intermaring there for a long time. But when stuff there for a long time. But when stuff there for a long time. But when stuff hits the fan, none of that matters. And hits the fan, none of that matters. And hits the fan, none of that matters. And people will still make dividing lines people will still make dividing lines people will still make dividing lines and say, "Hey, if you've got some of and say, "Hey, if you've got some of and say, "Hey, if you've got some of this in you, you're on the other side." this in you, you're on the other side." this in you, you're on the other side." &gt;&gt; I wish I had a more optimistic note &gt;&gt; I wish I had a more optimistic note &gt;&gt; I wish I had a more optimistic note there, but there, but there, but &gt;&gt; No, I think Well, it sounds like that &gt;&gt; No, I think Well, it sounds like that &gt;&gt; No, I think Well, it sounds like that the projects you're involved in to try the projects you're involved in to try the projects you're involved in to try and reduce polarization are Well, and reduce polarization are Well, and reduce polarization are Well, I'll say certainly they're very I'll say certainly they're very I'll say certainly they're very important and they sound very important and they sound very important and they sound very promising. Um, look, you're I feel like promising. Um, look, you're I feel like promising. Um, look, you're I feel like we could go another six hours. We have we could go another six hours. We have we could go another six hours. We have to have you back. Of course, you have to have you back. Of course, you have to have you back. Of course, you have your own podcast, amazing podcast. Uh so your own podcast, amazing podcast. Uh so your own podcast, amazing podcast. Uh so tell us about just um for folks we'll tell us about just um for folks we'll tell us about just um for folks we'll put links in the uh show note captions put links in the uh show note captions put links in the uh show note captions but um you're write you're writing what but um you're write you're writing what but um you're write you're writing what 10 books now you got a podcast you're 10 books now you got a podcast you're 10 books now you got a podcast you're involved in movie scripts involved in movie scripts involved in movie scripts but give us the highlights of what are but give us the highlights of what are but give us the highlights of what are you up to these days when you're not you up to these days when you're not you up to these days when you're not teaching three different classes at teaching three different classes at teaching three different classes at Stanford &gt;&gt; so I'm writing the podcast inner cosmos &gt;&gt; so I'm writing the podcast inner cosmos &gt;&gt; so I'm writing the podcast inner cosmos which is which is which is &gt;&gt; awesome podcast I listen to it &gt;&gt; awesome podcast I listen to it &gt;&gt; awesome podcast I listen to it &gt;&gt; thank you thanks and that's a &gt;&gt; thank you thanks and that's a &gt;&gt; thank you thanks and that's a really wonderful way for me to put out really wonderful way for me to put out really wonderful way for me to put out lots of ideas often I do you know mostly lots of ideas often I do you know mostly lots of ideas often I do you know mostly it's monologue um but I do have guests it's monologue um but I do have guests it's monologue um but I do have guests as well Um, and I get to just tackle big as well Um, and I get to just tackle big as well Um, and I get to just tackle big philosophical questions about time, philosophical questions about time, philosophical questions about time, about polarization, about whatever. Um, about polarization, about whatever. Um, about polarization, about whatever. Um, I just signed my next two books. One is I just signed my next two books. One is I just signed my next two books. One is the Ulyses contract, and one I mentioned the Ulyses contract, and one I mentioned the Ulyses contract, and one I mentioned is called Empire of the Invisible. Um, is called Empire of the Invisible. Um, is called Empire of the Invisible. Um, and then, yeah, I'm also doing a lot in and then, yeah, I'm also doing a lot in and then, yeah, I'm also doing a lot in the realm of movie production stuff. Um, the realm of movie production stuff. Um, the realm of movie production stuff. Um, we're making a documentary film right we're making a documentary film right we're making a documentary film right now with the comedian Craig Ferguson now with the comedian Craig Ferguson now with the comedian Craig Ferguson where we're asking the question, can AI where we're asking the question, can AI where we're asking the question, can AI be funny? So, we've built a robot that be funny? So, we've built a robot that be funny? So, we've built a robot that Craig is going to go on the road with Craig is going to go on the road with Craig is going to go on the road with and do this comedy with, you know, like and do this comedy with, you know, like and do this comedy with, you know, like in the middle of the country. And the in the middle of the country. And the in the middle of the country. And the reason we're starting there is because reason we're starting there is because reason we're starting there is because that allows us to ask all these deeper that allows us to ask all these deeper that allows us to ask all these deeper questions about AI, but in a way that questions about AI, but in a way that questions about AI, but in a way that draws people into the movie because you draws people into the movie because you draws people into the movie because you can't just make like a doomy gloomy can't just make like a doomy gloomy can't just make like a doomy gloomy movie about AI and expect anybody to movie about AI and expect anybody to movie about AI and expect anybody to watch it. But, but this is sort of a watch it. But, but this is sort of a watch it. But, but this is sort of a really fun funny movie that allows us to really fun funny movie that allows us to really fun funny movie that allows us to really ask what's it going to mean for really ask what's it going to mean for really ask what's it going to mean for our lives. our lives. our lives. &gt;&gt; Awesome. And when you're not doing that, &gt;&gt; Awesome. And when you're not doing that, &gt;&gt; Awesome. And when you're not doing that, you're fixing doorork knobs and stuff in you're fixing doorork knobs and stuff in you're fixing doorork knobs and stuff in your in your home. your in your home. your in your home. &gt;&gt; Yes. and raising a family. &gt;&gt; Yes. and raising a family. &gt;&gt; Yes. and raising a family. &gt;&gt; Uh David, thanks so much for coming here &gt;&gt; Uh David, thanks so much for coming here &gt;&gt; Uh David, thanks so much for coming here today. &gt;&gt; Great to see you, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Great to see you, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Great to see you, Andrew. &gt;&gt; As everyone now sees, and many already &gt;&gt; As everyone now sees, and many already &gt;&gt; As everyone now sees, and many already knew coming into this, you're a knew coming into this, you're a knew coming into this, you're a worldclass educator and uh storyteller worldclass educator and uh storyteller worldclass educator and uh storyteller and most importantly a scientist um who and most importantly a scientist um who and most importantly a scientist um who ran experiments. I think it really helps ran experiments. I think it really helps ran experiments. I think it really helps to have, you know, no diss on science to have, you know, no diss on science to have, you know, no diss on science communicators that haven't run labs and communicators that haven't run labs and communicators that haven't run labs and things like that, but I think when one things like that, but I think when one things like that, but I think when one has done experiments, you get a real has done experiments, you get a real has done experiments, you get a real deep sense for how data comes together deep sense for how data comes together deep sense for how data comes together and what it does and doesn't mean. and what it does and doesn't mean. and what it does and doesn't mean. um you're a virtuoso. So, um thanks for um you're a virtuoso. So, um thanks for um you're a virtuoso. So, um thanks for coming here today and sharing just coming here today and sharing just coming here today and sharing just so many pearls of wisdom and some so many pearls of wisdom and some so many pearls of wisdom and some practical takeaways uh that I know practical takeaways uh that I know practical takeaways uh that I know myself and other people are really going myself and other people are really going myself and other people are really going to uh going to work with. to uh going to work with. to uh going to work with. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks, Andrew. It's a blast &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks, Andrew. It's a blast &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks, Andrew. It's a blast being here. being here. being here. &gt;&gt; Awesome. Come back. Thank you for &gt;&gt; Awesome. Come back. Thank you for &gt;&gt; Awesome. Come back. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with Dr. David Eagleman. To learn more about Dr. David Eagleman. To learn more about Dr. David Eagleman. To learn more about his work and to find links to his work and to find links to his work and to find links to his various books, please see the links in various books, please see the links in various books, please see the links in the show note captions. If you're the show note captions. If you're the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years. And that's based on more than 5 years. And that's based on more than 5 years. And that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. David today's discussion with Dr. David today's discussion with Dr. David Eagleman. And last, but certainly not Eagleman. And last, but certainly not Eagleman. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for [music] your least, thank you for [music] your least, thank you for [music] your interest in science.