Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're talking all about habits. Today, we're talking all about habits. Today, we're talking all about habits. In particular, we're going to discuss In particular, we're going to discuss In particular, we're going to discuss the biology of habit formation and the biology of habit formation and the biology of habit formation and the biology of how we break habits. biology of how we break habits. biology of how we break habits. I think we can all appreciate the value I think we can all appreciate the value I think we can all appreciate the value of having habits. Habits organize our of having habits. Habits organize our of having habits. Habits organize our behavior into more or less reflexive behavior into more or less reflexive behavior into more or less reflexive action, so we don't have to think too action, so we don't have to think too action, so we don't have to think too much about performing the various much about performing the various much about performing the various behaviors that, for instance, allow us behaviors that, for instance, allow us behaviors that, for instance, allow us to brush our teeth, or which side of bed to brush our teeth, or which side of bed to brush our teeth, or which side of bed we roll out of in the morning. And then, we roll out of in the morning. And then, we roll out of in the morning. And then, of course, habits can be more elaborate, of course, habits can be more elaborate, of course, habits can be more elaborate, too. We can be in the habit of too. We can be in the habit of too. We can be in the habit of exercising at a particular time of day. exercising at a particular time of day. exercising at a particular time of day. We can be in the habit of eating certain We can be in the habit of eating certain We can be in the habit of eating certain foods. We can be in the habit of saying foods. We can be in the habit of saying foods. We can be in the habit of saying or not saying certain things. or not saying certain things. or not saying certain things. But, of course, there are many habits But, of course, there are many habits But, of course, there are many habits that don't serve us well, or that don't serve us well, or that don't serve us well, or that perhaps even undermine our immediate and perhaps even undermine our immediate and perhaps even undermine our immediate and long-term health goals and psychological long-term health goals and psychological long-term health goals and psychological goals, and even some habits that can goals, and even some habits that can goals, and even some habits that can really undermine our overall life goals. really undermine our overall life goals. really undermine our overall life goals. So, today we're going to talk about So, today we're going to talk about So, today we're going to talk about making, meaning forming, and breaking, making, meaning forming, and breaking, making, meaning forming, and breaking, meaning stopping, various habits. meaning stopping, various habits. meaning stopping, various habits. There's a lot of information out there There's a lot of information out there There's a lot of information out there about habits. You'll find this in the about habits. You'll find this in the about habits. You'll find this in the popular sphere. There are books, there popular sphere. There are books, there popular sphere. There are books, there are articles, there are workshops, and are articles, there are workshops, and are articles, there are workshops, and so forth. so forth. so forth. However, lesser known is that there's a However, lesser known is that there's a However, lesser known is that there's a whole neuroscience of habit formation whole neuroscience of habit formation whole neuroscience of habit formation and habit breaking. And there's a whole and habit breaking. And there's a whole and habit breaking. And there's a whole field of psychology devoted to field of psychology devoted to field of psychology devoted to understanding habit formation and habit understanding habit formation and habit understanding habit formation and habit breaking. And within those scientific breaking. And within those scientific breaking. And within those scientific literatures, I think there are some real literatures, I think there are some real literatures, I think there are some real gems that, at least to my knowledge, we gems that, at least to my knowledge, we gems that, at least to my knowledge, we haven't paid too much attention to in haven't paid too much attention to in haven't paid too much attention to in the popular sphere. So, today we're the popular sphere. So, today we're the popular sphere. So, today we're going to talk about the biology of habit going to talk about the biology of habit going to talk about the biology of habit formation and habit breaking. I'm also formation and habit breaking. I'm also formation and habit breaking. I'm also going to spell out two specific types of going to spell out two specific types of going to spell out two specific types of habit formation and habit breaking habit formation and habit breaking habit formation and habit breaking programs. I'm going to boil these down programs. I'm going to boil these down programs. I'm going to boil these down to some very explicit steps that anyone to some very explicit steps that anyone to some very explicit steps that anyone can use. can use. can use. My reasoning for doing that is, first of My reasoning for doing that is, first of My reasoning for doing that is, first of all, it's the end of 2021. Many people all, it's the end of 2021. Many people all, it's the end of 2021. Many people are thinking about New Year's are thinking about New Year's are thinking about New Year's resolutions. They're thinking about resolutions. They're thinking about resolutions. They're thinking about leaving some things behind from 2021 and leaving some things behind from 2021 and leaving some things behind from 2021 and previous, and acquiring some new previous, and acquiring some new previous, and acquiring some new behaviors, taking on some new behaviors, taking on some new behaviors, taking on some new challenges, and trying to bring new challenges, and trying to bring new challenges, and trying to bring new things to their lives. But regardless of things to their lives. But regardless of things to their lives. But regardless of when you're listening to this, when you're listening to this, when you're listening to this, the programs that I'll outline are the programs that I'll outline are the programs that I'll outline are grounded in the neuroscience and biology grounded in the neuroscience and biology grounded in the neuroscience and biology of habit formation, and they map very of habit formation, and they map very of habit formation, and they map very well to what the psychologists have well to what the psychologists have well to what the psychologists have described in terms of habit formation described in terms of habit formation described in terms of habit formation and breaking. So, today you're going to and breaking. So, today you're going to and breaking. So, today you're going to learn a lot of science. You're also learn a lot of science. You're also learn a lot of science. You're also going to come away with some practical going to come away with some practical going to come away with some practical tools, and I'm certain that regardless tools, and I'm certain that regardless tools, and I'm certain that regardless of your present state or goals, there'll of your present state or goals, there'll of your present state or goals, there'll be something of value to you. Before we be something of value to you. Before we be something of value to you. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I started mineral, probiotic drink. I started mineral, probiotic drink. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking the podcast. The reason I started taking the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still Athletic Greens, and the reason I still Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens, is that because of take Athletic Greens, is that because of take Athletic Greens, is that because of the ingredients it contains, I know that the ingredients it contains, I know that the ingredients it contains, I know that I'm covering all of my foundational I'm covering all of my foundational I'm covering all of my foundational needs for vitamins, minerals, and needs for vitamins, minerals, and needs for vitamins, minerals, and probiotics. There is a wealth of probiotics. There is a wealth of probiotics. There is a wealth of knowledge now pointing to the fact that knowledge now pointing to the fact that knowledge now pointing to the fact that the so-called gut-brain axis is the so-called gut-brain axis is the so-called gut-brain axis is important for our brain health, for our important for our brain health, for our important for our brain health, for our metabolic health, for our hormone metabolic health, for our hormone metabolic health, for our hormone health, for our immune system. So, the health, for our immune system. So, the health, for our immune system. So, the probiotics, vitamins, and minerals probiotics, vitamins, and minerals probiotics, vitamins, and minerals really support that system, and many of really support that system, and many of really support that system, and many of the other things it contains generally the other things it contains generally the other things it contains generally support our health in terms of neural support our health in terms of neural support our health in terms of neural system, meaning the brain, the spinal system, meaning the brain, the spinal system, meaning the brain, the spinal cord, etc. Basically, Athletic Greens cord, etc. Basically, Athletic Greens cord, etc. Basically, Athletic Greens has all the things I need, nothing I has all the things I need, nothing I has all the things I need, nothing I don't, and by taking it once or twice a don't, and by taking it once or twice a don't, and by taking it once or twice a day, I always feel better, and I know day, I always feel better, and I know day, I always feel better, and I know that I'm covering all my bases. If you'd that I'm covering all my bases. If you'd that I'm covering all my bases. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go like to try Athletic Greens, you can go like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to athleticgreens.com/huberman to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give to claim a special offer. They'll give to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it you five free travel packs that make it you five free travel packs that make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens very easy to mix up Athletic Greens very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on while you're on the road, in the car, on while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, etc. Plus a year's supply of the plane, etc. Plus a year's supply of the plane, etc. Plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer of the five to claim the special offer of the five to claim the special offer of the five free travel packs plus a year supply of free travel packs plus a year supply of free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 and K2. Today's podcast is vitamin D3 and K2. Today's podcast is vitamin D3 and K2. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. also brought to us by InsideTracker. also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been reach your health goals. I've long been reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work a believer in getting regular blood work a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that most of done for the simple reason that most of done for the simple reason that most of the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And analyzed from a quality blood test. And analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA nowadays with the advent of modern DNA nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insights into tests, you can also get insights into tests, you can also get insights into your particular needs your particular needs your particular needs for your genetic type. Now, a major for your genetic type. Now, a major for your genetic type. Now, a major issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there is you get the numbers tests out there is you get the numbers tests out there is you get the numbers back, you get a lot of information back, you get a lot of information back, you get a lot of information back, but you don't know what to do with that but you don't know what to do with that but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes that information. InsideTracker makes that information. InsideTracker makes that very easy. They have a personalized very easy. They have a personalized very easy. They have a personalized platform where you get your numbers and platform where you get your numbers and platform where you get your numbers and it points to specific things that you it points to specific things that you it points to specific things that you can do in terms of behavioral protocols, can do in terms of behavioral protocols, can do in terms of behavioral protocols, meaning things you perhaps should do meaning things you perhaps should do meaning things you perhaps should do more of or less of, nutritional more of or less of, nutritional more of or less of, nutritional protocols, things that you perhaps protocols, things that you perhaps protocols, things that you perhaps should ingest more of or less of, and should ingest more of or less of, and should ingest more of or less of, and various things that you might consider various things that you might consider various things that you might consider for more elaborate directed approaches for more elaborate directed approaches for more elaborate directed approaches to adjusting the numbers in your blood to adjusting the numbers in your blood to adjusting the numbers in your blood and DNA profiles. and DNA profiles. and DNA profiles. Another feature of InsideTracker is that Another feature of InsideTracker is that Another feature of InsideTracker is that it has what's called the inner age test. it has what's called the inner age test. it has what's called the inner age test. This test allows you to see what your This test allows you to see what your This test allows you to see what your biological age and compare that to your biological age and compare that to your biological age and compare that to your chronological age. And of course, your chronological age. And of course, your chronological age. And of course, your biological age is the one that you can biological age is the one that you can biological age is the one that you can control and that's the one that's really control and that's the one that's really control and that's the one that's really important to your immediate and important to your immediate and important to your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try long-term health. If you'd like to try long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to InsideTracker, you can go to InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off. Today's episode is also to get 25% off. Today's episode is also to get 25% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that I truly believe are the best out there. I truly believe are the best out there. I truly believe are the best out there. I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress for about a year now and it's the best for about a year now and it's the best for about a year now and it's the best sleep I've ever had. One thing that sleep I've ever had. One thing that sleep I've ever had. One thing that makes Helix mattresses really unique is makes Helix mattresses really unique is makes Helix mattresses really unique is that they are tailored to your unique that they are tailored to your unique that they are tailored to your unique sleep needs. You can go to their sleep needs. You can go to their sleep needs. You can go to their website, you take a quiz, it only takes website, you take a quiz, it only takes website, you take a quiz, it only takes about 2 minutes, and it will match your about 2 minutes, and it will match your about 2 minutes, and it will match your body type and sleep preferences to a body type and sleep preferences to a body type and sleep preferences to a particular mattress. So, it will ask you particular mattress. So, it will ask you particular mattress. So, it will ask you questions such as, do you sleep on your questions such as, do you sleep on your questions such as, do you sleep on your side, your back, or your stomach? Do you side, your back, or your stomach? Do you side, your back, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during the tend to run hot or cold during the tend to run hot or cold during the night? Maybe you don't know. night? Maybe you don't know. night? Maybe you don't know. You answer those questions and it You answer those questions and it You answer those questions and it matches you to the mattress that's right matches you to the mattress that's right matches you to the mattress that's right for you. For me, that turned out to be for you. For me, that turned out to be for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress, DUSK. I wanted a the Dusk mattress, DUSK. I wanted a the Dusk mattress, DUSK. I wanted a mattress that wasn't too firm, not too mattress that wasn't too firm, not too mattress that wasn't too firm, not too soft. Anyway, I matched to the Dusk. soft. Anyway, I matched to the Dusk. soft. Anyway, I matched to the Dusk. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress and as I mentioned before, it's been the and as I mentioned before, it's been the and as I mentioned before, it's been the best experience for me. My sleep is so best experience for me. My sleep is so best experience for me. My sleep is so improved. So, if you're interested in improved. So, if you're interested in improved. So, if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to upgrading your mattress, go to upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their 2-minute sleep quiz, and take their 2-minute sleep quiz, and take their 2-minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized they'll match you to a customized mattress for you, and you'll get up to mattress for you, and you'll get up to mattress for you, and you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two $200 off all mattress orders and two $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, go to free pillows. Again, go to free pillows. Again, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their quiz, match to the mattress take their quiz, match to the mattress take their quiz, match to the mattress that's right for you, and if you decide that's right for you, and if you decide that's right for you, and if you decide to purchase it, you'll get up to $200 to purchase it, you'll get up to $200 to purchase it, you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free off all mattress orders and two free off all mattress orders and two free pillows. They have a 10-year warranty, pillows. They have a 10-year warranty, pillows. They have a 10-year warranty, and if you want to try it out, you can and if you want to try it out, you can and if you want to try it out, you can do that for 100 nights risk-free. do that for 100 nights risk-free. do that for 100 nights risk-free. They'll even pick the mattress up for They'll even pick the mattress up for They'll even pick the mattress up for you if you don't love it, but I'm pretty you if you don't love it, but I'm pretty you if you don't love it, but I'm pretty confident that you will. Again, confident that you will. Again, confident that you will. Again, helixsleep.com/huberman is where you'll find a Helix mattress is where you'll find a Helix mattress is where you'll find a Helix mattress for you. Let's talk about habits. for you. Let's talk about habits. for you. Let's talk about habits. And anytime we're talking about habits, And anytime we're talking about habits, And anytime we're talking about habits, that means our nervous system learned that means our nervous system learned that means our nervous system learned something. Now, many people think that habits are Now, many people think that habits are Now, many people think that habits are just like reflexes, but pure reflexes just like reflexes, but pure reflexes just like reflexes, but pure reflexes are things like the eye blink reflex. are things like the eye blink reflex. are things like the eye blink reflex. You know, something comes toward your You know, something comes toward your You know, something comes toward your eye and you don't want it to get in your eye and you don't want it to get in your eye and you don't want it to get in your eye, you'll blink. Or if you happen to eye, you'll blink. Or if you happen to eye, you'll blink. Or if you happen to step on a sharp object or get too close step on a sharp object or get too close step on a sharp object or get too close to something that's too hot, you'll to something that's too hot, you'll to something that's too hot, you'll reflexively move away. Those aren't reflexively move away. Those aren't reflexively move away. Those aren't habits. Those are what we call hardwired habits. Those are what we call hardwired habits. Those are what we call hardwired reflexes. Habits are things that our reflexes. Habits are things that our reflexes. Habits are things that our nervous system learned, but not always nervous system learned, but not always nervous system learned, but not always consciously. Sometimes we develop habits consciously. Sometimes we develop habits consciously. Sometimes we develop habits that we're not even aware of that we're not even aware of that we're not even aware of till they become a problem or maybe they till they become a problem or maybe they till they become a problem or maybe they serve us well, who knows. But, the fact serve us well, who knows. But, the fact serve us well, who knows. But, the fact of the matter is that habits are a big of the matter is that habits are a big of the matter is that habits are a big part of who we are. What we do part of who we are. What we do part of who we are. What we do habitually makes up much of what we do habitually makes up much of what we do habitually makes up much of what we do entirely. In fact, it's estimated that entirely. In fact, it's estimated that entirely. In fact, it's estimated that up to 70% of our waking behavior is made up to 70% of our waking behavior is made up to 70% of our waking behavior is made up of habitual behavior. up of habitual behavior. up of habitual behavior. So, you can imagine that there's a lot So, you can imagine that there's a lot So, you can imagine that there's a lot of biology, meaning cells and hormones of biology, meaning cells and hormones of biology, meaning cells and hormones and neural pathways, etc., that are and neural pathways, etc., that are and neural pathways, etc., that are going to support the development of going to support the development of going to support the development of those habits. So, if habits are largely those habits. So, if habits are largely those habits. So, if habits are largely learned, consciously or unconsciously, learned, consciously or unconsciously, learned, consciously or unconsciously, we have to ask ourselves, what is we have to ask ourselves, what is we have to ask ourselves, what is learning? Well, learning is learning? Well, learning is learning? Well, learning is neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity is neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity is neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity is simply the process by which our nervous simply the process by which our nervous simply the process by which our nervous system changes in response to system changes in response to system changes in response to experience. We have to ask, what changes? Well, what We have to ask, what changes? Well, what We have to ask, what changes? Well, what changes are the connections between changes are the connections between changes are the connections between neurons. Neurons are just nerve cells. neurons. Neurons are just nerve cells. neurons. Neurons are just nerve cells. They communicate with one another by They communicate with one another by They communicate with one another by electricity and by sending chemical electricity and by sending chemical electricity and by sending chemical signals to one another that inspire the signals to one another that inspire the signals to one another that inspire the next neuron and the next neuron to next neuron and the next neuron to next neuron and the next neuron to either be electrically active or not, either be electrically active or not, either be electrically active or not, but at the end of the day, but at the end of the day, but at the end of the day, neuroplasticity is about forming new neuroplasticity is about forming new neuroplasticity is about forming new neural circuits, new pathways by which neural circuits, new pathways by which neural circuits, new pathways by which certain habits are likely to occur and certain habits are likely to occur and certain habits are likely to occur and other ones are less likely to occur. other ones are less likely to occur. other ones are less likely to occur. So, we've got habits. So, we've got habits. So, we've got habits. We have that habits are learned. We have We have that habits are learned. We have We have that habits are learned. We have that learning involves neuroplasticity that learning involves neuroplasticity that learning involves neuroplasticity and that neuroplasticity involves and that neuroplasticity involves and that neuroplasticity involves changes in the connections between changes in the connections between changes in the connections between neurons, nerve cells. Okay, so that neurons, nerve cells. Okay, so that neurons, nerve cells. Okay, so that describes habits through the lens of describes habits through the lens of describes habits through the lens of neuroscience and biology, but as many of neuroscience and biology, but as many of neuroscience and biology, but as many of you are well aware, there are popular you are well aware, there are popular you are well aware, there are popular books about habits and there's a whole books about habits and there's a whole books about habits and there's a whole psychological literature about habits. psychological literature about habits. psychological literature about habits. And those two areas point to some very And those two areas point to some very And those two areas point to some very interesting aspects of habits that I interesting aspects of habits that I interesting aspects of habits that I think are worth mentioning. First of think are worth mentioning. First of think are worth mentioning. First of all, is this notion of immediate all, is this notion of immediate all, is this notion of immediate goal-based habits versus identity-based goal-based habits versus identity-based goal-based habits versus identity-based habits. Immediate goal-based habits are going to Immediate goal-based habits are going to Immediate goal-based habits are going to be habits that are designed to bring you be habits that are designed to bring you be habits that are designed to bring you a specific outcome a specific outcome a specific outcome as you do them. So, each and every time as you do them. So, each and every time as you do them. So, each and every time you do them. So, for instance, it might you do them. So, for instance, it might you do them. So, for instance, it might be that you want to develop a habit of be that you want to develop a habit of be that you want to develop a habit of getting, uh, you know, 60 minutes of getting, uh, you know, 60 minutes of getting, uh, you know, 60 minutes of zone two cardio each day, uh, or zone two cardio each day, uh, or zone two cardio each day, uh, or perhaps, you know, three, four times a perhaps, you know, three, four times a perhaps, you know, three, four times a week as we head into the new year. I've week as we head into the new year. I've week as we head into the new year. I've talked before on the podcast about the talked before on the podcast about the talked before on the podcast about the fact that the scientific literature and fact that the scientific literature and fact that the scientific literature and the health literature really points to the health literature really points to the health literature really points to the incredibly positive effects of the incredibly positive effects of the incredibly positive effects of getting 150 minutes to 180 minutes per getting 150 minutes to 180 minutes per getting 150 minutes to 180 minutes per week minimum week minimum week minimum of what's called zone two cardio. Zone of what's called zone two cardio. Zone of what's called zone two cardio. Zone two cardio is basically any two cardio is basically any two cardio is basically any cardiovascular exercise that gets you cardiovascular exercise that gets you cardiovascular exercise that gets you moving and your heart pumping and moving and your heart pumping and moving and your heart pumping and breathing, but not so hard that you breathing, but not so hard that you breathing, but not so hard that you can't hold a conversation. It kind of can't hold a conversation. It kind of can't hold a conversation. It kind of puts you at the threshold of being just puts you at the threshold of being just puts you at the threshold of being just able to have a conversation that's a able to have a conversation that's a able to have a conversation that's a little bit strained, but if you were to little bit strained, but if you were to little bit strained, but if you were to exercise a little bit harder, you know, exercise a little bit harder, you know, exercise a little bit harder, you know, run a little bit faster, etc., you run a little bit faster, etc., you run a little bit faster, etc., you wouldn't be able to talk while you did wouldn't be able to talk while you did wouldn't be able to talk while you did it. There's a lot of literature that points There's a lot of literature that points There's a lot of literature that points to that as a healthy practice. So, maybe to that as a healthy practice. So, maybe to that as a healthy practice. So, maybe you're somebody that wants to get more you're somebody that wants to get more you're somebody that wants to get more of zone two cardio, for instance. of zone two cardio, for instance. of zone two cardio, for instance. That would be an immediate goal-based That would be an immediate goal-based That would be an immediate goal-based habit. If your goal is to habit. If your goal is to habit. If your goal is to get that cardio maybe four times a week, get that cardio maybe four times a week, get that cardio maybe four times a week, every time you do it, you go check off a every time you do it, you go check off a every time you do it, you go check off a little box and you'd say, "Okay, I did little box and you'd say, "Okay, I did little box and you'd say, "Okay, I did it." You meet You met the goal. it." You meet You met the goal. it." You meet You met the goal. That is different than so-called That is different than so-called That is different than so-called identity-based habits, where there's a identity-based habits, where there's a identity-based habits, where there's a larger overarching theme to the habit, larger overarching theme to the habit, larger overarching theme to the habit, where you're trying to become, quote where you're trying to become, quote where you're trying to become, quote unquote, a fit person, or you're unquote, a fit person, or you're unquote, a fit person, or you're somebody who wants to be somebody who wants to be somebody who wants to be an athlete or something of that sort. an athlete or something of that sort. an athlete or something of that sort. It's where you start to attach some sort It's where you start to attach some sort It's where you start to attach some sort of larger picture about yourself or what of larger picture about yourself or what of larger picture about yourself or what it means for you to do that habit, where it means for you to do that habit, where it means for you to do that habit, where there's both the immediate goal, right, there's both the immediate goal, right, there's both the immediate goal, right, complete the exercise, complete the complete the exercise, complete the complete the exercise, complete the session or whatever it is, session or whatever it is, session or whatever it is, check off that box, but that you're check off that box, but that you're check off that box, but that you're linking it to some sort of larger goal. linking it to some sort of larger goal. linking it to some sort of larger goal. Now, why am I making this distinction? I Now, why am I making this distinction? I Now, why am I making this distinction? I mean, first of all, I'm not the one to mean, first of all, I'm not the one to mean, first of all, I'm not the one to first make this distinction. Others have first make this distinction. Others have first make this distinction. Others have made the distinction between identity made the distinction between identity made the distinction between identity versus immediate goal-based habit versus immediate goal-based habit versus immediate goal-based habit formation. But, the reason I'm making formation. But, the reason I'm making formation. But, the reason I'm making the distinction is that pretty soon, in the distinction is that pretty soon, in the distinction is that pretty soon, in our discussion today, we are going to our discussion today, we are going to our discussion today, we are going to talk about dopamine, a molecule that's talk about dopamine, a molecule that's talk about dopamine, a molecule that's associated with motivation and reward associated with motivation and reward associated with motivation and reward that we make in our brain, that we make in our brain, that we make in our brain, and how different schedules of dopamine and how different schedules of dopamine and how different schedules of dopamine release predict whether or not we will release predict whether or not we will release predict whether or not we will stick to a habit or not. And in stick to a habit or not. And in stick to a habit or not. And in particular, whether or not we will be particular, whether or not we will be particular, whether or not we will be able to form that habit quickly or not. able to form that habit quickly or not. able to form that habit quickly or not. Now, this is absolutely critical to Now, this is absolutely critical to Now, this is absolutely critical to understand for the following reason. understand for the following reason. understand for the following reason. Another thing that you'll hear out there Another thing that you'll hear out there Another thing that you'll hear out there in the literature is that it takes 21 in the literature is that it takes 21 in the literature is that it takes 21 days to form a habit. Some people say days to form a habit. Some people say days to form a habit. Some people say 18, some people say 21, some people say 18, some people say 21, some people say 18, some people say 21, some people say 30 days, some people say 60 days. So, 30 days, some people say 60 days. So, 30 days, some people say 60 days. So, which one is it? Does it depend on the which one is it? Does it depend on the which one is it? Does it depend on the habit that one is trying to form, or habit that one is trying to form, or habit that one is trying to form, or does it depend on the person that's does it depend on the person that's does it depend on the person that's trying to form the habit? trying to form the habit? trying to form the habit? It turns out that there's excellent It turns out that there's excellent It turns out that there's excellent peer-reviewed data on this. There's a peer-reviewed data on this. There's a peer-reviewed data on this. There's a study published in 2010, first author study published in 2010, first author study published in 2010, first author Lally, l a l y. Lally, l a l y. Lally, l a l y. This study found that for the same habit This study found that for the same habit This study found that for the same habit to be formed, to be formed, to be formed, it can take anywhere from 18 days to as it can take anywhere from 18 days to as it can take anywhere from 18 days to as many as 254 days for different many as 254 days for different many as 254 days for different individuals to form that habit. The individuals to form that habit. The individuals to form that habit. The reason I bring this up is that I always reason I bring this up is that I always reason I bring this up is that I always get asked, is it true that it takes 21 get asked, is it true that it takes 21 get asked, is it true that it takes 21 days to form a habit? Is it true that days to form a habit? Is it true that days to form a habit? Is it true that your nervous system changes in 6 days your nervous system changes in 6 days your nervous system changes in 6 days when you're doing something repeatedly? when you're doing something repeatedly? when you're doing something repeatedly? And the answer is, as I mentioned And the answer is, as I mentioned And the answer is, as I mentioned before, it's highly variable. What I before, it's highly variable. What I before, it's highly variable. What I didn't tell you actually was what didn't tell you actually was what didn't tell you actually was what specific habit they were looking at in specific habit they were looking at in specific habit they were looking at in that Lally study. that Lally study. that Lally study. And it's interesting that the specific And it's interesting that the specific And it's interesting that the specific behavior was a health-related behavior. behavior was a health-related behavior. behavior was a health-related behavior. That's pretty relevant to our discussion That's pretty relevant to our discussion That's pretty relevant to our discussion here on the podcast, which was taking here on the podcast, which was taking here on the podcast, which was taking walks after dinner. There's actually a walks after dinner. There's actually a walks after dinner. There's actually a really nice literature showing that really nice literature showing that really nice literature showing that walks after a meal can speed glucose walks after a meal can speed glucose walks after a meal can speed glucose clearance from the bloodstream, can be clearance from the bloodstream, can be clearance from the bloodstream, can be beneficial for not just weight loss, but beneficial for not just weight loss, but beneficial for not just weight loss, but cardiovascular health, etc. cardiovascular health, etc. cardiovascular health, etc. So, a walk after dinner seems pretty So, a walk after dinner seems pretty So, a walk after dinner seems pretty straightforward, right? Well, in order straightforward, right? Well, in order straightforward, right? Well, in order to form that habit, to form that habit, to form that habit, it took some people 18 days and other it took some people 18 days and other it took some people 18 days and other people 254 days. How did they know when people 254 days. How did they know when people 254 days. How did they know when they formed the habit? Well, they were they formed the habit? Well, they were they formed the habit? Well, they were doing it about 85% of the time, and they doing it about 85% of the time, and they doing it about 85% of the time, and they also reported not having to spend that also reported not having to spend that also reported not having to spend that much mental effort in order to get into much mental effort in order to get into much mental effort in order to get into the mode of taking a walk after dinner. the mode of taking a walk after dinner. the mode of taking a walk after dinner. So, for those of you listening, some of So, for those of you listening, some of So, for those of you listening, some of you might be thinking, I can't believe you might be thinking, I can't believe you might be thinking, I can't believe that it would take some people 254 days that it would take some people 254 days that it would take some people 254 days to get into that habit. But as I said, to get into that habit. But as I said, to get into that habit. But as I said, people are highly variable. And if you people are highly variable. And if you people are highly variable. And if you can't form one habit easily, it doesn't can't form one habit easily, it doesn't can't form one habit easily, it doesn't mean that you can't form other habits mean that you can't form other habits mean that you can't form other habits easily. The mystery of why certain people can The mystery of why certain people can The mystery of why certain people can form certain habits more easily than form certain habits more easily than form certain habits more easily than others probably has something to do with others probably has something to do with others probably has something to do with how well people manage what's called how well people manage what's called how well people manage what's called limbic friction. Now, limbic friction is limbic friction. Now, limbic friction is limbic friction. Now, limbic friction is not a term that you're going to find in not a term that you're going to find in not a term that you're going to find in the formal neurobiological literature or the formal neurobiological literature or the formal neurobiological literature or even psychological literature. It's even psychological literature. It's even psychological literature. It's frankly a term that I coined to frankly a term that I coined to frankly a term that I coined to encompass a number of different pieces encompass a number of different pieces encompass a number of different pieces of the psychology and neuroscience of the psychology and neuroscience of the psychology and neuroscience literature. Limbic friction is a shorthand way that Limbic friction is a shorthand way that Limbic friction is a shorthand way that I use to describe the strain that's I use to describe the strain that's I use to describe the strain that's required in order to overcome one of two required in order to overcome one of two required in order to overcome one of two states within your body. One state is states within your body. One state is states within your body. One state is one of anxiousness where you're really one of anxiousness where you're really one of anxiousness where you're really anxious and therefore you can't calm anxious and therefore you can't calm anxious and therefore you can't calm down, you can't relax and therefore you down, you can't relax and therefore you down, you can't relax and therefore you can't engage in some particular activity can't engage in some particular activity can't engage in some particular activity or thought pattern that you would like. or thought pattern that you would like. or thought pattern that you would like. The other state is one in which you're The other state is one in which you're The other state is one in which you're feeling too tired or lazy or not feeling too tired or lazy or not feeling too tired or lazy or not motivated. Both of those states, feeling motivated. Both of those states, feeling motivated. Both of those states, feeling too alert and too calm if you will, too alert and too calm if you will, too alert and too calm if you will, relate to the function of the so-called relate to the function of the so-called relate to the function of the so-called autonomic nervous system, a set of autonomic nervous system, a set of autonomic nervous system, a set of neurons and hormones and chemicals in neurons and hormones and chemicals in neurons and hormones and chemicals in your brain and body that act as sort of your brain and body that act as sort of your brain and body that act as sort of a seesaw. You're either alert or calm. a seesaw. You're either alert or calm. a seesaw. You're either alert or calm. You're either asleep or stressed. Those You're either asleep or stressed. Those You're either asleep or stressed. Those two states are not compatible with one two states are not compatible with one two states are not compatible with one another. You've probably heard of wired another. You've probably heard of wired another. You've probably heard of wired and tired but that's really once you've and tired but that's really once you've and tired but that's really once you've been very stressed for a long time to been very stressed for a long time to been very stressed for a long time to the point where you're exhausted. What the point where you're exhausted. What the point where you're exhausted. What does the autonomic nervous system have does the autonomic nervous system have does the autonomic nervous system have to do with any of this? Well, limbic to do with any of this? Well, limbic to do with any of this? Well, limbic friction is a phrase that can be used to friction is a phrase that can be used to friction is a phrase that can be used to describe how much effort, how much describe how much effort, how much describe how much effort, how much activation energy you need in order to activation energy you need in order to activation energy you need in order to engage in a particular behavior. So, engage in a particular behavior. So, engage in a particular behavior. So, using this lolly study as an example, using this lolly study as an example, using this lolly study as an example, some people would eat dinner and then some people would eat dinner and then some people would eat dinner and then say, "Oh, that's right. I'm trying to say, "Oh, that's right. I'm trying to say, "Oh, that's right. I'm trying to develop the habit of taking a walk after develop the habit of taking a walk after develop the habit of taking a walk after dinner. So, let's get up and go." Other dinner. So, let's get up and go." Other dinner. So, let's get up and go." Other people will feel like, "I just don't people will feel like, "I just don't people will feel like, "I just don't want to do it today." They're going to want to do it today." They're going to want to do it today." They're going to feel too much limbic friction and that feel too much limbic friction and that feel too much limbic friction and that limbic friction could arrive, again, limbic friction could arrive, again, limbic friction could arrive, again, from one of two sources. It could be from one of two sources. It could be from one of two sources. It could be because they are too tired to do it or because they are too tired to do it or because they are too tired to do it or it could be because they're too anxious it could be because they're too anxious it could be because they're too anxious and distracted in order to do it. and distracted in order to do it. and distracted in order to do it. So, this is a key distinction. A lot of So, this is a key distinction. A lot of So, this is a key distinction. A lot of habit formation has to do with being in habit formation has to do with being in habit formation has to do with being in the right state of mind and being able the right state of mind and being able the right state of mind and being able to control your state of body and mind. to control your state of body and mind. to control your state of body and mind. So, as we march forward, what you're So, as we march forward, what you're So, as we march forward, what you're going to find is that this phrase or going to find is that this phrase or going to find is that this phrase or this term limbic friction is going to be this term limbic friction is going to be this term limbic friction is going to be a useful metric or way for you to touch a useful metric or way for you to touch a useful metric or way for you to touch in with yourself and address whether or in with yourself and address whether or in with yourself and address whether or not you are likely to be able to form a not you are likely to be able to form a not you are likely to be able to form a certain habit easily or whether or not certain habit easily or whether or not certain habit easily or whether or not it's going to be very challenging. And it's going to be very challenging. And it's going to be very challenging. And I'm going to teach you a way to measure I'm going to teach you a way to measure I'm going to teach you a way to measure your degree of limbic friction. That is your degree of limbic friction. That is your degree of limbic friction. That is how much activation energy it will take how much activation energy it will take how much activation energy it will take in order for you to execute a new habit. in order for you to execute a new habit. in order for you to execute a new habit. And I'm going to teach you how to And I'm going to teach you how to And I'm going to teach you how to measure your limbic friction and measure your limbic friction and measure your limbic friction and activation energy for how likely it is activation energy for how likely it is activation energy for how likely it is that you're going to be able to break a that you're going to be able to break a that you're going to be able to break a habit that you don't want to have. The habit that you don't want to have. The habit that you don't want to have. The other key concept for us to address other key concept for us to address other key concept for us to address that's really mainly found in the books that's really mainly found in the books that's really mainly found in the books and articles out there about habits is and articles out there about habits is and articles out there about habits is this notion of what I call linchpin this notion of what I call linchpin this notion of what I call linchpin habits. Linchpin habits are certain habits. Linchpin habits are certain habits. Linchpin habits are certain habits that make a lot of other habits that make a lot of other habits that make a lot of other habits easier to execute. easier to execute. easier to execute. Now, the sorts of linchpin habits that Now, the sorts of linchpin habits that Now, the sorts of linchpin habits that I'm referring to are always going to be I'm referring to are always going to be I'm referring to are always going to be things that you enjoy doing. I'll just things that you enjoy doing. I'll just things that you enjoy doing. I'll just give you an example from my life. give you an example from my life. give you an example from my life. I happen to like exercise. Not all forms I happen to like exercise. Not all forms I happen to like exercise. Not all forms of exercise, but I happen to like of exercise, but I happen to like of exercise, but I happen to like resistance training and I happen to like resistance training and I happen to like resistance training and I happen to like running. So, I'm personally in the habit running. So, I'm personally in the habit running. So, I'm personally in the habit of getting cardiovascular exercise three of getting cardiovascular exercise three of getting cardiovascular exercise three or four times per week, maybe 30 to 60 or four times per week, maybe 30 to 60 or four times per week, maybe 30 to 60 minutes per session. And I'm in the minutes per session. And I'm in the minutes per session. And I'm in the habit of doing resistance training three habit of doing resistance training three habit of doing resistance training three or four times per week. Typically also or four times per week. Typically also or four times per week. Typically also for about 45 to 60 minutes per session. for about 45 to 60 minutes per session. for about 45 to 60 minutes per session. Now, I enjoy those and for reasons that Now, I enjoy those and for reasons that Now, I enjoy those and for reasons that I'll get into a little bit later, I I'll get into a little bit later, I I'll get into a little bit later, I place those activities typically early place those activities typically early place those activities typically early in the day in the day in the day because of the neurochemistry and the because of the neurochemistry and the because of the neurochemistry and the various types of hormones, etc. that are various types of hormones, etc. that are various types of hormones, etc. that are associated with performing those associated with performing those associated with performing those activities. But, I really place those activities But, I really place those activities But, I really place those activities under the umbrella of what I call under the umbrella of what I call under the umbrella of what I call linchpin habits. Why? Because those linchpin habits. Why? Because those linchpin habits. Why? Because those particular habits are easy to execute particular habits are easy to execute particular habits are easy to execute because I enjoy them, but they also make because I enjoy them, but they also make because I enjoy them, but they also make a lot of other habits easier to execute. a lot of other habits easier to execute. a lot of other habits easier to execute. Things like being alert for work, things Things like being alert for work, things Things like being alert for work, things like making sure that I get good sleep like making sure that I get good sleep like making sure that I get good sleep the night before, things like hydration, the night before, things like hydration, the night before, things like hydration, things like making sure that I eat the things like making sure that I eat the things like making sure that I eat the foods that are better for me than maybe foods that are better for me than maybe foods that are better for me than maybe some of the other foods that I would some of the other foods that I would some of the other foods that I would more reflexively reach to if I weren't more reflexively reach to if I weren't more reflexively reach to if I weren't doing that training. So, certain habits doing that training. So, certain habits doing that training. So, certain habits act as lynchpins, meaning that they act as lynchpins, meaning that they act as lynchpins, meaning that they shift a lot of other things. They can shift a lot of other things. They can shift a lot of other things. They can control and bias the likelihood that control and bias the likelihood that control and bias the likelihood that in this case, you or me, will perform in this case, you or me, will perform in this case, you or me, will perform other habits that are harder to access, other habits that are harder to access, other habits that are harder to access, that we have less of an affinity for. that we have less of an affinity for. that we have less of an affinity for. So, again, there's three concepts that So, again, there's three concepts that So, again, there's three concepts that we need to include here. We've got we need to include here. We've got we need to include here. We've got identity-based versus goal-based habits. identity-based versus goal-based habits. identity-based versus goal-based habits. We've got the concept that different We've got the concept that different We've got the concept that different habits take different periods of time to habits take different periods of time to habits take different periods of time to adopt depending on the person and the adopt depending on the person and the adopt depending on the person and the habit, and that there are these what I habit, and that there are these what I habit, and that there are these what I call lynchpin habits, certain habits call lynchpin habits, certain habits call lynchpin habits, certain habits that make other habits easier to that make other habits easier to that make other habits easier to execute. And those lynchpin habits execute. And those lynchpin habits execute. And those lynchpin habits always are things that we always are things that we always are things that we enjoy doing. So, our goal throughout enjoy doing. So, our goal throughout enjoy doing. So, our goal throughout this episode is for you to identify this episode is for you to identify this episode is for you to identify which habits are easy for you to which habits are easy for you to which habits are easy for you to perform, which ones are hard for you to perform, which ones are hard for you to perform, which ones are hard for you to perform, and which habits you want to perform, and which habits you want to perform, and which habits you want to break. If you want to grab a pen and paper, you If you want to grab a pen and paper, you If you want to grab a pen and paper, you can do that, or if you want to dictate can do that, or if you want to dictate can do that, or if you want to dictate some of that into your phone, you can. some of that into your phone, you can. some of that into your phone, you can. But right now, actually, if you just But right now, actually, if you just But right now, actually, if you just want to think about these concepts, you want to think about these concepts, you want to think about these concepts, you can always go back later. I'll make sure can always go back later. I'll make sure can always go back later. I'll make sure to spell out a very specific way that to spell out a very specific way that to spell out a very specific way that you can chart out a map towards forming you can chart out a map towards forming you can chart out a map towards forming particular habits and breaking particular habits and breaking particular habits and breaking particular habits later on. particular habits later on. particular habits later on. What I'd like us to do at this point is What I'd like us to do at this point is What I'd like us to do at this point is to take that concept of limbic friction to take that concept of limbic friction to take that concept of limbic friction and for you to ask yourself and for you to ask yourself and for you to ask yourself what habits you perform on a daily what habits you perform on a daily what habits you perform on a daily basis. And these could be things as basic as And these could be things as basic as And these could be things as basic as brushing your teeth before breakfast or brushing your teeth before breakfast or brushing your teeth before breakfast or brushing your teeth after breakfast. It brushing your teeth after breakfast. It brushing your teeth after breakfast. It could be could be could be for instance that you get exercise or for instance that you get exercise or for instance that you get exercise or you get it at a particular time a day, you get it at a particular time a day, you get it at a particular time a day, or even that you take a particular route or even that you take a particular route or even that you take a particular route to work, right? We are very habitual. to work, right? We are very habitual. to work, right? We are very habitual. And we tend to do things more or less And we tend to do things more or less And we tend to do things more or less over and over in the same way unless we over and over in the same way unless we over and over in the same way unless we intervene in ourselves. That's just the intervene in ourselves. That's just the intervene in ourselves. That's just the way that we are wired. So now I'd like way that we are wired. So now I'd like way that we are wired. So now I'd like to shift to thinking about a particular to shift to thinking about a particular to shift to thinking about a particular aspect of habits, and that's habit aspect of habits, and that's habit aspect of habits, and that's habit strength. You all have different habits. You all have different habits. You all have different habits. You probably brush your teeth at a probably brush your teeth at a probably brush your teeth at a particular time of day. You probably particular time of day. You probably particular time of day. You probably exercise at particular times a week. You exercise at particular times a week. You exercise at particular times a week. You probably go to the refrigerator in a probably go to the refrigerator in a probably go to the refrigerator in a very habitual way. We are incredibly very habitual way. We are incredibly very habitual way. We are incredibly habitual organisms. Unless we intervene habitual organisms. Unless we intervene habitual organisms. Unless we intervene in our habits, they tend to carry out in our habits, they tend to carry out in our habits, they tend to carry out the same way that they always have once the same way that they always have once the same way that they always have once they formed. they formed. they formed. So you can do this exercise now. You So you can do this exercise now. You So you can do this exercise now. You don't have to write this down if you don't have to write this down if you don't have to write this down if you don't want to, but you certainly are don't want to, but you certainly are don't want to, but you certainly are welcome. We're going to evaluate what's called We're going to evaluate what's called We're going to evaluate what's called habit strength. That's not a concept habit strength. That's not a concept habit strength. That's not a concept that I created. Habit strength is that I created. Habit strength is that I created. Habit strength is something that you will find in the something that you will find in the something that you will find in the psychological literature. Habit strength psychological literature. Habit strength psychological literature. Habit strength is measured by two main criteria. The is measured by two main criteria. The is measured by two main criteria. The first is how context-dependent first is how context-dependent first is how context-dependent a given habit is. So context dependence a given habit is. So context dependence a given habit is. So context dependence is if you go from one environment to the if you go from one environment to the if you go from one environment to the next, do you tend to do the same thing next, do you tend to do the same thing next, do you tend to do the same thing in the same way at the same time of day? in the same way at the same time of day? in the same way at the same time of day? So for instance, brushing your teeth So for instance, brushing your teeth So for instance, brushing your teeth first thing in the morning, maybe some first thing in the morning, maybe some first thing in the morning, maybe some of you do that before breakfast, maybe of you do that before breakfast, maybe of you do that before breakfast, maybe some of you do that later, maybe some of some of you do that later, maybe some of some of you do that later, maybe some of you, like me, don't even eat breakfast. you, like me, don't even eat breakfast. you, like me, don't even eat breakfast. But when I travel, I tend to brush my But when I travel, I tend to brush my But when I travel, I tend to brush my teeth at more or less the same time of teeth at more or less the same time of teeth at more or less the same time of day relative to when I wake up as I do day relative to when I wake up as I do day relative to when I wake up as I do when I'm at home. So it's when I'm at home. So it's when I'm at home. So it's context-independent. So it's a very strong habit. Right? So it's a very strong habit. Right? So it's a very strong habit. Right? There's certain behaviors like There's certain behaviors like There's certain behaviors like perhaps what you eat or perhaps what you eat or perhaps what you eat or um you know, perhaps how you dress that um you know, perhaps how you dress that um you know, perhaps how you dress that are context-independent are context-independent are context-independent that you might perform one way in one that you might perform one way in one that you might perform one way in one context and another way in another context and another way in another context and another way in another context. The other aspect of habit context. The other aspect of habit context. The other aspect of habit strength is how much limbic friction is strength is how much limbic friction is strength is how much limbic friction is required to perform that habit on a required to perform that habit on a required to perform that habit on a regular basis. This is extremely regular basis. This is extremely regular basis. This is extremely important because important because important because if you are in the process of building if you are in the process of building if you are in the process of building habits and consolidating those habits, habits and consolidating those habits, habits and consolidating those habits, then it's probably going to take more limbic it's probably going to take more limbic it's probably going to take more limbic friction to execute those habits. What friction to execute those habits. What friction to execute those habits. What do I mean by that? Well, let's say do I mean by that? Well, let's say do I mean by that? Well, let's say you've set out to get let's say 45 you've set out to get let's say 45 you've set out to get let's say 45 minutes of zone two cardio exercise minutes of zone two cardio exercise minutes of zone two cardio exercise every day five or maybe even seven days every day five or maybe even seven days every day five or maybe even seven days a week. a week. a week. Well, if at first you're highly motivated, if at first you're highly motivated, if at first you're highly motivated, limbic friction might be pretty low. limbic friction might be pretty low. limbic friction might be pretty low. Limbic friction is how much top-down, Limbic friction is how much top-down, Limbic friction is how much top-down, meaning from your forebrain to your meaning from your forebrain to your meaning from your forebrain to your limbic system, the part of your brain limbic system, the part of your brain limbic system, the part of your brain that generates autonomic responses, how that generates autonomic responses, how that generates autonomic responses, how much limbic friction, meaning conscious much limbic friction, meaning conscious much limbic friction, meaning conscious override of your override of your override of your state is required in order to engage in state is required in order to engage in state is required in order to engage in that particular behavior. So, if you're that particular behavior. So, if you're that particular behavior. So, if you're feeling particularly tired and you don't feeling particularly tired and you don't feeling particularly tired and you don't want to get up out of bed and you don't want to get up out of bed and you don't want to get up out of bed and you don't want to go out and do your zone two want to go out and do your zone two want to go out and do your zone two cardio, that then there's a high degree cardio, that then there's a high degree cardio, that then there's a high degree of limbic friction. It takes more Some of limbic friction. It takes more Some of limbic friction. It takes more Some people think of it as motivation, but people think of it as motivation, but people think of it as motivation, but motivation is a bit of a vague concept, motivation is a bit of a vague concept, motivation is a bit of a vague concept, whereas limbic friction involves whereas limbic friction involves whereas limbic friction involves specific neural circuits and you can specific neural circuits and you can specific neural circuits and you can think of it in more or less quantitative think of it in more or less quantitative think of it in more or less quantitative way. You can think of that your body is way. You can think of that your body is way. You can think of that your body is very tired, so it's going to take more very tired, so it's going to take more very tired, so it's going to take more limbic friction in order to get into limbic friction in order to get into limbic friction in order to get into action, right? You're going to have to action, right? You're going to have to action, right? You're going to have to overcome more limbic friction, excuse overcome more limbic friction, excuse overcome more limbic friction, excuse me. Whereas, if you're very, very alert, me. Whereas, if you're very, very alert, me. Whereas, if you're very, very alert, it's there's less limbic friction it's there's less limbic friction it's there's less limbic friction because you're moving towards something because you're moving towards something because you're moving towards something that's action-oriented. However, the that's action-oriented. However, the that's action-oriented. However, the inverse is also true. Let's say that you inverse is also true. Let's say that you inverse is also true. Let's say that you are trying to get into the habit or are trying to get into the habit or are trying to get into the habit or you're in the early stages of forming a you're in the early stages of forming a you're in the early stages of forming a habit to meditate regularly. That's a habit to meditate regularly. That's a habit to meditate regularly. That's a pretty quiescent or calming activity. pretty quiescent or calming activity. pretty quiescent or calming activity. So, if you're somebody who comes home So, if you're somebody who comes home So, if you're somebody who comes home from work and you're from work and you're from work and you're very anxious and you have a lot of work very anxious and you have a lot of work very anxious and you have a lot of work to do and you have to deal with a bunch to do and you have to deal with a bunch to do and you have to deal with a bunch of things, there's a lot of limbic of things, there's a lot of limbic of things, there's a lot of limbic friction to overcome in order to get friction to overcome in order to get friction to overcome in order to get into that calm state. So, these two into that calm state. So, these two into that calm state. So, these two aspects, context dependence, whether or aspects, context dependence, whether or aspects, context dependence, whether or not you're likely to do the thing not you're likely to do the thing not you're likely to do the thing regardless of where you are, right? On regardless of where you are, right? On regardless of where you are, right? On travel, at home, on vacation, with travel, at home, on vacation, with travel, at home, on vacation, with people around, not people around, et people around, not people around, et people around, not people around, et cetera, and how much limbic friction is cetera, and how much limbic friction is cetera, and how much limbic friction is required to execute that habit, will required to execute that habit, will required to execute that habit, will tell you whether or not that habit is tell you whether or not that habit is tell you whether or not that habit is deeply or just shallowly embedded within deeply or just shallowly embedded within deeply or just shallowly embedded within your nervous system. The goal of any your nervous system. The goal of any your nervous system. The goal of any habit that we want to form is to get habit that we want to form is to get habit that we want to form is to get into what's called automaticity. into what's called automaticity. into what's called automaticity. Automaticity is fancy language for the Automaticity is fancy language for the Automaticity is fancy language for the neural circuits can perform it neural circuits can perform it neural circuits can perform it automatically, and that's the ultimate automatically, and that's the ultimate automatically, and that's the ultimate place to be. Right? If you have all place to be. Right? If you have all place to be. Right? If you have all these goals and things that you want to these goals and things that you want to these goals and things that you want to be doing on a regular basis, you'd love be doing on a regular basis, you'd love be doing on a regular basis, you'd love for them to be habitual because it takes for them to be habitual because it takes for them to be habitual because it takes less mental and physical effort, less mental and physical effort, less mental and physical effort, less limbic friction in order to execute limbic friction in order to execute limbic friction in order to execute those. And so much of what's out there, those. And so much of what's out there, those. And so much of what's out there, again, in the popular psychology again, in the popular psychology again, in the popular psychology literature, in books that you'll find on literature, in books that you'll find on literature, in books that you'll find on the bookstore shelf and on Amazon and in the bookstore shelf and on Amazon and in the bookstore shelf and on Amazon and in the airports, are about how to get from the airports, are about how to get from the airports, are about how to get from that mode of high degree of limbic that mode of high degree of limbic that mode of high degree of limbic friction to automaticity. And they offer friction to automaticity. And they offer friction to automaticity. And they offer a number of different ways. I think many a number of different ways. I think many a number of different ways. I think many of which are useful, um trying to get of which are useful, um trying to get of which are useful, um trying to get you to organize different types of you to organize different types of you to organize different types of habits into different bins like habits into different bins like habits into different bins like value-based and goal-based and um trying value-based and goal-based and um trying value-based and goal-based and um trying to persuade you that structuring habits to persuade you that structuring habits to persuade you that structuring habits at the particular times of day or in a at the particular times of day or in a at the particular times of day or in a particular way are going to be particular way are going to be particular way are going to be beneficial. And indeed, I think they beneficial. And indeed, I think they beneficial. And indeed, I think they have helped a lot of people. So, what have helped a lot of people. So, what have helped a lot of people. So, what I'd like to do is to take the scientific I'd like to do is to take the scientific I'd like to do is to take the scientific literature of how the nervous system literature of how the nervous system literature of how the nervous system learns and engages in neuroplasticity learns and engages in neuroplasticity learns and engages in neuroplasticity and apply that to habit formation, habit and apply that to habit formation, habit and apply that to habit formation, habit maintenance, and maintenance, and maintenance, and if so desired, how to break particular if so desired, how to break particular if so desired, how to break particular habits. I'd like to give you a habits. I'd like to give you a habits. I'd like to give you a particular tool that's gleaned from the particular tool that's gleaned from the particular tool that's gleaned from the research psychology literature. research psychology literature. research psychology literature. Should mention that I learned about this Should mention that I learned about this Should mention that I learned about this from an excellent review article that's from an excellent review article that's from an excellent review article that's available online. It's called Psychology available online. It's called Psychology available online. It's called Psychology of Habit. The authors are Wendy Wood and of Habit. The authors are Wendy Wood and of Habit. The authors are Wendy Wood and Dennis Runger. This is published in Dennis Runger. This is published in Dennis Runger. This is published in Annual Review of Psychology. The Annual Review of Psychology. The Annual Review of Psychology. The Annual Reviews series is a very high-quality Reviews series is a very high-quality Reviews series is a very high-quality series. There are annual reviews of series. There are annual reviews of series. There are annual reviews of neuroscience, annual reviews of neuroscience, annual reviews of neuroscience, annual reviews of psychology, annual reviews of nutrition psychology, annual reviews of nutrition psychology, annual reviews of nutrition science, etc. For those of you that are science, etc. For those of you that are science, etc. For those of you that are interested in exploring review articles interested in exploring review articles interested in exploring review articles that are grounded in hundreds of quality that are grounded in hundreds of quality that are grounded in hundreds of quality peer-reviewed studies, the Annual peer-reviewed studies, the Annual peer-reviewed studies, the Annual Reviews series is really terrific. Um Reviews series is really terrific. Um Reviews series is really terrific. Um certainly among the best, if not the certainly among the best, if not the certainly among the best, if not the best. And they also tend to be quite best. And they also tend to be quite best. And they also tend to be quite long and quite comprehensive. So, this long and quite comprehensive. So, this long and quite comprehensive. So, this review, Psychology of Habit by Wood and review, Psychology of Habit by Wood and review, Psychology of Habit by Wood and Runger, is excellent. is excellent. is excellent. And here I'm more or less paraphrasing from here I'm more or less paraphrasing from here I'm more or less paraphrasing from them, so I want to be clear that uh them, so I want to be clear that uh them, so I want to be clear that uh these are their words, not mine. these are their words, not mine. these are their words, not mine. They're talking about the various ways They're talking about the various ways They're talking about the various ways that habits form in the nervous system that habits form in the nervous system that habits form in the nervous system and they mention and they mention and they mention with each repetition of a habit with each repetition of a habit with each repetition of a habit small changes occur in the cognitive and small changes occur in the cognitive and small changes occur in the cognitive and neural mechanisms associated associate neural mechanisms associated associate neural mechanisms associated associate with procedural memory. So, I just want with procedural memory. So, I just want with procedural memory. So, I just want to talk for a second about what to talk for a second about what to talk for a second about what procedural memory is. procedural memory is. procedural memory is. In the neuroscience of memory, we In the neuroscience of memory, we In the neuroscience of memory, we distinguish between what's called distinguish between what's called distinguish between what's called episodic memory and procedural memory. episodic memory and procedural memory. episodic memory and procedural memory. Episodic memory is a recall of a Episodic memory is a recall of a Episodic memory is a recall of a particular set of events that happened, particular set of events that happened, particular set of events that happened, whereas procedural memory is holding in whereas procedural memory is holding in whereas procedural memory is holding in mind the specific sequence of things mind the specific sequence of things mind the specific sequence of things that need to happen in order for a that need to happen in order for a that need to happen in order for a particular outcome to occur. So, think particular outcome to occur. So, think particular outcome to occur. So, think of it like a recipe or a protocol or if of it like a recipe or a protocol or if of it like a recipe or a protocol or if for sake of exercise, it's like sets and for sake of exercise, it's like sets and for sake of exercise, it's like sets and reps or reps or reps or particular course that you're going to particular course that you're going to particular course that you're going to run or cycle or the number of laps run or cycle or the number of laps run or cycle or the number of laps you're going to swim and how you're going to swim and how you're going to swim and how you're going to perform it. going to perform it. going to perform it. It's very clear that for anyone trying It's very clear that for anyone trying It's very clear that for anyone trying to adopt new habits, getting into the to adopt new habits, getting into the to adopt new habits, getting into the mindset of procedural memory is very mindset of procedural memory is very mindset of procedural memory is very useful for overcoming that barrier that useful for overcoming that barrier that useful for overcoming that barrier that we call limbic friction. How do you do we call limbic friction. How do you do we call limbic friction. How do you do that? Well, a simple visualization that? Well, a simple visualization that? Well, a simple visualization exercise or doesn't even have to be done exercise or doesn't even have to be done exercise or doesn't even have to be done eyes closed. You know, often times we eyes closed. You know, often times we eyes closed. You know, often times we hear visualization exercise, you think hear visualization exercise, you think hear visualization exercise, you think about sitting in a lotus position, eyes about sitting in a lotus position, eyes about sitting in a lotus position, eyes closed and you know, trying really hard closed and you know, trying really hard closed and you know, trying really hard to visualize something. Doesn't need to visualize something. Doesn't need to visualize something. Doesn't need to be anything like that. It can simply be anything like that. It can simply be anything like that. It can simply be if you were deciding to adopt a new if you were deciding to adopt a new if you were deciding to adopt a new habit, to just think about the very habit, to just think about the very habit, to just think about the very specific sequence of steps that's specific sequence of steps that's specific sequence of steps that's required to execute that habit. And I'll required to execute that habit. And I'll required to execute that habit. And I'll use a trivial example, but this could be use a trivial example, but this could be use a trivial example, but this could be applied to anything. Let's say I want to applied to anything. Let's say I want to applied to anything. Let's say I want to get into the habit of making myself or get into the habit of making myself or get into the habit of making myself or someone else in my household a cup of someone else in my household a cup of someone else in my household a cup of espresso every morning. espresso every morning. espresso every morning. I would actually think through each of I would actually think through each of I would actually think through each of those steps. Walk into the kitchen, turn those steps. Walk into the kitchen, turn those steps. Walk into the kitchen, turn on the espresso machine, draw the on the espresso machine, draw the on the espresso machine, draw the espresso, walking through each of those espresso, walking through each of those espresso, walking through each of those steps from start to finish. It turns out steps from start to finish. It turns out steps from start to finish. It turns out just that simple mental exercise done just that simple mental exercise done just that simple mental exercise done once can shift people toward a much once can shift people toward a much once can shift people toward a much higher likelihood of performing that higher likelihood of performing that higher likelihood of performing that habit regularly, not just the first habit regularly, not just the first habit regularly, not just the first time, but as they continue out into the time, but as they continue out into the time, but as they continue out into the days and weeks that follow. So, that's days and weeks that follow. So, that's days and weeks that follow. So, that's remarkable to me, and the literature is remarkable to me, and the literature is remarkable to me, and the literature is really robust. Just one mental exercise really robust. Just one mental exercise really robust. Just one mental exercise of thinking through what are the of thinking through what are the of thinking through what are the sequence of steps required in order to sequence of steps required in order to sequence of steps required in order to perform this habit from start to finish perform this habit from start to finish perform this habit from start to finish can shift the likelihood of being able can shift the likelihood of being able can shift the likelihood of being able to perform that habit from unlikely or to perform that habit from unlikely or to perform that habit from unlikely or to moderately likely to very likely over to moderately likely to very likely over to moderately likely to very likely over time. And that's because it pulls from time. And that's because it pulls from time. And that's because it pulls from this process that involves our this process that involves our this process that involves our hippocampus and our neocortex and other hippocampus and our neocortex and other hippocampus and our neocortex and other areas of our brain and nervous system areas of our brain and nervous system areas of our brain and nervous system that engage in procedural memory. It that engage in procedural memory. It that engage in procedural memory. It shifts the brain towards a mindset, if shifts the brain towards a mindset, if shifts the brain towards a mindset, if you will. Uh it's more of a neural you will. Uh it's more of a neural you will. Uh it's more of a neural circuit set it would be more accurate, circuit set it would be more accurate, circuit set it would be more accurate, but a but a but a mindset {slash} neural circuit set of mindset {slash} neural circuit set of mindset {slash} neural circuit set of doing things in a particular sequence, doing things in a particular sequence, doing things in a particular sequence, which allows that limbic friction to which allows that limbic friction to which allows that limbic friction to come down and increases the likelihood come down and increases the likelihood come down and increases the likelihood that we're going to perform that thing. that we're going to perform that thing. that we're going to perform that thing. Simple tool, but very powerful tool Simple tool, but very powerful tool Simple tool, but very powerful tool according to the psychology literature. according to the psychology literature. according to the psychology literature. And actually, the cellular molecular And actually, the cellular molecular And actually, the cellular molecular mechanisms that lie that sort of mechanisms that lie that sort of mechanisms that lie that sort of procedural memory stepping-through procedural memory stepping-through procedural memory stepping-through phenomenon are known. are known. are known. In this article I mentioned, this In this article I mentioned, this In this article I mentioned, this beautiful review, beautiful review, beautiful review, uh they talk about so-called Hebbian they talk about so-called Hebbian they talk about so-called Hebbian learning. Donald Hebb was a psychologist learning. Donald Hebb was a psychologist learning. Donald Hebb was a psychologist in Canada and birthed this field that in Canada and birthed this field that in Canada and birthed this field that has now lasted, gosh, um more than 50 has now lasted, gosh, um more than 50 has now lasted, gosh, um more than 50 years and is still very strong in years and is still very strong in years and is still very strong in neuroscience and psychology of Hebbian neuroscience and psychology of Hebbian neuroscience and psychology of Hebbian learning. Hebbian learning is when learning. Hebbian learning is when learning. Hebbian learning is when particular neurons are coactive, meaning particular neurons are coactive, meaning particular neurons are coactive, meaning when they fire together, they tend to when they fire together, they tend to when they fire together, they tend to strengthen their connections with one strengthen their connections with one strengthen their connections with one another. And it has a number of another. And it has a number of another. And it has a number of different underlying cellular molecular different underlying cellular molecular different underlying cellular molecular features that we don't have to go into features that we don't have to go into features that we don't have to go into in detail, but for those of you that in detail, but for those of you that in detail, but for those of you that want to know, I know some of you are want to know, I know some of you are want to know, I know some of you are hungry for a little bit more hungry for a little bit more hungry for a little bit more neuroscience, uh neuroscience, uh neuroscience, uh this involves things like NMDA this involves things like NMDA this involves things like NMDA receptors, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. NMDA receptors are really receptors. NMDA receptors are really receptors. NMDA receptors are really important, I think, for everyone to important, I think, for everyone to important, I think, for everyone to understand, so I'll just tell you a understand, so I'll just tell you a understand, so I'll just tell you a little bit about them. These are little bit about them. These are little bit about them. These are receptors that are on the neuron receptors that are on the neuron receptors that are on the neuron surface, and normally they don't surface, and normally they don't surface, and normally they don't contribute much to the activity of those contribute much to the activity of those contribute much to the activity of those neurons. Those neurons are perfectly neurons. Those neurons are perfectly neurons. Those neurons are perfectly capable of doing their thing without capable of doing their thing without capable of doing their thing without activation of this NMDA receptor. But activation of this NMDA receptor. But activation of this NMDA receptor. But when a neuron gets a very strong input, when a neuron gets a very strong input, when a neuron gets a very strong input, a strong stimulus, that NMDA receptor a strong stimulus, that NMDA receptor a strong stimulus, that NMDA receptor triggers a number of mechanisms that triggers a number of mechanisms that triggers a number of mechanisms that recruit to the surface of the neuron recruit to the surface of the neuron recruit to the surface of the neuron more other receptors. In other words, it more other receptors. In other words, it more other receptors. In other words, it makes that neuron more responsive to makes that neuron more responsive to makes that neuron more responsive to input in the future such that it doesn't input in the future such that it doesn't input in the future such that it doesn't require so much input. In other words, require so much input. In other words, require so much input. In other words, it takes a neuron that is very unlikely it takes a neuron that is very unlikely it takes a neuron that is very unlikely to fire and makes it more likely to fire and makes it more likely to fire and makes it more likely to fire. So, this procedural stepping fire. So, this procedural stepping fire. So, this procedural stepping through of the steps of the recipe or through of the steps of the recipe or through of the steps of the recipe or the series of action steps that are the series of action steps that are the series of action steps that are involved in sitting down to study and involved in sitting down to study and involved in sitting down to study and writing for an hour or generating writing for an hour or generating writing for an hour or generating exercise, whatever it is the habit that exercise, whatever it is the habit that exercise, whatever it is the habit that you're trying to learn, when you're trying to learn, when you're trying to learn, when you're doing that exercise, it's not as if your doing that exercise, it's not as if your doing that exercise, it's not as if your nervous system thinks you're actually nervous system thinks you're actually nervous system thinks you're actually performing the behavior. Your nervous performing the behavior. Your nervous performing the behavior. Your nervous system isn't stupid. It's actually a lot system isn't stupid. It's actually a lot system isn't stupid. It's actually a lot smarter than that. It knows the smarter than that. It knows the smarter than that. It knows the difference between a thought and an difference between a thought and an difference between a thought and an action. But when you do that, it sets in action. But when you do that, it sets in action. But when you do that, it sets in motion the same neurons that are going motion the same neurons that are going motion the same neurons that are going to be required for the execution of that to be required for the execution of that to be required for the execution of that habit. And so, when you actually show up habit. And so, when you actually show up habit. And so, when you actually show up to perform that habit, it's as if the to perform that habit, it's as if the to perform that habit, it's as if the dominoes fall more easily. It's a dominoes fall more easily. It's a dominoes fall more easily. It's a um lower threshold as we say in order to um lower threshold as we say in order to um lower threshold as we say in order to get the habit to perform. So, heavy in get the habit to perform. So, heavy in get the habit to perform. So, heavy in learning, NMDA receptors, all that um learning, NMDA receptors, all that um learning, NMDA receptors, all that um nuts and bolts stuff are really the guts nuts and bolts stuff are really the guts nuts and bolts stuff are really the guts of the mechanisms of how this works. But of the mechanisms of how this works. But of the mechanisms of how this works. But for those of you that just want to be for those of you that just want to be for those of you that just want to be more habitual about certain things, be more habitual about certain things, be more habitual about certain things, be able to perform certain things more able to perform certain things more able to perform certain things more reflexively that you would like in your reflexively that you would like in your reflexively that you would like in your life, simply take the time, do it once, life, simply take the time, do it once, life, simply take the time, do it once, maybe twice, and just sit down, close maybe twice, and just sit down, close maybe twice, and just sit down, close your eyes if you like, and just step your eyes if you like, and just step your eyes if you like, and just step through the procedure of what it's going through the procedure of what it's going through the procedure of what it's going to take in order to perform that habit. to take in order to perform that habit. to take in order to perform that habit. The psychology literature, as I The psychology literature, as I The psychology literature, as I mentioned, and also the neuroscience mentioned, and also the neuroscience mentioned, and also the neuroscience literature strongly supports the fact that it is strongly supports the fact that it is strongly supports the fact that it is going to make it far easier for you to going to make it far easier for you to going to make it far easier for you to adopt and maintain that habit. And if adopt and maintain that habit. And if adopt and maintain that habit. And if you are somebody who used to perform a you are somebody who used to perform a you are somebody who used to perform a habit and you don't understand why you habit and you don't understand why you habit and you don't understand why you dropped it and you're frustrated with dropped it and you're frustrated with dropped it and you're frustrated with yourself and you're trying to figure out yourself and you're trying to figure out yourself and you're trying to figure out how you can get back into that habit, how you can get back into that habit, how you can get back into that habit, well, by all means, lean right back into well, by all means, lean right back into well, by all means, lean right back into that habit. But if you're having trouble that habit. But if you're having trouble that habit. But if you're having trouble doing that, also, just use the doing that, also, just use the doing that, also, just use the procedural memory exercise in order to procedural memory exercise in order to procedural memory exercise in order to shift your nervous system toward a shift your nervous system toward a shift your nervous system toward a higher likelihood that you will return higher likelihood that you will return higher likelihood that you will return to that habit. Just the same way I to that habit. Just the same way I to that habit. Just the same way I described for trying to initiate a new described for trying to initiate a new described for trying to initiate a new habit. So, now I'd like to discuss a habit. So, now I'd like to discuss a habit. So, now I'd like to discuss a second and what I think is perhaps the second and what I think is perhaps the second and what I think is perhaps the most powerful tool for being able to most powerful tool for being able to most powerful tool for being able to acquire and stick to new habits. acquire and stick to new habits. acquire and stick to new habits. This tool is rooted in what we call This tool is rooted in what we call This tool is rooted in what we call neural circuits, and I do think it is neural circuits, and I do think it is neural circuits, and I do think it is important to understand a little bit important to understand a little bit important to understand a little bit about how those neural circuits work. about how those neural circuits work. about how those neural circuits work. For those of you that are saying, "Just For those of you that are saying, "Just For those of you that are saying, "Just tell me what to do." tell me what to do." tell me what to do." I have to say, as I always say, I have to say, as I always say, I have to say, as I always say, understanding a little bit or a lot of understanding a little bit or a lot of understanding a little bit or a lot of underlying mechanism underlying mechanism underlying mechanism will help solidify these concepts for will help solidify these concepts for will help solidify these concepts for you and will help ensure that the tools you and will help ensure that the tools you and will help ensure that the tools that I offer are going to make sense and that I offer are going to make sense and that I offer are going to make sense and that they're going to make sense in that they're going to make sense in that they're going to make sense in different contexts and for different contexts and for different contexts and for different types of habits that you're trying to types of habits that you're trying to types of habits that you're trying to learn. So, rather than just tell you learn. So, rather than just tell you learn. So, rather than just tell you what to do, I'm going to tell you how what to do, I'm going to tell you how what to do, I'm going to tell you how this particular tool works and then in this particular tool works and then in this particular tool works and then in doing that, you should be able to apply doing that, you should be able to apply doing that, you should be able to apply it to any habit under any conditions. it to any habit under any conditions. it to any habit under any conditions. The tool that I'm referring to is The tool that I'm referring to is The tool that I'm referring to is something called task bracketing and the something called task bracketing and the something called task bracketing and the neural circuits associated with task neural circuits associated with task neural circuits associated with task bracketing are basically the neural circuits that are basically the neural circuits that are basically the neural circuits that are going to allow you to learn any new are going to allow you to learn any new are going to allow you to learn any new type of habit or break any habit that type of habit or break any habit that type of habit or break any habit that you'd like to break. you'd like to break. you'd like to break. We have in our brain a set of neural We have in our brain a set of neural We have in our brain a set of neural circuits that fall under the umbrella circuits that fall under the umbrella circuits that fall under the umbrella term of the basal ganglia. The basal term of the basal ganglia. The basal term of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia are involved in action ganglia are involved in action ganglia are involved in action execution, meaning doing certain things, execution, meaning doing certain things, execution, meaning doing certain things, and action suppression, and action suppression, and action suppression, not doing certain things. not doing certain things. not doing certain things. In the experimental realm, these are In the experimental realm, these are In the experimental realm, these are referred to as go, meaning do, or no go, referred to as go, meaning do, or no go, referred to as go, meaning do, or no go, don't do, certain things. don't do, certain things. don't do, certain things. And some of us fall more into the And some of us fall more into the And some of us fall more into the category of we find it very easy to do category of we find it very easy to do category of we find it very easy to do certain things, certain things, certain things, but harder to not do other things. Some but harder to not do other things. Some but harder to not do other things. Some people have a lot of no go type circuits people have a lot of no go type circuits people have a lot of no go type circuits that are very robust and they have a lot that are very robust and they have a lot that are very robust and they have a lot of behavioral constraint, but they have of behavioral constraint, but they have of behavioral constraint, but they have a harder time getting into action. And a harder time getting into action. And a harder time getting into action. And some people have a perfect balance of some people have a perfect balance of some people have a perfect balance of both, but I've never met one of those both, but I've never met one of those both, but I've never met one of those people. So, again drawing from more or less So, again drawing from more or less So, again drawing from more or less paraphrasing from this beautiful review paraphrasing from this beautiful review paraphrasing from this beautiful review that I described earlier in annual that I described earlier in annual that I described earlier in annual review annual review of psychology, review annual review of psychology, review annual review of psychology, excuse me, by Wood and Runger. excuse me, by Wood and Runger. excuse me, by Wood and Runger. Task bracketing involves a particular Task bracketing involves a particular Task bracketing involves a particular set of neural circuits within the basal set of neural circuits within the basal set of neural circuits within the basal ganglia. So, I'm going to describe this ganglia. So, I'm going to describe this ganglia. So, I'm going to describe this here, again paraphrasing. A sensory here, again paraphrasing. A sensory here, again paraphrasing. A sensory motor loop. Sensory means just input motor loop. Sensory means just input motor loop. Sensory means just input coming in about sight, sounds, tastes, coming in about sight, sounds, tastes, coming in about sight, sounds, tastes, etc. And then the motor systems, the etc. And then the motor systems, the etc. And then the motor systems, the systems of the brain and body that systems of the brain and body that systems of the brain and body that generate action, taking that information generate action, taking that information generate action, taking that information and generating action. and generating action. and generating action. So, it turns out that there's an area of So, it turns out that there's an area of So, it turns out that there's an area of our basal ganglia called the dorsal our basal ganglia called the dorsal our basal ganglia called the dorsal lateral striatum. We can use the acronym lateral striatum. We can use the acronym lateral striatum. We can use the acronym DLS. Again, dorsal lateral striatum. DLS. Again, dorsal lateral striatum. DLS. Again, dorsal lateral striatum. Dorsal means up, lateral means to the Dorsal means up, lateral means to the Dorsal means up, lateral means to the side, so dorsal lateral, and striatum is side, so dorsal lateral, and striatum is side, so dorsal lateral, and striatum is a subdivision of the basal ganglia. a subdivision of the basal ganglia. a subdivision of the basal ganglia. And it's very important for the And it's very important for the And it's very important for the establishment of behaviors that are establishment of behaviors that are establishment of behaviors that are associated with a habit, but not associated with a habit, but not associated with a habit, but not necessarily the habit itself. necessarily the habit itself. necessarily the habit itself. And beautiful studies in both animals And beautiful studies in both animals And beautiful studies in both animals and humans that record the electrical and humans that record the electrical and humans that record the electrical activity in the dorsal lateral striatum activity in the dorsal lateral striatum activity in the dorsal lateral striatum find that the dorsal lateral striatum is find that the dorsal lateral striatum is find that the dorsal lateral striatum is associated, meaning it becomes active at associated, meaning it becomes active at associated, meaning it becomes active at the beginning of a particular habit and the beginning of a particular habit and the beginning of a particular habit and at the very end and after a particular at the very end and after a particular at the very end and after a particular habit. Hence the phrase task bracketing. habit. Hence the phrase task bracketing. habit. Hence the phrase task bracketing. It brackets the habit. Now, other sets It brackets the habit. Now, other sets It brackets the habit. Now, other sets of neurons are going to be active during of neurons are going to be active during of neurons are going to be active during the actual execution of the habit. the actual execution of the habit. the actual execution of the habit. But what the literature on the dorsal But what the literature on the dorsal But what the literature on the dorsal lateral striatum tells us is that we lateral striatum tells us is that we lateral striatum tells us is that we have particular circuits in our brain have particular circuits in our brain have particular circuits in our brain that are devoted to framing the events that are devoted to framing the events that are devoted to framing the events that happen just before and as we that happen just before and as we that happen just before and as we initiate a habit and just after and as initiate a habit and just after and as initiate a habit and just after and as we terminate a habit. In other words, it we terminate a habit. In other words, it we terminate a habit. In other words, it acts as a sort of marker for the habit acts as a sort of marker for the habit acts as a sort of marker for the habit execution, but not the execution of the execution, but not the execution of the execution, but not the execution of the habit per se. habit per se. habit per se. This is very important because This is very important because This is very important because task bracketing task bracketing task bracketing is what underlies whether or not a habit is what underlies whether or not a habit is what underlies whether or not a habit will be context-dependent or not. will be context-dependent or not. will be context-dependent or not. Whether or not it will be strong and Whether or not it will be strong and Whether or not it will be strong and likely to occur even if we didn't get a likely to occur even if we didn't get a likely to occur even if we didn't get a good night's sleep the night before, good night's sleep the night before, good night's sleep the night before, even if we're feeling distracted, even if we're feeling distracted, even if we're feeling distracted, even if we are not feeling like doing if we are not feeling like doing if we are not feeling like doing something emotionally, or if we are, you something emotionally, or if we are, you something emotionally, or if we are, you know, completely overwhelmed by other know, completely overwhelmed by other know, completely overwhelmed by other events. If the neural circuits for task events. If the neural circuits for task events. If the neural circuits for task bracketing are deeply embedded in us, bracketing are deeply embedded in us, bracketing are deeply embedded in us, meaning they are very robust around a meaning they are very robust around a meaning they are very robust around a particular habit, well then it's likely particular habit, well then it's likely particular habit, well then it's likely that we're going to go out for that zone that we're going to go out for that zone that we're going to go out for that zone two cardio no matter what. That we're two cardio no matter what. That we're two cardio no matter what. That we're going to brush our teeth no matter what. going to brush our teeth no matter what. going to brush our teeth no matter what. In fact, brushing our teeth is a pretty In fact, brushing our teeth is a pretty In fact, brushing our teeth is a pretty good example because for most people, good example because for most people, good example because for most people, even if you got a terrible night's even if you got a terrible night's even if you got a terrible night's sleep, even if everything in your life sleep, even if everything in your life sleep, even if everything in your life is going wrong, chances are, unless is going wrong, chances are, unless is going wrong, chances are, unless you're very depressed, if you're going you're very depressed, if you're going you're very depressed, if you're going to leave to work or even if you're not, to leave to work or even if you're not, to leave to work or even if you're not, that you're going to still carry out the that you're going to still carry out the that you're going to still carry out the behavior of brushing your teeth in the behavior of brushing your teeth in the behavior of brushing your teeth in the morning. I would hope so, actually. But morning. I would hope so, actually. But morning. I would hope so, actually. But you are probably less likely to perform you are probably less likely to perform you are probably less likely to perform particular habits that are particular habits that are particular habits that are not what you deem as necessary. But if not what you deem as necessary. But if not what you deem as necessary. But if you think about it, you think about it, you think about it, brushing your teeth, exercise, eating brushing your teeth, exercise, eating brushing your teeth, exercise, eating particular foods, maybe engaging particular foods, maybe engaging particular foods, maybe engaging socially in particular ways, socially in particular ways, socially in particular ways, you are the one that places any kind of you are the one that places any kind of you are the one that places any kind of value assessment on which ones are value assessment on which ones are value assessment on which ones are essential and which ones are negotiable. essential and which ones are negotiable. essential and which ones are negotiable. So, task bracketing sets a neural So, task bracketing sets a neural So, task bracketing sets a neural imprint, a kind of a fingerprint in your imprint, a kind of a fingerprint in your imprint, a kind of a fingerprint in your brain of this thing has to happen at brain of this thing has to happen at brain of this thing has to happen at this particular time of day, so much so this particular time of day, so much so this particular time of day, so much so that it's reflexive. that it's reflexive. that it's reflexive. And as we'll talk about in a moment, And as we'll talk about in a moment, And as we'll talk about in a moment, there's a way that you can build up task there's a way that you can build up task there's a way that you can build up task bracketing so that regardless of what it bracketing so that regardless of what it bracketing so that regardless of what it is you're trying to learn, there's a is you're trying to learn, there's a is you're trying to learn, there's a much higher probability that you're much higher probability that you're much higher probability that you're going to do that thing. And when I say going to do that thing. And when I say going to do that thing. And when I say learn, meaning learn, meaning learn, meaning let's say you're trying to acquire a let's say you're trying to acquire a let's say you're trying to acquire a habit that for you is really habit that for you is really habit that for you is really challenging. Maybe it's that you're challenging. Maybe it's that you're challenging. Maybe it's that you're going to write for an hour a day on a going to write for an hour a day on a going to write for an hour a day on a book project that you've been thinking book project that you've been thinking book project that you've been thinking about, or you're going to work on about, or you're going to work on about, or you're going to work on mathematics or you're going to do any mathematics or you're going to do any mathematics or you're going to do any sort of thing that for you there's a lot sort of thing that for you there's a lot sort of thing that for you there's a lot of limbic friction. of limbic friction. of limbic friction. While it is important to think about the While it is important to think about the While it is important to think about the sequence of events that would be sequence of events that would be sequence of events that would be required in order to engage in that required in order to engage in that required in order to engage in that behavior, that procedural memory behavior, that procedural memory behavior, that procedural memory visualization exercise we talked about visualization exercise we talked about visualization exercise we talked about before, that will help. before, that will help. before, that will help. There is a way also that you can orient There is a way also that you can orient There is a way also that you can orient your nervous system toward this task your nervous system toward this task your nervous system toward this task bracketing process so that your nervous bracketing process so that your nervous bracketing process so that your nervous system is shifted or oriented toward the system is shifted or oriented toward the system is shifted or oriented toward the execution of a given habit. execution of a given habit. execution of a given habit. So this is sort of like warming up your So this is sort of like warming up your So this is sort of like warming up your body to exercise. body to exercise. body to exercise. When the dorsal lateral striatum is When the dorsal lateral striatum is When the dorsal lateral striatum is engaged, your body and your brain are engaged, your body and your brain are engaged, your body and your brain are primed to execute a habit and then you primed to execute a habit and then you primed to execute a habit and then you get to consciously insert which habit get to consciously insert which habit get to consciously insert which habit you want to perform. So in order to you want to perform. So in order to you want to perform. So in order to leverage the neural mechanisms of task leverage the neural mechanisms of task leverage the neural mechanisms of task bracketing in order to increase the bracketing in order to increase the bracketing in order to increase the likelihood that you're going to perform likelihood that you're going to perform likelihood that you're going to perform a particular habit, a particular habit, a particular habit, I have to break it to you I have to break it to you I have to break it to you that one thing that you've probably that one thing that you've probably that one thing that you've probably heard over and over heard over and over heard over and over about habit formation is not true. about habit formation is not true. about habit formation is not true. And what I'm referring to is this idea And what I'm referring to is this idea And what I'm referring to is this idea that if you are very specific about that if you are very specific about that if you are very specific about exactly when you're going to perform a exactly when you're going to perform a exactly when you're going to perform a particular habit, that you are more particular habit, that you are more particular habit, that you are more likely to perform that habit. And while likely to perform that habit. And while likely to perform that habit. And while that is true in the short term, it is that is true in the short term, it is that is true in the short term, it is not true in the long term. not true in the long term. not true in the long term. And the reason for that is that our And the reason for that is that our And the reason for that is that our nervous system tends to generate nervous system tends to generate nervous system tends to generate particular kinds of behaviors based not particular kinds of behaviors based not particular kinds of behaviors based not on time, but on our state. Meaning what on time, but on our state. Meaning what on time, but on our state. Meaning what level of activation is taking place in level of activation is taking place in level of activation is taking place in our brain and body. How much focus we our brain and body. How much focus we our brain and body. How much focus we happen to have, how fatigued we are, how happen to have, how fatigued we are, how happen to have, how fatigued we are, how energized we are. energized we are. energized we are. So while schedules are important, it's So while schedules are important, it's So while schedules are important, it's not the specific time of day per se not the specific time of day per se not the specific time of day per se that's going to allow you to get into a that's going to allow you to get into a that's going to allow you to get into a habit and form that habit and habit and form that habit and habit and form that habit and consolidate that habit. Rather, it's the consolidate that habit. Rather, it's the consolidate that habit. Rather, it's the state that your brain and body are in state that your brain and body are in state that your brain and body are in that's important to anchor yourself to. that's important to anchor yourself to. that's important to anchor yourself to. So now I'm going to offer you a tool. So now I'm going to offer you a tool. So now I'm going to offer you a tool. It's actually an entire program by which It's actually an entire program by which It's actually an entire program by which you can insert particular habits and you can insert particular habits and you can insert particular habits and activities at particular phases of the activities at particular phases of the activities at particular phases of the day, not times of day, but phases of the day, not times of day, but phases of the day, not times of day, but phases of the day, because it turns out that day, because it turns out that day, because it turns out that particular phases of the day are particular phases of the day are particular phases of the day are associated with particular biological associated with particular biological associated with particular biological underpinnings, chemicals, and neural underpinnings, chemicals, and neural underpinnings, chemicals, and neural circuits, and so forth. circuits, and so forth. circuits, and so forth. And in doing so, it will make it far And in doing so, it will make it far And in doing so, it will make it far more likely that you'll be able to more likely that you'll be able to more likely that you'll be able to regularly engage in these habits and regularly engage in these habits and regularly engage in these habits and activities over a long period of time. activities over a long period of time. activities over a long period of time. Now, whether or not that will move you Now, whether or not that will move you Now, whether or not that will move you from somebody who ordinarily would take from somebody who ordinarily would take from somebody who ordinarily would take 200 days to form a habit as one of those 200 days to form a habit as one of those 200 days to form a habit as one of those 18 days to habit people in that earlier 18 days to habit people in that earlier 18 days to habit people in that earlier study I mentioned, I don't know, but I study I mentioned, I don't know, but I study I mentioned, I don't know, but I am certain that it will have a am certain that it will have a am certain that it will have a significant shift on allowing you to significant shift on allowing you to significant shift on allowing you to engage in particular habits more easily engage in particular habits more easily engage in particular habits more easily and to consolidate those habits more and to consolidate those habits more and to consolidate those habits more quickly. So, the program I'm about to quickly. So, the program I'm about to quickly. So, the program I'm about to describe I formulated for you based on describe I formulated for you based on describe I formulated for you based on the neuroscience literature and the neuroscience literature and the neuroscience literature and the psychology literature of learning and psychology literature of learning and psychology literature of learning and this concept of task bracketing. this concept of task bracketing. this concept of task bracketing. It involves dividing the 24-hour days It involves dividing the 24-hour days It involves dividing the 24-hour days into what I call three phases. The first into what I call three phases. The first into what I call three phases. The first is phase one, which is 0 to 8 hours is phase one, which is 0 to 8 hours is phase one, which is 0 to 8 hours after waking up, approximately. Okay, after waking up, approximately. Okay, after waking up, approximately. Okay, you can put a plus or minus 30 minutes you can put a plus or minus 30 minutes you can put a plus or minus 30 minutes on this for yourself. on this for yourself. on this for yourself. The second phase is the 9 to 14, maybe The second phase is the 9 to 14, maybe The second phase is the 9 to 14, maybe 15 hours after you wake up. And the 15 hours after you wake up. And the 15 hours after you wake up. And the third phase is 16 to 24 hours after third phase is 16 to 24 hours after third phase is 16 to 24 hours after waking up. So, we've taken the 24-hour waking up. So, we've taken the 24-hour waking up. So, we've taken the 24-hour cycle, we've carved it up into three cycle, we've carved it up into three cycle, we've carved it up into three phases, phase one, phase two, and phase phases, phase one, phase two, and phase phases, phase one, phase two, and phase three. Now, everything I'm describing, three. Now, everything I'm describing, three. Now, everything I'm describing, or at least the way I'm going to or at least the way I'm going to or at least the way I'm going to describe it, is based on what I would describe it, is based on what I would describe it, is based on what I would call a typical schedule, diurnal call a typical schedule, diurnal call a typical schedule, diurnal schedule. You've heard of nocturnal, schedule. You've heard of nocturnal, schedule. You've heard of nocturnal, well, we are diurnal. Most of us are well, we are diurnal. Most of us are well, we are diurnal. Most of us are asleep at night and awake during the asleep at night and awake during the asleep at night and awake during the day. I do realize that a number of day. I do realize that a number of day. I do realize that a number of people have shift work or they have people have shift work or they have people have shift work or they have newborns or other reasons why they have newborns or other reasons why they have newborns or other reasons why they have to be up in the middle of the night and to be up in the middle of the night and to be up in the middle of the night and sleeping during the day. sleeping during the day. sleeping during the day. If that's the case, please listen to the If that's the case, please listen to the If that's the case, please listen to the episode that we did on jet lag and shift episode that we did on jet lag and shift episode that we did on jet lag and shift work because it has a lot of tools work because it has a lot of tools work because it has a lot of tools specifically for that population. But specifically for that population. But specifically for that population. But most people go to sleep somewhere around most people go to sleep somewhere around most people go to sleep somewhere around 10:00 p.m., plus or minus 2 hours and 10:00 p.m., plus or minus 2 hours and 10:00 p.m., plus or minus 2 hours and wake up sometime around 7:00 a.m. plus wake up sometime around 7:00 a.m. plus wake up sometime around 7:00 a.m. plus or minus 2 hours. So, today I'm going to or minus 2 hours. So, today I'm going to or minus 2 hours. So, today I'm going to use the to bed at 10:00 p.m. and the use the to bed at 10:00 p.m. and the use the to bed at 10:00 p.m. and the wake up time of 7:00 a.m. wake up time of 7:00 a.m. wake up time of 7:00 a.m. as the framework for this, but you could as the framework for this, but you could as the framework for this, but you could adopt it easily to your particular adopt it easily to your particular adopt it easily to your particular schedule. Phase one, which again is 0 to 8 hours Phase one, which again is 0 to 8 hours Phase one, which again is 0 to 8 hours after waking, has a particular after waking, has a particular after waking, has a particular neurochemical signature. neurochemical signature. neurochemical signature. Regardless of what you do, Regardless of what you do, Regardless of what you do, the neuromodulators norepinephrine as the neuromodulators norepinephrine as the neuromodulators norepinephrine as well as epinephrine, so that's well as epinephrine, so that's well as epinephrine, so that's noradrenaline and adrenaline, as well as noradrenaline and adrenaline, as well as noradrenaline and adrenaline, as well as the neuromodulator dopamine tend to be the neuromodulator dopamine tend to be the neuromodulator dopamine tend to be elevated during that first 0 to 8 hours elevated during that first 0 to 8 hours elevated during that first 0 to 8 hours after waking. There are a number of after waking. There are a number of after waking. There are a number of reasons for this related to the fact reasons for this related to the fact reasons for this related to the fact that also cortisol is higher in our that also cortisol is higher in our that also cortisol is higher in our brain and bloodstream. It's a healthy brain and bloodstream. It's a healthy brain and bloodstream. It's a healthy level of cortisol upon waking. Body level of cortisol upon waking. Body level of cortisol upon waking. Body temperature is increased, etc. And there temperature is increased, etc. And there temperature is increased, etc. And there are several things that perhaps we are several things that perhaps we are several things that perhaps we should all be doing. I've talked about should all be doing. I've talked about should all be doing. I've talked about many of these on the podcast before many of these on the podcast before many of these on the podcast before that in addition to those chemicals that in addition to those chemicals that in addition to those chemicals further support an alert and focused further support an alert and focused further support an alert and focused state. And I'll just list those off. state. And I'll just list those off. state. And I'll just list those off. I've done many podcasts on each of I've done many podcasts on each of I've done many podcasts on each of these. If you'd like to access those podcasts, If you'd like to access those podcasts, If you'd like to access those podcasts, you can find them you can find them you can find them in the menu of podcasts on YouTube, in the menu of podcasts on YouTube, in the menu of podcasts on YouTube, Apple, Spotify, etc. They involve, for Apple, Spotify, etc. They involve, for Apple, Spotify, etc. They involve, for instance, viewing sunlight or bright instance, viewing sunlight or bright instance, viewing sunlight or bright artificial light if you can't access artificial light if you can't access artificial light if you can't access sunlight within the first 30 minutes of sunlight within the first 30 minutes of sunlight within the first 30 minutes of waking. Physical exercise of some kind Physical exercise of some kind Physical exercise of some kind in this first phase of the day, 0 to 8 in this first phase of the day, 0 to 8 in this first phase of the day, 0 to 8 hours of the day, ideally pretty early hours of the day, ideally pretty early hours of the day, ideally pretty early in that phase, but, you know, if it has in that phase, but, you know, if it has in that phase, but, you know, if it has to be at the 7 to 8 hour transition to be at the 7 to 8 hour transition to be at the 7 to 8 hour transition point, that's fine, too. Cold exposure point, that's fine, too. Cold exposure point, that's fine, too. Cold exposure in the form of cold showers or ice baths in the form of cold showers or ice baths in the form of cold showers or ice baths or outside with minimal clothing, or outside with minimal clothing, or outside with minimal clothing, appropriate yet minimal clothing. appropriate yet minimal clothing. appropriate yet minimal clothing. Caffeine ingestion, Caffeine ingestion, Caffeine ingestion, fasting, for instance, fasting, for instance, fasting, for instance, not ingesting calories also will lend not ingesting calories also will lend not ingesting calories also will lend itself to increased norepinephrine, itself to increased norepinephrine, itself to increased norepinephrine, dopamine, etc. If you are going to dopamine, etc. If you are going to dopamine, etc. If you are going to consume foods, foods that are rich in consume foods, foods that are rich in consume foods, foods that are rich in things like tyrosine, which is a things like tyrosine, which is a things like tyrosine, which is a precursor for dopamine. precursor for dopamine. precursor for dopamine. You can look up which foods are high in You can look up which foods are high in You can look up which foods are high in tyrosine. And for those of you that are tyrosine. And for those of you that are tyrosine. And for those of you that are interested in supplementation and like interested in supplementation and like interested in supplementation and like to use those routes, things like alpha to use those routes, things like alpha to use those routes, things like alpha GPC or phenylethylamine thing or GPC or phenylethylamine thing or GPC or phenylethylamine thing or L-tyrosine if that's in keeping with L-tyrosine if that's in keeping with L-tyrosine if that's in keeping with what you're able to do. Of course, what you're able to do. Of course, what you're able to do. Of course, consult your doctor if you're going to consult your doctor if you're going to consult your doctor if you're going to rely on supplementation. What's this all rely on supplementation. What's this all rely on supplementation. What's this all about? Well, the already elevated about? Well, the already elevated about? Well, the already elevated norepinephrine and dopamine, norepinephrine and dopamine, norepinephrine and dopamine, the sunlight, exercise, cold exposure, the sunlight, exercise, cold exposure, the sunlight, exercise, cold exposure, caffeine, tyrosine, etc. All of those caffeine, tyrosine, etc. All of those caffeine, tyrosine, etc. All of those place the brain and body into a state place the brain and body into a state place the brain and body into a state in which in which in which you are better able, or I would say more you are better able, or I would say more you are better able, or I would say more easily able, to engage in activities easily able, to engage in activities easily able, to engage in activities that have a high degree of limbic that have a high degree of limbic that have a high degree of limbic friction and where you need to override friction and where you need to override friction and where you need to override that limbic friction, right? We've heard that limbic friction, right? We've heard that limbic friction, right? We've heard that the morning is kind of sacred, that the morning is kind of sacred, that the morning is kind of sacred, conquer the hardest things first thing conquer the hardest things first thing conquer the hardest things first thing in the morning, and that's been in the morning, and that's been in the morning, and that's been discussed in the pop psychology discussed in the pop psychology discussed in the pop psychology literature and in the habit formation literature and in the habit formation literature and in the habit formation literature merely from the perspective of get it merely from the perspective of get it merely from the perspective of get it out of the way so you can feel good out of the way so you can feel good out of the way so you can feel good about having done it. But what I'm about having done it. But what I'm about having done it. But what I'm referring to is quite different. What referring to is quite different. What referring to is quite different. What I'm referring to is a particular phase I'm referring to is a particular phase I'm referring to is a particular phase of day of day of day that after rising, after waking up that after rising, after waking up that after rising, after waking up that is, for zero to eight hours, right? In is, for zero to eight hours, right? In is, for zero to eight hours, right? In that first phase, your whole system is that first phase, your whole system is that first phase, your whole system is action and focus oriented. And we know action and focus oriented. And we know action and focus oriented. And we know that when you're action and focus that when you're action and focus that when you're action and focus oriented and because of the oriented and because of the oriented and because of the neurochemicals that are naturally released into your that are naturally released into your that are naturally released into your brain and body brain and body brain and body that you will be more likely to overcome that you will be more likely to overcome that you will be more likely to overcome any limbic friction that stands in the any limbic friction that stands in the any limbic friction that stands in the way of performing particular habits. So, way of performing particular habits. So, way of performing particular habits. So, as you list out or think about the as you list out or think about the as you list out or think about the various habits that you'd like to adopt various habits that you'd like to adopt various habits that you'd like to adopt in your life, in your life, in your life, take the habits for which you know take the habits for which you know take the habits for which you know there's the highest degree of limbic there's the highest degree of limbic there's the highest degree of limbic friction. They are the hardest for you friction. They are the hardest for you friction. They are the hardest for you to engage in. They require the most to engage in. They require the most to engage in. They require the most activation energy and put those in this activation energy and put those in this activation energy and put those in this zero to eight hours after waking. This zero to eight hours after waking. This zero to eight hours after waking. This will greatly facilitate your performance will greatly facilitate your performance will greatly facilitate your performance of those new habits. I'm certain of those new habits. I'm certain of those new habits. I'm certain of that. And in addition to that, by doing that. And in addition to that, by doing that. And in addition to that, by doing them in this particular phase of the them in this particular phase of the them in this particular phase of the day, not necessarily at the same time. I day, not necessarily at the same time. I day, not necessarily at the same time. I mean, if you want to be very habitual mean, if you want to be very habitual mean, if you want to be very habitual and you want to do, you know, the and you want to do, you know, the and you want to do, you know, the exercise or the sunlight viewing always exercise or the sunlight viewing always exercise or the sunlight viewing always at the same time, or you want to do at the same time, or you want to do at the same time, or you want to do you want to drink your caffeine always you want to drink your caffeine always you want to drink your caffeine always at the exact same time, that's fine. But at the exact same time, that's fine. But at the exact same time, that's fine. But by placing them in this broader window by placing them in this broader window by placing them in this broader window of 0 to 8 hours after waking, what of 0 to 8 hours after waking, what of 0 to 8 hours after waking, what you're doing is you're creating task you're doing is you're creating task you're doing is you're creating task bracketing. You're making it such that bracketing. You're making it such that bracketing. You're making it such that your nervous system will predict when your nervous system will predict when your nervous system will predict when you are going to lean in against limbic you are going to lean in against limbic you are going to lean in against limbic friction in order to perform particular friction in order to perform particular friction in order to perform particular types of habits. And this is very types of habits. And this is very types of habits. And this is very different than saying, "I'm always going different than saying, "I'm always going different than saying, "I'm always going to run, or I'm always going to study to run, or I'm always going to study to run, or I'm always going to study from 10:00 to 12:00 a.m. every morning." from 10:00 to 12:00 a.m. every morning." from 10:00 to 12:00 a.m. every morning." That's great, and if you can do that, That's great, and if you can do that, That's great, and if you can do that, terrific. But the literature indicates terrific. But the literature indicates terrific. But the literature indicates that people who do that, who are very that people who do that, who are very that people who do that, who are very rigid about when they do things, tend, rigid about when they do things, tend, rigid about when they do things, tend, because of context dependence, to not because of context dependence, to not because of context dependence, to not necessarily stick to those habits over necessarily stick to those habits over necessarily stick to those habits over time. Some people do, but many, many time. Some people do, but many, many time. Some people do, but many, many people don't. So, think about the people don't. So, think about the people don't. So, think about the hardest habits to form, and the hardest habits to form, and the hardest habits to form, and the habits that you most want to form that habits that you most want to form that habits that you most want to form that are hardest for you to adopt and to are hardest for you to adopt and to are hardest for you to adopt and to maintain, and I highly suggest placing maintain, and I highly suggest placing maintain, and I highly suggest placing those somewhere within this phase one of those somewhere within this phase one of those somewhere within this phase one of 0 to 8 hours after waking. 0 to 8 hours after waking. 0 to 8 hours after waking. Now, of course, some of the things I Now, of course, some of the things I Now, of course, some of the things I listed out, sunlight viewing, exercise, listed out, sunlight viewing, exercise, listed out, sunlight viewing, exercise, cold exposure, cold exposure, cold exposure, caffeine, fasting, those might be the caffeine, fasting, those might be the caffeine, fasting, those might be the actual habits themselves. But here I actual habits themselves. But here I actual habits themselves. But here I realize, or I rather I want to realize, or I rather I want to realize, or I rather I want to acknowledge that many people, including acknowledge that many people, including acknowledge that many people, including myself, are doing some or all of these myself, are doing some or all of these myself, are doing some or all of these things already, and many people, things already, and many people, things already, and many people, including myself, are trying to adopt including myself, are trying to adopt including myself, are trying to adopt new habits that don't fall into the new habits that don't fall into the new habits that don't fall into the category of just trying to set your category of just trying to set your category of just trying to set your overall state. Again, norepinephrine, overall state. Again, norepinephrine, overall state. Again, norepinephrine, dopamine, and all these neural systems dopamine, and all these neural systems dopamine, and all these neural systems will be greatly elevated in this 0 to 8 will be greatly elevated in this 0 to 8 will be greatly elevated in this 0 to 8 hours after waking. hours after waking. hours after waking. However, the other things I mentioned, However, the other things I mentioned, However, the other things I mentioned, sunlight exposure, exercise, cold sunlight exposure, exercise, cold sunlight exposure, exercise, cold exposure, caffeine, fasting, if that's exposure, caffeine, fasting, if that's exposure, caffeine, fasting, if that's for you, or if you're eating during that for you, or if you're eating during that for you, or if you're eating during that phase, eating things that contain some or eating things that contain some or eating things that contain some or elevated levels of tyrosine, maybe elevated levels of tyrosine, maybe elevated levels of tyrosine, maybe supplementing alpha GPC or L-tyrosine supplementing alpha GPC or L-tyrosine supplementing alpha GPC or L-tyrosine etc. All of those things further facilitate All of those things further facilitate All of those things further facilitate the neurochemistry and therefore the neurochemistry and therefore the neurochemistry and therefore the state of mind that's going to be ideal state of mind that's going to be ideal state of mind that's going to be ideal for leaning into limbic friction and for leaning into limbic friction and for leaning into limbic friction and overriding that limbic friction so that overriding that limbic friction so that overriding that limbic friction so that you can regularly perform that habit. you can regularly perform that habit. you can regularly perform that habit. What we're really talking about here is What we're really talking about here is What we're really talking about here is leveraging neural systems in order to leveraging neural systems in order to leveraging neural systems in order to help you make it more likely that you're help you make it more likely that you're help you make it more likely that you're going to be able to engage and maintain going to be able to engage and maintain going to be able to engage and maintain a particular habit. So what I'm a particular habit. So what I'm a particular habit. So what I'm referring to as phase one of each day is referring to as phase one of each day is referring to as phase one of each day is useful for acquiring certain habits, but useful for acquiring certain habits, but useful for acquiring certain habits, but there are other phases of the day and there are other phases of the day and there are other phases of the day and those turn out to be useful for those turn out to be useful for those turn out to be useful for acquiring other types of habits. acquiring other types of habits. acquiring other types of habits. Phase two, as I mentioned, is about, Phase two, as I mentioned, is about, Phase two, as I mentioned, is about, again, these aren't specifics, but about again, these aren't specifics, but about again, these aren't specifics, but about 9 to 14 or 15 hours after waking. 9 to 14 or 15 hours after waking. 9 to 14 or 15 hours after waking. During this phase of the day, because of During this phase of the day, because of During this phase of the day, because of the circadian shifts in our biology, the circadian shifts in our biology, the circadian shifts in our biology, the amount of dopamine and the amount of dopamine and the amount of dopamine and norepinephrine that's circulating in our norepinephrine that's circulating in our norepinephrine that's circulating in our brain and bloodstream tends to start to brain and bloodstream tends to start to brain and bloodstream tends to start to come down. come down. come down. And levels of cortisol tend to start to And levels of cortisol tend to start to And levels of cortisol tend to start to come down. That's the ideal come down. That's the ideal come down. That's the ideal circumstance. In fact, you don't really circumstance. In fact, you don't really circumstance. In fact, you don't really want elevated cortisol late in the day. want elevated cortisol late in the day. want elevated cortisol late in the day. That's actually a signature of That's actually a signature of That's actually a signature of depression and anxiety and a number of depression and anxiety and a number of depression and anxiety and a number of other uh unfortunate things. unfortunate things. unfortunate things. So 9 to 14 hours after waking, So 9 to 14 hours after waking, So 9 to 14 hours after waking, dopamine and norepinephrine and cortisol dopamine and norepinephrine and cortisol dopamine and norepinephrine and cortisol are starting to taper down just are starting to taper down just are starting to taper down just naturally and naturally and naturally and a different neuromodulator, serotonin, a different neuromodulator, serotonin, a different neuromodulator, serotonin, is starting to rise. is starting to rise. is starting to rise. Serotonin is definitely going to be Serotonin is definitely going to be Serotonin is definitely going to be highest in this second half of the day highest in this second half of the day highest in this second half of the day and tends to lend itself to a more and tends to lend itself to a more and tends to lend itself to a more relaxed state of being. Now, of course, relaxed state of being. Now, of course, relaxed state of being. Now, of course, I do realize that some people are less I do realize that some people are less I do realize that some people are less of morning people and find that they of morning people and find that they of morning people and find that they really come alive and awake in the really come alive and awake in the really come alive and awake in the afternoon, but most people don't fall afternoon, but most people don't fall afternoon, but most people don't fall into that category. Most people feel into that category. Most people feel into that category. Most people feel more alert early in the day, even more alert early in the day, even more alert early in the day, even anxious early in the day, and then as anxious early in the day, and then as anxious early in the day, and then as the afternoon progresses, they tend to the afternoon progresses, they tend to the afternoon progresses, they tend to be a bit more sleepy, a bit more be a bit more sleepy, a bit more be a bit more sleepy, a bit more relaxed, a bit more calm. relaxed, a bit more calm. relaxed, a bit more calm. There are certain things that we all can There are certain things that we all can There are certain things that we all can and should do during this phase two of and should do during this phase two of and should do during this phase two of each day that lend themselves to a state each day that lend themselves to a state each day that lend themselves to a state of mind and a state of body that is of mind and a state of body that is of mind and a state of body that is going to be beneficial for the going to be beneficial for the going to be beneficial for the generation and consolidation of certain generation and consolidation of certain generation and consolidation of certain types of habits. What are those things? types of habits. What are those things? types of habits. What are those things? First of all, as the day goes on, you First of all, as the day goes on, you First of all, as the day goes on, you should try if you can to start tapering should try if you can to start tapering should try if you can to start tapering the amount of light that you're viewing. the amount of light that you're viewing. the amount of light that you're viewing. Now, this doesn't mean putting yourself Now, this doesn't mean putting yourself Now, this doesn't mean putting yourself into dim light at 3:00 or 4:00 in the into dim light at 3:00 or 4:00 in the into dim light at 3:00 or 4:00 in the afternoon. That's certainly not the afternoon. That's certainly not the afternoon. That's certainly not the case. Simply that you want to start case. Simply that you want to start case. Simply that you want to start tapering off the amount of really bright tapering off the amount of really bright tapering off the amount of really bright light that you're getting unless it's light that you're getting unless it's light that you're getting unless it's sunlight. Talked about this before on the podcast, Talked about this before on the podcast, Talked about this before on the podcast, but if you haven't heard, but if you haven't heard, but if you haven't heard, viewing the sun as it's what we call low viewing the sun as it's what we call low viewing the sun as it's what we call low solar angle, so as it's headed toward solar angle, so as it's headed toward solar angle, so as it's headed toward the horizon, you don't necessarily have the horizon, you don't necessarily have the horizon, you don't necessarily have to watch the sunset, although that can to watch the sunset, although that can to watch the sunset, although that can be nice, but getting some sunlight in be nice, but getting some sunlight in be nice, but getting some sunlight in your eyes in the second half of the day your eyes in the second half of the day your eyes in the second half of the day can also be beneficial for a number of can also be beneficial for a number of can also be beneficial for a number of brain systems and psychological systems. brain systems and psychological systems. brain systems and psychological systems. So, you can get some sunlight in your So, you can get some sunlight in your So, you can get some sunlight in your eyes, you can eyes, you can eyes, you can uh certainly have artificial lights on, uh certainly have artificial lights on, uh certainly have artificial lights on, but you want to start dimming those but you want to start dimming those but you want to start dimming those lights and bringing them actually lights and bringing them actually lights and bringing them actually physically lower in the room because the physically lower in the room because the physically lower in the room because the neurons in your eye that view the upper neurons in your eye that view the upper neurons in your eye that view the upper visual field, they actually trigger this visual field, they actually trigger this visual field, they actually trigger this alertness mechanism in the brain and alertness mechanism in the brain and alertness mechanism in the brain and body. And in the second half of the day, body. And in the second half of the day, body. And in the second half of the day, even if you're humming around and doing even if you're humming around and doing even if you're humming around and doing work at 3:00 and 4:00 or 5:00 or even work at 3:00 and 4:00 or 5:00 or even work at 3:00 and 4:00 or 5:00 or even 7:00 p.m., you are probably headed 7:00 p.m., you are probably headed 7:00 p.m., you are probably headed towards sleep a few hours later. So, towards sleep a few hours later. So, towards sleep a few hours later. So, things like limiting the total amount of things like limiting the total amount of things like limiting the total amount of light if you can, light if you can, light if you can, things like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, things like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, things like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, another thing that I've talked about on another thing that I've talked about on another thing that I've talked about on this podcast. If you haven't heard about this podcast. If you haven't heard about this podcast. If you haven't heard about this before, non-sleep deep rest is an this before, non-sleep deep rest is an this before, non-sleep deep rest is an umbrella term for things like umbrella term for things like umbrella term for things like meditation, for yoga nidra, a very meditation, for yoga nidra, a very meditation, for yoga nidra, a very powerful um science-supported tool for powerful um science-supported tool for powerful um science-supported tool for teaching you how to relax, things like teaching you how to relax, things like teaching you how to relax, things like self-hypnosis, which might sound a self-hypnosis, which might sound a self-hypnosis, which might sound a little kooky to some of you, but little kooky to some of you, but little kooky to some of you, but actually is a clinically based tool for actually is a clinically based tool for actually is a clinically based tool for which there's a lot of scientific which there's a lot of scientific which there's a lot of scientific literature. If you're interested in literature. If you're interested in literature. If you're interested in that, there's a great free resource that, there's a great free resource that, there's a great free resource called Reveri, r e v e r i.com. There's called Reveri, r e v e r i.com. There's called Reveri, r e v e r i.com. There's a app for both Apple and Android. This a app for both Apple and Android. This a app for both Apple and Android. This is an app that was developed by is an app that was developed by is an app that was developed by colleagues of mine and researchers at colleagues of mine and researchers at colleagues of mine and researchers at Stanford School of Medicine. You can do Stanford School of Medicine. You can do Stanford School of Medicine. You can do these short 15-minute self-hypnosis these short 15-minute self-hypnosis these short 15-minute self-hypnosis scripts, as they're called, that can scripts, as they're called, that can scripts, as they're called, that can teach you how to relax yourself. There's teach you how to relax yourself. There's teach you how to relax yourself. There's even ones for focus, for sleep, for even ones for focus, for sleep, for even ones for focus, for sleep, for chronic pain. Again, all very strongly chronic pain. Again, all very strongly chronic pain. Again, all very strongly supported by quality peer-reviewed supported by quality peer-reviewed supported by quality peer-reviewed literature. So, things like reverie, literature. So, things like reverie, literature. So, things like reverie, meditation, things like heat and sauna, hot baths, things like heat and sauna, hot baths, things like heat and sauna, hot baths, hot showers. Those are terrific things hot showers. Those are terrific things hot showers. Those are terrific things to do in the second half of the day. to do in the second half of the day. to do in the second half of the day. They tend to support this serotonergic They tend to support this serotonergic They tend to support this serotonergic or high serotonin-like state, and lend or high serotonin-like state, and lend or high serotonin-like state, and lend themselves to more calm and relaxation. themselves to more calm and relaxation. themselves to more calm and relaxation. For those of you that are interested in For those of you that are interested in For those of you that are interested in supplementation, there's always supplementation, there's always supplementation, there's always ashwagandha, which ashwagandha, which ashwagandha, which reduces cortisol. Again, peaks in reduces cortisol. Again, peaks in reduces cortisol. Again, peaks in cortisol late in the afternoon and cortisol late in the afternoon and cortisol late in the afternoon and evening are associated with depression, evening are associated with depression, evening are associated with depression, anxiety, and so forth. Ashwagandha is a anxiety, and so forth. Ashwagandha is a anxiety, and so forth. Ashwagandha is a pretty potent cortisol pretty potent cortisol pretty potent cortisol inhibiting tool. inhibiting tool. inhibiting tool. I personally don't use it very often, I personally don't use it very often, I personally don't use it very often, and I caution people about using it for and I caution people about using it for and I caution people about using it for longer than 2-week periods of time longer than 2-week periods of time longer than 2-week periods of time without taking some breaks. You can look without taking some breaks. You can look without taking some breaks. You can look up more about ashwagandha on up more about ashwagandha on up more about ashwagandha on examine.com. There's a lot of terrific examine.com. There's a lot of terrific examine.com. There's a lot of terrific literature with links to studies there. literature with links to studies there. literature with links to studies there. But, basically, this phase two of the But, basically, this phase two of the But, basically, this phase two of the day is one in which you're alert, you day is one in which you're alert, you day is one in which you're alert, you are present, you are working, you are present, you are working, you are present, you are working, you are engaging socially, you're cooking engaging socially, you're cooking engaging socially, you're cooking dinner, probably paying attention to a dinner, probably paying attention to a dinner, probably paying attention to a number of things, but you should really number of things, but you should really number of things, but you should really be trying to taper off your stress be trying to taper off your stress be trying to taper off your stress level. So, how do you leverage phase two level. So, how do you leverage phase two level. So, how do you leverage phase two of the day for habit formation? Well, of the day for habit formation? Well, of the day for habit formation? Well, given what we know about the given what we know about the given what we know about the neurochemistry of learning and memory, neurochemistry of learning and memory, neurochemistry of learning and memory, given what we know about task formation given what we know about task formation given what we know about task formation and its reliance on certain forms of and its reliance on certain forms of and its reliance on certain forms of neuroplasticity, this second half of the neuroplasticity, this second half of the neuroplasticity, this second half of the day is a terrific time to take on day is a terrific time to take on day is a terrific time to take on habits and things that you're already habits and things that you're already habits and things that you're already doing that require very little override doing that require very little override doing that require very little override of limbic friction. So, these might be of limbic friction. So, these might be of limbic friction. So, these might be things that you could categorize in things that you could categorize in things that you could categorize in common terms as kind of mellower common terms as kind of mellower common terms as kind of mellower activities. It might be journaling. It activities. It might be journaling. It activities. It might be journaling. It might be might be might be that you already are performing music, that you already are performing music, that you already are performing music, or I should say practicing music or I should say practicing music or I should say practicing music regularly, but that there's a particular regularly, but that there's a particular regularly, but that there's a particular type of music that is hard for you, or type of music that is hard for you, or type of music that is hard for you, or that you're working on a particular that you're working on a particular that you're working on a particular piece of music, or you're trying to piece of music, or you're trying to piece of music, or you're trying to learn a language, something that's a learn a language, something that's a learn a language, something that's a little bit challenging, but doesn't little bit challenging, but doesn't little bit challenging, but doesn't require a ton of energy in order to require a ton of energy in order to require a ton of energy in order to override that limbic friction. The override that limbic friction. The override that limbic friction. The second half of the day is a much better second half of the day is a much better second half of the day is a much better time to do that, less resistance, as we time to do that, less resistance, as we time to do that, less resistance, as we might say. might say. might say. But, of course, resistance has a neural But, of course, resistance has a neural But, of course, resistance has a neural substrate, and the reason for doing substrate, and the reason for doing substrate, and the reason for doing those things in the second part of the those things in the second part of the those things in the second part of the day, the so-called phase two, as I've day, the so-called phase two, as I've day, the so-called phase two, as I've called it, part of the day, is because called it, part of the day, is because called it, part of the day, is because your ability to override resistance is your ability to override resistance is your ability to override resistance is really diminished in this second phase really diminished in this second phase really diminished in this second phase of the day. of the day. of the day. Some of you might say, "Well, wait, I Some of you might say, "Well, wait, I Some of you might say, "Well, wait, I like to exercise in the second half of like to exercise in the second half of like to exercise in the second half of the day. That's actually when I have the day. That's actually when I have the day. That's actually when I have the most energy. That's when I'm I feel most energy. That's when I'm I feel most energy. That's when I'm I feel warmer. I'm not a morning exerciser." warmer. I'm not a morning exerciser." warmer. I'm not a morning exerciser." That's absolutely fine. That's absolutely fine. That's absolutely fine. What I'm referring to is the acquisition What I'm referring to is the acquisition What I'm referring to is the acquisition of new behaviors of new behaviors of new behaviors and placing those consistently at the and placing those consistently at the and placing those consistently at the second half of the day in order to second half of the day in order to second half of the day in order to engage these task bracketing mechanisms engage these task bracketing mechanisms engage these task bracketing mechanisms that I talked about before. that I talked about before. that I talked about before. One of the hallmark features of those One of the hallmark features of those One of the hallmark features of those basal ganglia circuits for go and no-go basal ganglia circuits for go and no-go basal ganglia circuits for go and no-go is that they are associated with certain is that they are associated with certain is that they are associated with certain neurochemicals, dopamine and serotonin, neurochemicals, dopamine and serotonin, neurochemicals, dopamine and serotonin, acetylcholine, and other neurochemicals. acetylcholine, and other neurochemicals. acetylcholine, and other neurochemicals. And by placing particular habits at And by placing particular habits at And by placing particular habits at particular phases of the day, those particular phases of the day, those particular phases of the day, those neurochemical states start to be neurochemical states start to be neurochemical states start to be associated with the leaning in and the associated with the leaning in and the associated with the leaning in and the process of beginning and, as I process of beginning and, as I process of beginning and, as I mentioned, ending those particular mentioned, ending those particular mentioned, ending those particular habits. And in doing so, they shift the habits. And in doing so, they shift the habits. And in doing so, they shift the whole nervous system toward being able whole nervous system toward being able whole nervous system toward being able to predict that certain things are going to predict that certain things are going to predict that certain things are going to happen at particular times of day, to happen at particular times of day, to happen at particular times of day, that you're going to be leaning very that you're going to be leaning very that you're going to be leaning very hard against limbic friction early in hard against limbic friction early in hard against limbic friction early in the day in phase one, and that you're the day in phase one, and that you're the day in phase one, and that you're going to be doing things that require going to be doing things that require going to be doing things that require less conscious override of limbic less conscious override of limbic less conscious override of limbic friction in phase two. And in doing so, friction in phase two. And in doing so, friction in phase two. And in doing so, set up this task bracketing system so set up this task bracketing system so set up this task bracketing system so that the individual habits that you're that the individual habits that you're that the individual habits that you're learning, or that you're trying to learning, or that you're trying to learning, or that you're trying to learn, have a much greater probability learn, have a much greater probability learn, have a much greater probability of being executed and consolidated, of being executed and consolidated, of being executed and consolidated, meaning that pretty soon they will just meaning that pretty soon they will just meaning that pretty soon they will just naturally become reflexive. And as with naturally become reflexive. And as with naturally become reflexive. And as with phase one, many of the things that I phase one, many of the things that I phase one, many of the things that I mentioned that support this mentioned that support this mentioned that support this what I'm calling a serotonergic state or what I'm calling a serotonergic state or what I'm calling a serotonergic state or a more relaxed state in phase two, a more relaxed state in phase two, a more relaxed state in phase two, things like seeing some light in the things like seeing some light in the things like seeing some light in the afternoon but not a lot of bright light afternoon but not a lot of bright light afternoon but not a lot of bright light from artificial sources, things like from artificial sources, things like from artificial sources, things like NSDR, things like heat and sauna, NSDR, things like heat and sauna, NSDR, things like heat and sauna, hot baths, etc. Ashwagandha. Again, all hot baths, etc. Ashwagandha. Again, all hot baths, etc. Ashwagandha. Again, all of those things themselves could be of those things themselves could be of those things themselves could be habits that you're trying to adopt, habits that you're trying to adopt, habits that you're trying to adopt, right? In that case, do those if right? In that case, do those if right? In that case, do those if you'd like to explore them. They are you'd like to explore them. They are you'd like to explore them. They are quite beneficial for a number of quite beneficial for a number of quite beneficial for a number of reasons, not just related to execution of not just related to execution of not just related to execution of particular habits in phase two of the particular habits in phase two of the particular habits in phase two of the day, but also for improving quality of day, but also for improving quality of day, but also for improving quality of sleep and consolidating any learning sleep and consolidating any learning sleep and consolidating any learning that you might have triggered early in that you might have triggered early in that you might have triggered early in the day. I've talked about that before, the day. I've talked about that before, the day. I've talked about that before, but just briefly as a relevant aside, but just briefly as a relevant aside, but just briefly as a relevant aside, neuroplasticity involves triggering the neuroplasticity involves triggering the neuroplasticity involves triggering the neuroplasticity, setting it in motion, neuroplasticity, setting it in motion, neuroplasticity, setting it in motion, but the actual rewiring of the brain and but the actual rewiring of the brain and but the actual rewiring of the brain and the reconfiguration of neurons that will the reconfiguration of neurons that will the reconfiguration of neurons that will allow that learning to be reflexive, allow that learning to be reflexive, allow that learning to be reflexive, that actually occurs during states of that actually occurs during states of that actually occurs during states of deep rest like NSDR and like deep sleep. deep rest like NSDR and like deep sleep. deep rest like NSDR and like deep sleep. And I should just mention for those of And I should just mention for those of And I should just mention for those of you that can only exercise or prefer to you that can only exercise or prefer to you that can only exercise or prefer to exercise in phase two of the day, right? exercise in phase two of the day, right? exercise in phase two of the day, right? 9 to 14 hours or 15 hours after waking, 9 to 14 hours or 15 hours after waking, 9 to 14 hours or 15 hours after waking, that's absolutely fine. However, because that's absolutely fine. However, because that's absolutely fine. However, because of the importance of sleep and in of the importance of sleep and in of the importance of sleep and in particular deep sleep throughout the particular deep sleep throughout the particular deep sleep throughout the night for not just neuroplasticity but night for not just neuroplasticity but night for not just neuroplasticity but recovery of mus- muscle and other recovery of mus- muscle and other recovery of mus- muscle and other tissues that are taxed during physical tissues that are taxed during physical tissues that are taxed during physical exercise, if you do train in phase two, exercise, if you do train in phase two, exercise, if you do train in phase two, I highly recommend highly recommend that I highly recommend highly recommend that I highly recommend highly recommend that you start doing some sort of NSDR type you start doing some sort of NSDR type you start doing some sort of NSDR type activity after you train within an hour activity after you train within an hour activity after you train within an hour or two, because that will allow you to or two, because that will allow you to or two, because that will allow you to taper down and relax so that you can get taper down and relax so that you can get taper down and relax so that you can get into the next phase we're going to talk into the next phase we're going to talk into the next phase we're going to talk about, which is phase three. about, which is phase three. about, which is phase three. Phase three of the 24-hour schedule Phase three of the 24-hour schedule Phase three of the 24-hour schedule runs from about 16 to 24 hours after runs from about 16 to 24 hours after runs from about 16 to 24 hours after waking. During that period of time, During that period of time, During that period of time, there are a few things that are going to there are a few things that are going to there are a few things that are going to support being in a state of mind, state support being in a state of mind, state support being in a state of mind, state of body that are going to allow of body that are going to allow of body that are going to allow neuroplasticity to occur, that are going neuroplasticity to occur, that are going neuroplasticity to occur, that are going to allow the rewiring that you've to allow the rewiring that you've to allow the rewiring that you've triggered during the waking part of the triggered during the waking part of the triggered during the waking part of the day to actually take place. day to actually take place. day to actually take place. Those things are very low to no light. Those things are very low to no light. Those things are very low to no light. Meaning keeping your environment very Meaning keeping your environment very Meaning keeping your environment very dark or very dim. dark or very dim. dark or very dim. I don't think it's necessary to sleep in I don't think it's necessary to sleep in I don't think it's necessary to sleep in a room that's complete blackness. I a room that's complete blackness. I a room that's complete blackness. I think that's a little bit overkill. think that's a little bit overkill. think that's a little bit overkill. But for most people, keeping the room But for most people, keeping the room But for most people, keeping the room dark and keeping the room temperature low is and keeping the room temperature low is and keeping the room temperature low is very beneficial for getting and staying very beneficial for getting and staying very beneficial for getting and staying in deep sleep. in deep sleep. in deep sleep. The body has to drop by about 1 to 3° in The body has to drop by about 1 to 3° in The body has to drop by about 1 to 3° in order to get into sleep and to stay order to get into sleep and to stay order to get into sleep and to stay asleep. So, low light, low temperature asleep. So, low light, low temperature asleep. So, low light, low temperature environment, you can always pile on environment, you can always pile on environment, you can always pile on blankets of course if you don't want to blankets of course if you don't want to blankets of course if you don't want to be cold at night. You want to be warm be cold at night. You want to be warm be cold at night. You want to be warm enough, but you want your environment to enough, but you want your environment to enough, but you want your environment to be cold. be cold. be cold. Typically, people aren't eating in the Typically, people aren't eating in the Typically, people aren't eating in the middle of the night. Although, one thing middle of the night. Although, one thing middle of the night. Although, one thing that can be useful is to make sure that can be useful is to make sure that can be useful is to make sure that you're at least well fed enough when you you're at least well fed enough when you you're at least well fed enough when you head into this third phase of every head into this third phase of every head into this third phase of every 24-hour day that you're not awake 24-hour day that you're not awake 24-hour day that you're not awake because you're hungry. Now, a lot of because you're hungry. Now, a lot of because you're hungry. Now, a lot of people recommend putting a gap between people recommend putting a gap between people recommend putting a gap between your final bite of food and when you go your final bite of food and when you go your final bite of food and when you go to sleep at night. Some people will say to sleep at night. Some people will say to sleep at night. Some people will say that gap should be 4 hours, other people that gap should be 4 hours, other people that gap should be 4 hours, other people say 2 hours. Uh if you're me, I say 2 hours. Uh if you're me, I say 2 hours. Uh if you're me, I generally have something, I don't know, generally have something, I don't know, generally have something, I don't know, within 2 hours or 90 minutes of going to sleep, 2 hours or 90 minutes of going to sleep, 2 hours or 90 minutes of going to sleep, but it's not a big meal. But that's just but it's not a big meal. But that's just but it's not a big meal. But that's just me and I fall asleep and stay asleep me and I fall asleep and stay asleep me and I fall asleep and stay asleep fine with that. You have to experiment fine with that. You have to experiment fine with that. You have to experiment for yourself. for yourself. for yourself. I've talked about supplements that can I've talked about supplements that can I've talked about supplements that can support sleep in previous episodes of support sleep in previous episodes of support sleep in previous episodes of the podcast, things like magnesium 3 and the podcast, things like magnesium 3 and the podcast, things like magnesium 3 and 8 or magnesium bisglycinate, things like 8 or magnesium bisglycinate, things like 8 or magnesium bisglycinate, things like theanine, apigenin. If you'd like to theanine, apigenin. If you'd like to theanine, apigenin. If you'd like to read more about those, we actually have read more about those, we actually have read more about those, we actually have a newsletter that I'll just quickly a newsletter that I'll just quickly a newsletter that I'll just quickly refer you to. This is the Huberman Lab refer you to. This is the Huberman Lab refer you to. This is the Huberman Lab Neural Network newsletter. You can sign Neural Network newsletter. You can sign Neural Network newsletter. You can sign up for it by going to hubermanlab.com. up for it by going to hubermanlab.com. up for it by going to hubermanlab.com. It's very easy to find. But It's very easy to find. But It's very easy to find. But even if you don't sign up, you can go to even if you don't sign up, you can go to even if you don't sign up, you can go to the toolkit for sleep that's listed the toolkit for sleep that's listed the toolkit for sleep that's listed there, and that toolkit is not just there, and that toolkit is not just there, and that toolkit is not just supplements. That toolkit is a number of supplements. That toolkit is a number of supplements. That toolkit is a number of different things, both behavioral and different things, both behavioral and different things, both behavioral and supplement-based and nutrition-based, supplement-based and nutrition-based, supplement-based and nutrition-based, etc. that can allow you to get into etc. that can allow you to get into etc. that can allow you to get into sleep and to stay asleep more readily. sleep and to stay asleep more readily. sleep and to stay asleep more readily. It's totally zero cost. You can find It's totally zero cost. You can find It's totally zero cost. You can find that again at hubermanlab.com. So, that again at hubermanlab.com. So, that again at hubermanlab.com. So, things like low light, low temperature, things like low light, low temperature, things like low light, low temperature, the supplements I mentioned, adjusting the supplements I mentioned, adjusting the supplements I mentioned, adjusting your eating schedule appropriately. your eating schedule appropriately. your eating schedule appropriately. Obviously not drinking caffeine in the Obviously not drinking caffeine in the Obviously not drinking caffeine in the middle of the night or too close to bed, middle of the night or too close to bed, middle of the night or too close to bed, that's going to be critical. In fact, that's going to be critical. In fact, that's going to be critical. In fact, ideally, you wouldn't ingest any ideally, you wouldn't ingest any ideally, you wouldn't ingest any caffeine in phase two of the day so that caffeine in phase two of the day so that caffeine in phase two of the day so that you could get into this deeper state of you could get into this deeper state of you could get into this deeper state of rest in which habit formation and rest in which habit formation and rest in which habit formation and neuroplasticity can occur. neuroplasticity can occur. neuroplasticity can occur. What if you wake up, right? The way I've What if you wake up, right? The way I've What if you wake up, right? The way I've cast phase three is that you're supposed cast phase three is that you're supposed cast phase three is that you're supposed to be in this deep slumber. You're not to be in this deep slumber. You're not to be in this deep slumber. You're not supposed to wake up at all. You're supposed to wake up at all. You're supposed to wake up at all. You're supposed to be in low light and your supposed to be in low light and your supposed to be in low light and your brain is re-wiring and those habits are brain is re-wiring and those habits are brain is re-wiring and those habits are getting consolidated, etc. Well, if getting consolidated, etc. Well, if getting consolidated, etc. Well, if you're like me, you probably get up once you're like me, you probably get up once you're like me, you probably get up once in the middle of the night. Maybe you go in the middle of the night. Maybe you go in the middle of the night. Maybe you go use the restroom. Perfectly normal. use the restroom. Perfectly normal. use the restroom. Perfectly normal. Perfectly normal. But a lot of people Perfectly normal. But a lot of people Perfectly normal. But a lot of people have trouble falling back asleep. have trouble falling back asleep. have trouble falling back asleep. Very important if you get up in the Very important if you get up in the Very important if you get up in the middle of the night to use a minimum of middle of the night to use a minimum of middle of the night to use a minimum of light in order to navigate your light in order to navigate your light in order to navigate your surroundings just as much as you need in surroundings just as much as you need in surroundings just as much as you need in order to safely do so. order to safely do so. order to safely do so. Because light inhibits the hormone Because light inhibits the hormone Because light inhibits the hormone melatonin, can make it very hard to fall melatonin, can make it very hard to fall melatonin, can make it very hard to fall back asleep if you inhibit melatonin. back asleep if you inhibit melatonin. back asleep if you inhibit melatonin. The effects of light inhibiting The effects of light inhibiting The effects of light inhibiting melatonin are actually very potent. melatonin are actually very potent. melatonin are actually very potent. Happens very, very quickly. So, try and Happens very, very quickly. So, try and Happens very, very quickly. So, try and keep the lights low. keep the lights low. keep the lights low. And if you have trouble falling back And if you have trouble falling back And if you have trouble falling back asleep, that's when you might also want asleep, that's when you might also want asleep, that's when you might also want to use something like the Reverie app. to use something like the Reverie app. to use something like the Reverie app. They have a sleep script there that can They have a sleep script there that can They have a sleep script there that can hopefully help you get back to sleep or hopefully help you get back to sleep or hopefully help you get back to sleep or something like NSDR. You can find NSDR something like NSDR. You can find NSDR something like NSDR. You can find NSDR scripts on YouTube. These are zero cost. scripts on YouTube. These are zero cost. scripts on YouTube. These are zero cost. You can look up one that I particularly You can look up one that I particularly You can look up one that I particularly like is NSDR made for. It's a company like is NSDR made for. It's a company like is NSDR made for. It's a company I'm associated with, but the NSDR is I'm associated with, but the NSDR is I'm associated with, but the NSDR is completely zero cost. And there are completely zero cost. And there are completely zero cost. And there are other things like Yoga Nidra which you other things like Yoga Nidra which you other things like Yoga Nidra which you can find scripts for elsewhere. Again, can find scripts for elsewhere. Again, can find scripts for elsewhere. Again, all of these habits or these behaviors, all of these habits or these behaviors, all of these habits or these behaviors, these do's and don'ts around phase three these do's and don'ts around phase three these do's and don'ts around phase three themselves might be habits that you're trying to might be habits that you're trying to might be habits that you're trying to create for yourself. But again, phase create for yourself. But again, phase create for yourself. But again, phase three is really about making sure that three is really about making sure that three is really about making sure that whatever limbic friction you've been whatever limbic friction you've been whatever limbic friction you've been able to override in phase one and able to override in phase one and able to override in phase one and trigger some new habit, right? Forcing trigger some new habit, right? Forcing trigger some new habit, right? Forcing yourself to yourself to yourself to write, or forcing yourself to study, or write, or forcing yourself to study, or write, or forcing yourself to study, or forcing yourself to exercise during that forcing yourself to exercise during that forcing yourself to exercise during that high limbic friction state. And then high limbic friction state. And then high limbic friction state. And then whatever things you've been doing in whatever things you've been doing in whatever things you've been doing in phase two, which are habits that phase two, which are habits that phase two, which are habits that hopefully have moved a little bit hopefully have moved a little bit hopefully have moved a little bit further along the continuum of newly further along the continuum of newly further along the continuum of newly formed versus all the way to reflexive, formed versus all the way to reflexive, formed versus all the way to reflexive, or things that take less limbic friction or things that take less limbic friction or things that take less limbic friction in order to do, phase three is when all in order to do, phase three is when all in order to do, phase three is when all of that gets really locked into the of that gets really locked into the of that gets really locked into the nervous system through those heavy-in nervous system through those heavy-in nervous system through those heavy-in mechanisms like NMDA receptors, etc., mechanisms like NMDA receptors, etc., mechanisms like NMDA receptors, etc., that I talked about before. Again, that I talked about before. Again, that I talked about before. Again, neuroplasticity is the basis of habit neuroplasticity is the basis of habit neuroplasticity is the basis of habit formation, and neuroplasticity and the formation, and neuroplasticity and the formation, and neuroplasticity and the rewiring of neural circuits happens in rewiring of neural circuits happens in rewiring of neural circuits happens in these states of deep sleep. So, if these states of deep sleep. So, if these states of deep sleep. So, if you're not obeying this phase three, if you're not obeying this phase three, if you're not obeying this phase three, if you're not giving phase three the you're not giving phase three the you're not giving phase three the materials it needs, and you're and materials it needs, and you're and materials it needs, and you're and you're not avoiding the certain things you're not avoiding the certain things you're not avoiding the certain things like caffeine and bright light and like caffeine and bright light and like caffeine and bright light and stress during phase three, you're simply not during phase three, you're simply not during phase three, you're simply not going to be able to build those habits going to be able to build those habits going to be able to build those habits that you've been working so hard to that you've been working so hard to that you've been working so hard to trigger in phase one and phase two of trigger in phase one and phase two of trigger in phase one and phase two of the day. the day. the day. Again, these are things that I've talked Again, these are things that I've talked Again, these are things that I've talked about in previous episodes of the about in previous episodes of the about in previous episodes of the podcast and elsewhere, podcast and elsewhere, podcast and elsewhere, but really this is about habit but really this is about habit but really this is about habit formation. And the whole reason for formation. And the whole reason for formation. And the whole reason for placing particular types of behaviors placing particular types of behaviors placing particular types of behaviors at particular phases of the day is to at particular phases of the day is to at particular phases of the day is to set a framework for that task set a framework for that task set a framework for that task bracketing. Again, task bracketing and those Again, task bracketing and those Again, task bracketing and those circuits of the basal ganglia indicate circuits of the basal ganglia indicate circuits of the basal ganglia indicate that it's not just the neural circuits that it's not just the neural circuits that it's not just the neural circuits that are engaged by the task itself, that are engaged by the task itself, that are engaged by the task itself, but the neural circuits that are engaged but the neural circuits that are engaged but the neural circuits that are engaged before and after that task execution. before and after that task execution. before and after that task execution. That's what gets consolidated. So, when That's what gets consolidated. So, when That's what gets consolidated. So, when you do things at particular phases of you do things at particular phases of you do things at particular phases of the day the day the day under particular conditions of under particular conditions of under particular conditions of neurochemistry, what you're doing is neurochemistry, what you're doing is neurochemistry, what you're doing is you're giving the brain a very you're giving the brain a very you're giving the brain a very predictable set of sequences that during predictable set of sequences that during predictable set of sequences that during sleep it can start to put into your hard sleep it can start to put into your hard sleep it can start to put into your hard drive, if you will. It can really drive, if you will. It can really drive, if you will. It can really program it into your nervous system, so program it into your nervous system, so program it into your nervous system, so that within a short period of time, that within a short period of time, that within a short period of time, hopefully within hopefully within hopefully within 18, or maybe even 6 days, or who knows, 18, or maybe even 6 days, or who knows, 18, or maybe even 6 days, or who knows, maybe even fewer days, you'll find that maybe even fewer days, you'll find that maybe even fewer days, you'll find that executing those behaviors is very, very executing those behaviors is very, very executing those behaviors is very, very straightforward for you and that you straightforward for you and that you straightforward for you and that you won't have to won't have to won't have to feel so much limbic friction or override feel so much limbic friction or override feel so much limbic friction or override so much limbic friction. Some of you are so much limbic friction. Some of you are so much limbic friction. Some of you are probably asking, "Okay, if I probably asking, "Okay, if I probably asking, "Okay, if I perform a particular habit during phase perform a particular habit during phase perform a particular habit during phase one and then I do other habits during one and then I do other habits during one and then I do other habits during phase two and I eventually get to the phase two and I eventually get to the phase two and I eventually get to the point where I'm engaging in those habits point where I'm engaging in those habits point where I'm engaging in those habits in a pretty effortless way, do I keep in a pretty effortless way, do I keep in a pretty effortless way, do I keep them in the same phase of the day?" And them in the same phase of the day?" And them in the same phase of the day?" And the good news is, the literature says it the good news is, the literature says it the good news is, the literature says it doesn't matter and in fact moving that doesn't matter and in fact moving that doesn't matter and in fact moving that particular habit around somewhat particular habit around somewhat particular habit around somewhat randomly can actually be beneficial to randomly can actually be beneficial to randomly can actually be beneficial to you because actually moving it from one you because actually moving it from one you because actually moving it from one time of day to the other is that context time of day to the other is that context time of day to the other is that context independence that we're we really are independence that we're we really are independence that we're we really are seeking. By seeking. By seeking. By being able to do the same thing that we being able to do the same thing that we being able to do the same thing that we want to do regardless of time of day or want to do regardless of time of day or want to do regardless of time of day or circumstances, that's how we know that circumstances, that's how we know that circumstances, that's how we know that we've achieved a real habit formation. we've achieved a real habit formation. we've achieved a real habit formation. That's how we know that the habit has That's how we know that the habit has That's how we know that the habit has been moved into certain components of been moved into certain components of been moved into certain components of our neural circuitry that just allows to our neural circuitry that just allows to our neural circuitry that just allows to do it what seems like reflexively. do it what seems like reflexively. do it what seems like reflexively. Although earlier I pointed out that Although earlier I pointed out that Although earlier I pointed out that these aren't reflexes in the traditional these aren't reflexes in the traditional these aren't reflexes in the traditional sense. The reason for that is that this brain The reason for that is that this brain The reason for that is that this brain area, the hippocampus, that many of you area, the hippocampus, that many of you area, the hippocampus, that many of you know is associated with learning and know is associated with learning and know is associated with learning and memory, is not actually where memories memory, is not actually where memories memory, is not actually where memories are stored. The hippocampus is where are stored. The hippocampus is where are stored. The hippocampus is where memories are formed. It's where memories are formed. It's where memories are formed. It's where procedures, like I talked about before, procedures, like I talked about before, procedures, like I talked about before, procedural memory of how you're going to procedural memory of how you're going to procedural memory of how you're going to execute a particular sequence, where execute a particular sequence, where execute a particular sequence, where that's maintained. So like if we use the that's maintained. So like if we use the that's maintained. So like if we use the recipe model, that's where the recipe is recipe model, that's where the recipe is recipe model, that's where the recipe is maintained until you know how to cook maintained until you know how to cook maintained until you know how to cook that dish and then that dish and then that dish and then the procedural memory literally migrates the procedural memory literally migrates the procedural memory literally migrates off into a different set of neural off into a different set of neural off into a different set of neural circuits, which are the neural circuits circuits, which are the neural circuits circuits, which are the neural circuits of the neocortex, where we have maps of the neocortex, where we have maps of the neocortex, where we have maps of sensory experience, maps of sensory experience, maps of sensory experience, maps of all kinds of experiences including motor all kinds of experiences including motor all kinds of experiences including motor maps of how to execute things. So we use maps of how to execute things. So we use maps of how to execute things. So we use one part of the brain to learn one part of the brain to learn one part of the brain to learn something, but then that information in something, but then that information in something, but then that information in the form of the electrical activity of the form of the electrical activity of the form of the electrical activity of neurons is passed off neurons is passed off neurons is passed off to a different brain area. Now, the to a different brain area. Now, the to a different brain area. Now, the neurons themselves don't move from the neurons themselves don't move from the neurons themselves don't move from the hippocampus to the cortex. That doesn't hippocampus to the cortex. That doesn't hippocampus to the cortex. That doesn't happen. What happens is happen. What happens is happen. What happens is the signals, the sequence of electrical the signals, the sequence of electrical the signals, the sequence of electrical firing, much like uh a script uh for a firing, much like uh a script uh for a firing, much like uh a script uh for a movie or the notes on a sheet of paper movie or the notes on a sheet of paper movie or the notes on a sheet of paper uh for a particular musical piece, is uh for a particular musical piece, is uh for a particular musical piece, is transferred off to a different brain transferred off to a different brain transferred off to a different brain area. So, that whole process of really area. So, that whole process of really area. So, that whole process of really leaning into something that's hard, then leaning into something that's hard, then leaning into something that's hard, then it becoming easier, and then eventually it becoming easier, and then eventually it becoming easier, and then eventually that thing becoming more or less that thing becoming more or less that thing becoming more or less reflexive, involves a migration of the reflexive, involves a migration of the reflexive, involves a migration of the information in the brain. information in the brain. information in the brain. And once it's migrated out to a And once it's migrated out to a And once it's migrated out to a different location in the brain, at that different location in the brain, at that different location in the brain, at that point, it's achieved context point, it's achieved context point, it's achieved context independence. It doesn't have to be independence. It doesn't have to be independence. It doesn't have to be bracketed by uh you know, your caffeine bracketed by uh you know, your caffeine bracketed by uh you know, your caffeine and your lunch. It doesn't have to occur and your lunch. It doesn't have to occur and your lunch. It doesn't have to occur uh immediately after your afternoon NSDR, immediately after your afternoon NSDR, immediately after your afternoon NSDR, but before your uh 4:00 meeting on Zoom but before your uh 4:00 meeting on Zoom but before your uh 4:00 meeting on Zoom or something of that sort. So, or something of that sort. So, or something of that sort. So, all this is to say that once something all this is to say that once something all this is to say that once something has become reflexive, has become reflexive, has become reflexive, you should play with it a little bit you should play with it a little bit you should play with it a little bit about time of day. If you want to keep about time of day. If you want to keep about time of day. If you want to keep it in the same phase of day, great. But it in the same phase of day, great. But it in the same phase of day, great. But if you if you if you one day decide you're going to exercise one day decide you're going to exercise one day decide you're going to exercise in the afternoon, next day you decide in the afternoon, next day you decide in the afternoon, next day you decide you're going to exercise in the morning, you're going to exercise in the morning, you're going to exercise in the morning, and that's the habit that you're and that's the habit that you're and that's the habit that you're concerned with, that's terrific. If concerned with, that's terrific. If concerned with, that's terrific. If you're able to do that, that means that you're able to do that, that means that you're able to do that, that means that it's truly achieved context it's truly achieved context it's truly achieved context independence. It means that you have independence. It means that you have independence. It means that you have officially formed that habit. And as I officially formed that habit. And as I officially formed that habit. And as I mentioned earlier, mentioned earlier, mentioned earlier, much earlier at the beginning of the much earlier at the beginning of the much earlier at the beginning of the episode, the strength of a habit is episode, the strength of a habit is episode, the strength of a habit is dictated by how much limbic friction, dictated by how much limbic friction, dictated by how much limbic friction, that was one, and how much context that was one, and how much context that was one, and how much context dependence there is. So, when it doesn't dependence there is. So, when it doesn't dependence there is. So, when it doesn't take much activation energy to get into take much activation energy to get into take much activation energy to get into the execution of that habit, and you can the execution of that habit, and you can the execution of that habit, and you can do it in any context, well, then you do it in any context, well, then you do it in any context, well, then you have formed a habit. We really can't have formed a habit. We really can't have formed a habit. We really can't have a discussion about learning have a discussion about learning have a discussion about learning anything, habits or otherwise, unless we anything, habits or otherwise, unless we anything, habits or otherwise, unless we talk about reward prediction error. talk about reward prediction error. talk about reward prediction error. Reward prediction error is associated Reward prediction error is associated Reward prediction error is associated with the molecule dopamine, although I with the molecule dopamine, although I with the molecule dopamine, although I should say there are other should say there are other should say there are other neurochemicals in our brain and body neurochemicals in our brain and body neurochemicals in our brain and body that are also related to reward that are also related to reward that are also related to reward prediction error. prediction error. prediction error. But reward prediction error But reward prediction error But reward prediction error is a very good system, or I should say a is a very good system, or I should say a is a very good system, or I should say a lens through which to think about lens through which to think about lens through which to think about whether or not we should reward whether or not we should reward whether or not we should reward ourselves for performing a given habit. ourselves for performing a given habit. ourselves for performing a given habit. And this is a much larger discussion And this is a much larger discussion And this is a much larger discussion that actually relates to things like that actually relates to things like that actually relates to things like parenting and self-regulation. You know, parenting and self-regulation. You know, parenting and self-regulation. You know, should we reward kids just for effort? should we reward kids just for effort? should we reward kids just for effort? Should we reward ourselves just for Should we reward ourselves just for Should we reward ourselves just for effort? What should we reward? How much effort? What should we reward? How much effort? What should we reward? How much should we reward ourselves? When should we reward ourselves? When should we reward ourselves? When should we withdraw reward? Should we use we withdraw reward? Should we use we withdraw reward? Should we use punishment? These kinds of things. This punishment? These kinds of things. This punishment? These kinds of things. This is a vast literature. We don't have time is a vast literature. We don't have time is a vast literature. We don't have time to go into all the details. But the to go into all the details. But the to go into all the details. But the notion of reward prediction error is so notion of reward prediction error is so notion of reward prediction error is so powerful that it can predict most, if powerful that it can predict most, if powerful that it can predict most, if not all, forms of learning including not all, forms of learning including not all, forms of learning including habit formation. And you can deploy or habit formation. And you can deploy or habit formation. And you can deploy or use particular features of reward use particular features of reward use particular features of reward prediction error prediction error prediction error if you would like to reinforce or if you would like to reinforce or if you would like to reinforce or accelerate the formation of certain accelerate the formation of certain accelerate the formation of certain habits. So, reward prediction error, reward prediction error, reward prediction error, quite simply, is quite simply, is quite simply, is if you expect a reward and the reward if you expect a reward and the reward if you expect a reward and the reward comes, a particular behavior that was a particular behavior that was a particular behavior that was associated with generating that reward associated with generating that reward associated with generating that reward is more likely to occur again. That's is more likely to occur again. That's is more likely to occur again. That's pretty straightforward. pretty straightforward. pretty straightforward. However, the amount However, the amount However, the amount of reward in the form of this molecule of reward in the form of this molecule of reward in the form of this molecule dopamine that you'll experience is even dopamine that you'll experience is even dopamine that you'll experience is even greater if a reward arrives that's unexpected. if a reward arrives that's unexpected. if a reward arrives that's unexpected. Okay? So, let me repeat that again. If I Okay? So, let me repeat that again. If I Okay? So, let me repeat that again. If I think that something's coming that's think that something's coming that's think that something's coming that's going to be great. That I Let's say I going to be great. That I Let's say I going to be great. That I Let's say I lean into a habit. I manage to override lean into a habit. I manage to override lean into a habit. I manage to override my limbic friction and I'm doing my 45 my limbic friction and I'm doing my 45 my limbic friction and I'm doing my 45 minutes of writing in the morning with minutes of writing in the morning with minutes of writing in the morning with no phone and no internet and I'm getting no phone and no internet and I'm getting no phone and no internet and I'm getting toward the end and I'm anticipating, toward the end and I'm anticipating, toward the end and I'm anticipating, "Huh, I'm actually doing this. This is "Huh, I'm actually doing this. This is "Huh, I'm actually doing this. This is great. I did it. I'm feeling really, great. I did it. I'm feeling really, great. I did it. I'm feeling really, really good." really good." really good." I finish. I definitely will receive a I finish. I definitely will receive a I finish. I definitely will receive a dopamine reward. I'll make my own dopamine reward. I'll make my own dopamine reward. I'll make my own dopamine reward. That's where it comes dopamine reward. That's where it comes dopamine reward. That's where it comes from. Remember, this is all internal. from. Remember, this is all internal. from. Remember, this is all internal. However, I will also receive dopamine reward if I will also receive dopamine reward if I will also receive dopamine reward if unexpectedly something positive happens. unexpectedly something positive happens. unexpectedly something positive happens. And typically, if something unexpected And typically, if something unexpected And typically, if something unexpected but positive happens, the amount of but positive happens, the amount of but positive happens, the amount of dopamine reward that we get is actually dopamine reward that we get is actually dopamine reward that we get is actually much greater than in any other much greater than in any other much greater than in any other conditions. However, it's hard to surprise yourself However, it's hard to surprise yourself However, it's hard to surprise yourself about a behavior that you're about a behavior that you're about a behavior that you're deliberately engaging in. So, that deliberately engaging in. So, that deliberately engaging in. So, that becomes a bit of a tricky one. becomes a bit of a tricky one. becomes a bit of a tricky one. Reward prediction error also says that Reward prediction error also says that Reward prediction error also says that if we expect a reward if we expect a reward if we expect a reward and the reward doesn't come, and the reward doesn't come, and the reward doesn't come, that the pattern of dopamine release that the pattern of dopamine release that the pattern of dopamine release will follow a particular contour. will follow a particular contour. will follow a particular contour. And that contour is very important. And that contour is very important. And that contour is very important. Here's how it goes. Here's how it goes. Here's how it goes. Let's say that I'm Let's say that I'm Let's say that I'm writing and I'm about 30 or 45 minutes writing and I'm about 30 or 45 minutes writing and I'm about 30 or 45 minutes in and I'm thinking, "Oh, this is great. in and I'm thinking, "Oh, this is great. in and I'm thinking, "Oh, this is great. I'm actually I managed to do this. I'm actually I managed to do this. I'm actually I managed to do this. I'm succeeding in uh executing the succeeding in uh executing the succeeding in uh executing the behaviors that I need to in order to behaviors that I need to in order to behaviors that I need to in order to perform this habit. I'm overriding perform this habit. I'm overriding perform this habit. I'm overriding limbic friction." limbic friction." limbic friction." Just that series of thoughts will start Just that series of thoughts will start Just that series of thoughts will start to generate the dopamine release within to generate the dopamine release within to generate the dopamine release within my brain and body. my brain and body. my brain and body. However, if at the 50-minute mark, However, if at the 50-minute mark, However, if at the 50-minute mark, the phone rings and I pick up the phone the phone rings and I pick up the phone the phone rings and I pick up the phone or I break my own protocol, I break my or I break my own protocol, I break my or I break my own protocol, I break my own self-discipline and I own self-discipline and I own self-discipline and I go on and check social media or I do go on and check social media or I do go on and check social media or I do something that takes me out of that, something that takes me out of that, something that takes me out of that, what's going to happen is that my level what's going to happen is that my level what's going to happen is that my level of dopamine is actually going to drop of dopamine is actually going to drop of dopamine is actually going to drop below the baseline, meaning below the below the baseline, meaning below the below the baseline, meaning below the level of dopamine I had before I even level of dopamine I had before I even level of dopamine I had before I even started the habit execution. started the habit execution. started the habit execution. Okay? So, what this is this is a Okay? So, what this is this is a Okay? So, what this is this is a system that predicts whether or not system that predicts whether or not system that predicts whether or not rewards are going to come. rewards are going to come. rewards are going to come. When we think a reward is going to come, When we think a reward is going to come, When we think a reward is going to come, it starts actually arrive earlier in the it starts actually arrive earlier in the it starts actually arrive earlier in the form of dopamine release. This is the form of dopamine release. This is the form of dopamine release. This is the feeling that we experience as in feeling that we experience as in feeling that we experience as in positive anticipation. You tell a kid, positive anticipation. You tell a kid, positive anticipation. You tell a kid, "Hey, we're going to go to the amusement "Hey, we're going to go to the amusement "Hey, we're going to go to the amusement park or we're going to go get ice park or we're going to go get ice park or we're going to go get ice cream." They haven't had the ice cream cream." They haven't had the ice cream cream." They haven't had the ice cream yet. They're not at the amusement park, yet. They're not at the amusement park, yet. They're not at the amusement park, but they're excited. The dopamine but they're excited. The dopamine but they're excited. The dopamine release comes earlier. release comes earlier. release comes earlier. Okay? They get to the amusement park or Okay? They get to the amusement park or Okay? They get to the amusement park or they get the ice cream, they will also they get the ice cream, they will also they get the ice cream, they will also have some dopamine release associated have some dopamine release associated have some dopamine release associated with that. But, most of it, believe it with that. But, most of it, believe it with that. But, most of it, believe it or not, came in the form of the or not, came in the form of the or not, came in the form of the anticipation. And dopamine has some anticipation. And dopamine has some anticipation. And dopamine has some qualities that make the actual ice cream qualities that make the actual ice cream qualities that make the actual ice cream and the actual amusement park experience and the actual amusement park experience and the actual amusement park experience more pleasurable than it would be had more pleasurable than it would be had more pleasurable than it would be had that dopamine release not happen. Now, that dopamine release not happen. Now, that dopamine release not happen. Now, of course, the other way to do it is to of course, the other way to do it is to of course, the other way to do it is to surprise a kid. You tell them, "Listen, surprise a kid. You tell them, "Listen, surprise a kid. You tell them, "Listen, we're going to the we're going to the we're going to the class that you absolutely hate or we're class that you absolutely hate or we're class that you absolutely hate or we're going to go see the person that you going to go see the person that you going to go see the person that you absolutely despise." And then you drive absolutely despise." And then you drive absolutely despise." And then you drive them to the amusement park. That's the them to the amusement park. That's the them to the amusement park. That's the big release of dopamine. big release of dopamine. big release of dopamine. But, reward prediction error also says But, reward prediction error also says But, reward prediction error also says that if you tell the kid or yourself, that if you tell the kid or yourself, that if you tell the kid or yourself, "Okay, we're heading to the amusement "Okay, we're heading to the amusement "Okay, we're heading to the amusement park. We're going to get some ice park. We're going to get some ice park. We're going to get some ice cream." They really, really excite and cream." They really, really excite and cream." They really, really excite and then you get there and it's closed or then you get there and it's closed or then you get there and it's closed or they're not letting any more people in, they're not letting any more people in, they're not letting any more people in, well, then the dopamine level drops way well, then the dopamine level drops way well, then the dopamine level drops way below what it was before you told them below what it was before you told them below what it was before you told them that you were headed there. Okay? I've that you were headed there. Okay? I've that you were headed there. Okay? I've given a number of different examples given a number of different examples given a number of different examples that hopefully make this clear. Reward that hopefully make this clear. Reward that hopefully make this clear. Reward prediction error governs virtually all prediction error governs virtually all prediction error governs virtually all aspects of effort and all aspects of aspects of effort and all aspects of aspects of effort and all aspects of learning. Why? Because when dopamine is learning. Why? Because when dopamine is learning. Why? Because when dopamine is released in the brain and body, the released in the brain and body, the released in the brain and body, the neural circuits of our brain and body neural circuits of our brain and body neural circuits of our brain and body change. There's a state change. Our over change. There's a state change. Our over change. There's a state change. Our over level Our Excuse me, our overall level Our Excuse me, our overall level Our Excuse me, our overall level of energy, but also the sorts of sensory of energy, but also the sorts of sensory of energy, but also the sorts of sensory events that we're paying attention to events that we're paying attention to events that we're paying attention to changes when there's a lot of dopamine changes when there's a lot of dopamine changes when there's a lot of dopamine in our system. in our system. in our system. And you can leverage this for habit And you can leverage this for habit And you can leverage this for habit formation. Think back to task bracketing. Think back to task bracketing. Think back to task bracketing. Think back to limbic friction. Think back to limbic friction. Think back to limbic friction. If you are considering adopting a new If you are considering adopting a new If you are considering adopting a new habit or if you are trying to break a habit or if you are trying to break a habit or if you are trying to break a habit, something we haven't talked too habit, something we haven't talked too habit, something we haven't talked too much about, but we will in a moment, much about, but we will in a moment, much about, but we will in a moment, it's very useful to think not just about it's very useful to think not just about it's very useful to think not just about the procedural aspects of what you're the procedural aspects of what you're the procedural aspects of what you're going to do, but also think about the going to do, but also think about the going to do, but also think about the events that precede and follow that events that precede and follow that events that precede and follow that particular habit and the execution or at particular habit and the execution or at particular habit and the execution or at least the effort to execute that habit. least the effort to execute that habit. least the effort to execute that habit. What you're doing is you're casting a What you're doing is you're casting a What you're doing is you're casting a kind of a spotlight or around a bin of kind of a spotlight or around a bin of kind of a spotlight or around a bin of time or a set of events for which time or a set of events for which time or a set of events for which dopamine can be associated. What does dopamine can be associated. What does dopamine can be associated. What does this look like in the practical sense? this look like in the practical sense? this look like in the practical sense? Well, again, I'll just try and use very Well, again, I'll just try and use very Well, again, I'll just try and use very simple concrete examples, but this could simple concrete examples, but this could simple concrete examples, but this could carry over to anything. Let's say I were carry over to anything. Let's say I were carry over to anything. Let's say I were somebody who has a hard time getting in somebody who has a hard time getting in somebody who has a hard time getting in that 30 to 60 minutes of zone two that 30 to 60 minutes of zone two that 30 to 60 minutes of zone two cardiovascular exercise mid-morning. cardiovascular exercise mid-morning. cardiovascular exercise mid-morning. This is actually an issue for me. I much This is actually an issue for me. I much This is actually an issue for me. I much prefer to do resistance exercise than prefer to do resistance exercise than prefer to do resistance exercise than cardiovascular exercise, although once I cardiovascular exercise, although once I cardiovascular exercise, although once I do it, I always feel much better do it, I always feel much better do it, I always feel much better that I have done it. What I should do is positively What I should do is positively What I should do is positively anticipate the onset and the offset of anticipate the onset and the offset of anticipate the onset and the offset of that session, right? So thinking about that session, right? So thinking about that session, right? So thinking about leaning into the effort, leaning into the effort, leaning into the effort, going out and doing that zone two cardio going out and doing that zone two cardio going out and doing that zone two cardio session, and I should think about how session, and I should think about how session, and I should think about how I'm going to feel after. So not just I'm going to feel after. So not just I'm going to feel after. So not just thinking about how great I'm going to thinking about how great I'm going to thinking about how great I'm going to feel after, but also thinking about how feel after, but also thinking about how feel after, but also thinking about how hard it's going to be at the beginning, hard it's going to be at the beginning, hard it's going to be at the beginning, and then trying to reward myself and then trying to reward myself and then trying to reward myself subjectively for the entire experience. subjectively for the entire experience. subjectively for the entire experience. In other words, start rewarding task In other words, start rewarding task In other words, start rewarding task bracketing in addition to rewarding the bracketing in addition to rewarding the bracketing in addition to rewarding the execution of the habit itself. Now, some execution of the habit itself. Now, some execution of the habit itself. Now, some of you might be saying, "Well, wait, of you might be saying, "Well, wait, of you might be saying, "Well, wait, this is all self-talk. This is just this is all self-talk. This is just this is all self-talk. This is just positive self-talk." But it's not positive self-talk." But it's not positive self-talk." But it's not positive self-talk. It's not saying, "Uh positive self-talk. It's not saying, "Uh positive self-talk. It's not saying, "Uh you know, I feel so great about doing you know, I feel so great about doing you know, I feel so great about doing something that I actually hate." You something that I actually hate." You something that I actually hate." You can't lie to yourself or you're welcome can't lie to yourself or you're welcome can't lie to yourself or you're welcome to lie to yourself, but the neuroscience to lie to yourself, but the neuroscience to lie to yourself, but the neuroscience literature, the literature of growth literature, the literature of growth literature, the literature of growth mindset, all the literature basically of mindset, all the literature basically of mindset, all the literature basically of mindset speaks to the fact that when you mindset speaks to the fact that when you mindset speaks to the fact that when you lie to yourself, you know you're lying, lie to yourself, you know you're lying, lie to yourself, you know you're lying, and you actually set up the opposite of and you actually set up the opposite of and you actually set up the opposite of a reward system. So you have to be a reward system. So you have to be a reward system. So you have to be brutally honest with yourself brutally honest with yourself brutally honest with yourself that, for instance, I don't like that, for instance, I don't like that, for instance, I don't like initiating this cardiovascular exercise, initiating this cardiovascular exercise, initiating this cardiovascular exercise, but I do like the fact that I've done it but I do like the fact that I've done it but I do like the fact that I've done it after I've done it. So what you are after I've done it. So what you are after I've done it. So what you are doing is you are applying reward doing is you are applying reward doing is you are applying reward prediction error to the entire sequence prediction error to the entire sequence prediction error to the entire sequence of things that's involved in getting of things that's involved in getting of things that's involved in getting into the habit execution, getting into the habit execution, getting into the habit execution, getting through the habit execution, and getting through the habit execution, and getting through the habit execution, and getting out of the habit execution. How do you out of the habit execution. How do you out of the habit execution. How do you do this? Well, I take us back to our do this? Well, I take us back to our do this? Well, I take us back to our procedural memory visualization exercise procedural memory visualization exercise procedural memory visualization exercise that we talked about earlier. When I that we talked about earlier. When I that we talked about earlier. When I talked about it in that context, I talked about it in that context, I talked about it in that context, I talked about walking through mentally talked about walking through mentally talked about walking through mentally the series of steps that's required to the series of steps that's required to the series of steps that's required to perform a particular habit. So, in the perform a particular habit. So, in the perform a particular habit. So, in the case of the zone two cardio thing, it case of the zone two cardio thing, it case of the zone two cardio thing, it would be, "Okay, I'm going to put on my would be, "Okay, I'm going to put on my would be, "Okay, I'm going to put on my shoes, then I'm going to head out the shoes, then I'm going to head out the shoes, then I'm going to head out the door, then I'm going to drive up the door, then I'm going to drive up the door, then I'm going to drive up the road." There's a particular canyon near road." There's a particular canyon near road." There's a particular canyon near here that if I'm going to run, I here that if I'm going to run, I here that if I'm going to run, I happen to like running or I don't hate happen to like running or I don't hate happen to like running or I don't hate running enough that I tend to do it. running enough that I tend to do it. running enough that I tend to do it. Going through that, heading back, etc., Going through that, heading back, etc., Going through that, heading back, etc., etc. That's great, but even better would be That's great, but even better would be That's great, but even better would be to broaden the time bin and start to broaden the time bin and start to broaden the time bin and start to positively anticipate the period headed positively anticipate the period headed positively anticipate the period headed into the habit. So, even before you put into the habit. So, even before you put into the habit. So, even before you put on your shoes, the fact that you are on your shoes, the fact that you are on your shoes, the fact that you are successfully placing the habit in, in successfully placing the habit in, in successfully placing the habit in, in this case, phase one of the day, this case, phase one of the day, this case, phase one of the day, and that afterwards I'm going to feel a and that afterwards I'm going to feel a and that afterwards I'm going to feel a particular set of positive benefits, particular set of positive benefits, particular set of positive benefits, elevated mood, etc. I like being hungry elevated mood, etc. I like being hungry elevated mood, etc. I like being hungry and typically after exercise I'm hungry, and typically after exercise I'm hungry, and typically after exercise I'm hungry, so I like being hungry cuz I like so I like being hungry cuz I like so I like being hungry cuz I like eating, and so there's a whole set of eating, and so there's a whole set of eating, and so there's a whole set of things that link up with one another. things that link up with one another. things that link up with one another. So, I'm not just thinking about habit So, I'm not just thinking about habit So, I'm not just thinking about habit execution as this isolated little set of execution as this isolated little set of execution as this isolated little set of events or this little time bin, but events or this little time bin, but events or this little time bin, but rather I'm drawing a larger envelope rather I'm drawing a larger envelope rather I'm drawing a larger envelope around it and starting to positively around it and starting to positively around it and starting to positively associate dopamine reward with that associate dopamine reward with that associate dopamine reward with that larger envelope. And for those of you larger envelope. And for those of you larger envelope. And for those of you that are thinking, "Well, this is just a that are thinking, "Well, this is just a that are thinking, "Well, this is just a psychological trick, you know, you kind psychological trick, you know, you kind psychological trick, you know, you kind of this is sort of like lying to of this is sort of like lying to of this is sort of like lying to yourself." It's not because you're not yourself." It's not because you're not yourself." It's not because you're not actually contradicting the fact that some of this contradicting the fact that some of this contradicting the fact that some of this is unpleasant. What you're doing is unpleasant. What you're doing is unpleasant. What you're doing is you're taking this entire series of you're taking this entire series of you're taking this entire series of events, what I'm calling this kind of events, what I'm calling this kind of events, what I'm calling this kind of time envelope, and you're associating it time envelope, and you're associating it time envelope, and you're associating it with a particular reward that comes with a particular reward that comes with a particular reward that comes later, which for me would be the feeling later, which for me would be the feeling later, which for me would be the feeling that uh you know, that I've completed that uh you know, that I've completed that uh you know, that I've completed this, right? Cuz for me that's usually a this, right? Cuz for me that's usually a this, right? Cuz for me that's usually a good feeling. So, reward prediction good feeling. So, reward prediction good feeling. So, reward prediction error is beautiful not just because it's error is beautiful not just because it's error is beautiful not just because it's a sort of math of anticipation and a sort of math of anticipation and a sort of math of anticipation and reward or a math of anticipation and reward or a math of anticipation and reward or a math of anticipation and disappointment, it's beautiful because disappointment, it's beautiful because disappointment, it's beautiful because you can stretch out or make more narrow you can stretch out or make more narrow you can stretch out or make more narrow the time bins in which reward prediction the time bins in which reward prediction the time bins in which reward prediction error works. Reward prediction error is error works. Reward prediction error is error works. Reward prediction error is the way in which people navigate the way in which people navigate the way in which people navigate four-year degrees, right? I mean, you go four-year degrees, right? I mean, you go four-year degrees, right? I mean, you go sure final exam to final exam, etc. But sure final exam to final exam, etc. But sure final exam to final exam, etc. But ultimately, there's a big payoff at the ultimately, there's a big payoff at the ultimately, there's a big payoff at the end and it's all basically for that big end and it's all basically for that big end and it's all basically for that big payoff. And of course, I understand that it's And of course, I understand that it's And of course, I understand that it's the journey, not the destination, but the journey, not the destination, but the journey, not the destination, but let's face it, for a lot of us, goals let's face it, for a lot of us, goals let's face it, for a lot of us, goals and habits are about achieving some sort and habits are about achieving some sort and habits are about achieving some sort of destination. In the case of zone two of destination. In the case of zone two of destination. In the case of zone two cardio for me, it's about trying to stay cardio for me, it's about trying to stay cardio for me, it's about trying to stay alive for as long as I can, um as long alive for as long as I can, um as long alive for as long as I can, um as long as I can with vitality, that is. And as I can with vitality, that is. And as I can with vitality, that is. And it's also the fact that if I'm doing it's also the fact that if I'm doing it's also the fact that if I'm doing that, I get to eat uh the foods that I that, I get to eat uh the foods that I that, I get to eat uh the foods that I like. I tend to be able to eat more, like. I tend to be able to eat more, like. I tend to be able to eat more, which I happen to really enjoy eating, which I happen to really enjoy eating, which I happen to really enjoy eating, so much so that I'd like it just as an so much so that I'd like it just as an so much so that I'd like it just as an activity. So, basically, what you're activity. So, basically, what you're activity. So, basically, what you're trying to do is not restrict your trying to do is not restrict your trying to do is not restrict your thinking to just the habit that you're thinking to just the habit that you're thinking to just the habit that you're trying to form, but rather to grab a trying to form, but rather to grab a trying to form, but rather to grab a hold of the timing before and after that hold of the timing before and after that hold of the timing before and after that particular habit and start to positively particular habit and start to positively particular habit and start to positively associate reward mechanisms in your associate reward mechanisms in your associate reward mechanisms in your brain with that entire time bin. This is brain with that entire time bin. This is brain with that entire time bin. This is a very useful and very powerful tool in a very useful and very powerful tool in a very useful and very powerful tool in order to form habits. And I should say order to form habits. And I should say order to form habits. And I should say that it's not something that comes that it's not something that comes that it's not something that comes naturally to most people. In fact, even naturally to most people. In fact, even naturally to most people. In fact, even as I describe it, you might find it's a as I describe it, you might find it's a as I describe it, you might find it's a still a little bit abstract. But what I still a little bit abstract. But what I still a little bit abstract. But what I encourage you to do, if you are finding encourage you to do, if you are finding encourage you to do, if you are finding it to be a little bit vague, would be to it to be a little bit vague, would be to it to be a little bit vague, would be to pick the habit that you want to form. pick the habit that you want to form. pick the habit that you want to form. Write down or think about very Write down or think about very Write down or think about very concretely, what is the sequence of concretely, what is the sequence of concretely, what is the sequence of steps involved in the execution of that steps involved in the execution of that steps involved in the execution of that habit? And then write down or think habit? And then write down or think habit? And then write down or think about, what is the sequence of events about, what is the sequence of events about, what is the sequence of events that need to precede that habit? Maybe that need to precede that habit? Maybe that need to precede that habit? Maybe the immediate 10 or 15 minutes before, the immediate 10 or 15 minutes before, the immediate 10 or 15 minutes before, as well as the immediate sequence of as well as the immediate sequence of as well as the immediate sequence of events and or feelings that will occur events and or feelings that will occur events and or feelings that will occur after that habit. And then call the after that habit. And then call the after that habit. And then call the whole thing a habit execution. The whole thing a habit execution. The whole thing a habit execution. The whole thing a thing a thing a effort to engage in that particular effort to engage in that particular effort to engage in that particular habit. And in doing that, and in habit. And in doing that, and in habit. And in doing that, and in positively associating with the idea positively associating with the idea positively associating with the idea that you're going to complete that you're going to complete that you're going to complete that entire sequence, you will engage reward entire sequence, you will engage reward entire sequence, you will engage reward prediction error in the proper way that prediction error in the proper way that prediction error in the proper way that the dopamine surge can lend itself the dopamine surge can lend itself the dopamine surge can lend itself toward motivation. Because, ultimately, toward motivation. Because, ultimately, toward motivation. Because, ultimately, dopamine is not about feeling good, it's dopamine is not about feeling good, it's dopamine is not about feeling good, it's about feeling motivated. This is about feeling motivated. This is about feeling motivated. This is something that I've talked about something that I've talked about something that I've talked about numerous times before, but dopamine, numerous times before, but dopamine, numerous times before, but dopamine, contrary to popular belief, is not a contrary to popular belief, is not a contrary to popular belief, is not a reward molecule as much as it is a reward molecule as much as it is a reward molecule as much as it is a molecule of motivation and drive. And molecule of motivation and drive. And molecule of motivation and drive. And the natural consequence of doing the natural consequence of doing the natural consequence of doing the exercise I just described of writing exercise I just described of writing exercise I just described of writing things out that precede, things out that precede, things out that precede, are involved in the immediate execution are involved in the immediate execution are involved in the immediate execution of the habit, and follow the habit, will of the habit, and follow the habit, will of the habit, and follow the habit, will allow you to experience an increase in allow you to experience an increase in allow you to experience an increase in energy, and thereby an increase in energy, and thereby an increase in energy, and thereby an increase in likelihood that you're going to engage likelihood that you're going to engage likelihood that you're going to engage in that entire sequence of events. And in that entire sequence of events. And in that entire sequence of events. And the reason for that is that dopamine the reason for that is that dopamine the reason for that is that dopamine gives us energy, and the reason for that gives us energy, and the reason for that gives us energy, and the reason for that is that the molecule epinephrine, is that the molecule epinephrine, is that the molecule epinephrine, adrenaline, is actually manufactured adrenaline, is actually manufactured adrenaline, is actually manufactured from dopamine. Biochemically, it comes from dopamine. Biochemically, it comes from dopamine. Biochemically, it comes from dopamine. So, dopamine is powerful, from dopamine. So, dopamine is powerful, from dopamine. So, dopamine is powerful, and you can access more dopamine around and you can access more dopamine around and you can access more dopamine around even habits that you haven't yet formed even habits that you haven't yet formed even habits that you haven't yet formed by taking this broader time envelope and by taking this broader time envelope and by taking this broader time envelope and task bracketing that specific task bracketing that specific task bracketing that specific task execution or habit execution. Way back execution or habit execution. Way back execution or habit execution. Way back at the beginning of the episode, I at the beginning of the episode, I at the beginning of the episode, I promised to you that I would deliver two promised to you that I would deliver two promised to you that I would deliver two programs that are geared towards habit programs that are geared towards habit programs that are geared towards habit formation. And I promised that I would formation. And I promised that I would formation. And I promised that I would give you ways in which you could gauge give you ways in which you could gauge give you ways in which you could gauge whether or not certain habits had moved whether or not certain habits had moved whether or not certain habits had moved from high effort, high effort, high effort, what I call high limbic friction, to what I call high limbic friction, to what I call high limbic friction, to reflexive. We talked about a number of ways to We talked about a number of ways to We talked about a number of ways to gauge that. gauge that. gauge that. In researching this episode, I found a In researching this episode, I found a In researching this episode, I found a tremendous number of different systems tremendous number of different systems tremendous number of different systems for habit formation. It's really amazing for habit formation. It's really amazing for habit formation. It's really amazing how much is out there. There's ones that how much is out there. There's ones that how much is out there. There's ones that 60 days to this, or 21 days to that, or 60 days to this, or 21 days to that, or 60 days to this, or 21 days to that, or 18 days to this. I mean, it's just 18 days to this. I mean, it's just 18 days to this. I mean, it's just rampant in the popular psychology rampant in the popular psychology rampant in the popular psychology literature and in the self-help literature and in the self-help literature and in the self-help literature. I want to spell out a particular system I want to spell out a particular system I want to spell out a particular system that I think could be very useful to that I think could be very useful to that I think could be very useful to most, if not all, people that's most, if not all, people that's most, if not all, people that's rooted in the biology of habit rooted in the biology of habit rooted in the biology of habit formation, rooted in the psychology of formation, rooted in the psychology of formation, rooted in the psychology of habit formation, and that is entirely habit formation, and that is entirely habit formation, and that is entirely compatible with that phase one, phase compatible with that phase one, phase compatible with that phase one, phase two, phase three type program that I two, phase three type program that I two, phase three type program that I talked about earlier, talked about earlier, talked about earlier, but encompasses a bit of a longer time but encompasses a bit of a longer time but encompasses a bit of a longer time scale, and really arrives at a kind of a scale, and really arrives at a kind of a scale, and really arrives at a kind of a system, if you will, system, if you will, system, if you will, for how to build in habits, and then to for how to build in habits, and then to for how to build in habits, and then to test whether or not those habits have test whether or not those habits have test whether or not those habits have really stuck, and whether or not they're really stuck, and whether or not they're really stuck, and whether or not they're likely to stick going forward. And so, likely to stick going forward. And so, likely to stick going forward. And so, this is, at least for sake of this is, at least for sake of this is, at least for sake of this example, a 21-day system. I picked 21 example, a 21-day system. I picked 21 example, a 21-day system. I picked 21 days because that seems to be the days because that seems to be the days because that seems to be the average or most typical system for average or most typical system for average or most typical system for engaging neuroplasticity as it relates engaging neuroplasticity as it relates engaging neuroplasticity as it relates to the formation of new habits. This to the formation of new habits. This to the formation of new habits. This 21-day system actually is one that 21-day system actually is one that 21-day system actually is one that someone I know very well uses, and has someone I know very well uses, and has someone I know very well uses, and has used for a long time. Actually use them used for a long time. Actually use them used for a long time. Actually use them their kids use it as well, and it has a their kids use it as well, and it has a their kids use it as well, and it has a certain elegance to it, and I think as I certain elegance to it, and I think as I certain elegance to it, and I think as I describe it that elegance will describe it that elegance will describe it that elegance will begin to reveal itself. begin to reveal itself. begin to reveal itself. So, basically what this involves is So, basically what this involves is So, basically what this involves is you set out to you set out to you set out to perform six new habits per day perform six new habits per day perform six new habits per day across the course of 21 days. Why six across the course of 21 days. Why six across the course of 21 days. Why six and why 21? Well, we'll talk about that and why 21? Well, we'll talk about that and why 21? Well, we'll talk about that in a moment. But, the idea is you write in a moment. But, the idea is you write in a moment. But, the idea is you write down six things that you would like to down six things that you would like to down six things that you would like to do every day for 21 days. do every day for 21 days. do every day for 21 days. What phase of the day those things fall What phase of the day those things fall What phase of the day those things fall into? Well, that will depend on what into? Well, that will depend on what into? Well, that will depend on what they are and how they relate to those they are and how they relate to those they are and how they relate to those earlier phase one, phase two, phase earlier phase one, phase two, phase earlier phase one, phase two, phase three. But, for now, 21 days, six things three. But, for now, 21 days, six things three. But, for now, 21 days, six things per day. per day. per day. However, the expectation However, the expectation However, the expectation is that you'll only complete four to is that you'll only complete four to is that you'll only complete four to five of those each day. five of those each day. five of those each day. Okay? So, built into this is a kind of Okay? So, built into this is a kind of Okay? So, built into this is a kind of permission to fail, but it's not permission to fail, but it's not permission to fail, but it's not failure, because it turns out that this failure, because it turns out that this failure, because it turns out that this approach to forming habits is based not approach to forming habits is based not approach to forming habits is based not so much on the specific habits that so much on the specific habits that so much on the specific habits that you're trying to form, you're trying to form, you're trying to form, but the habit of performing habits, but the habit of performing habits, but the habit of performing habits, right? It's the habit of doing a certain right? It's the habit of doing a certain right? It's the habit of doing a certain number of things per day. number of things per day. number of things per day. So, you set out to perform six. Now, So, you set out to perform six. Now, So, you set out to perform six. Now, another reason for not necessarily another reason for not necessarily another reason for not necessarily performing all six is that some performing all six is that some performing all six is that some activities probably shouldn't be activities probably shouldn't be activities probably shouldn't be performed each day. For instance, in my performed each day. For instance, in my performed each day. For instance, in my case, if I were to weight train or even case, if I were to weight train or even case, if I were to weight train or even run every day, I'm of the sort or my run every day, I'm of the sort or my run every day, I'm of the sort or my biology is of the sort that I don't biology is of the sort that I don't biology is of the sort that I don't recover so well. So, I wouldn't want to recover so well. So, I wouldn't want to recover so well. So, I wouldn't want to do resistance training every day, but I do resistance training every day, but I do resistance training every day, but I might want to do it 4 days a week for might want to do it 4 days a week for might want to do it 4 days a week for instance. So, by having six things in instance. So, by having six things in instance. So, by having six things in that list, I could shuffle out that list, I could shuffle out that list, I could shuffle out that particular activity on particular days particular activity on particular days particular activity on particular days of the week and simply do four or five of the week and simply do four or five of the week and simply do four or five other activities. So, 21 days, you list other activities. So, 21 days, you list other activities. So, 21 days, you list out four to five things. So, it might be out four to five things. So, it might be out four to five things. So, it might be zone two cardio, resistance training, zone two cardio, resistance training, zone two cardio, resistance training, sunlight viewing, sunlight viewing, sunlight viewing, um writing. Uh it could be journaling, it writing. Uh it could be journaling, it writing. Uh it could be journaling, it could be learning a language, could be learning a language, could be learning a language, mathematics. Again, this is going to mathematics. Again, this is going to mathematics. Again, this is going to vary depending on your particular goals vary depending on your particular goals vary depending on your particular goals and the habits that you're trying to and the habits that you're trying to and the habits that you're trying to create. But, no more than six and the create. But, no more than six and the create. But, no more than six and the expectation is that you're not going to expectation is that you're not going to expectation is that you're not going to perform more than four to five. perform more than four to five. perform more than four to five. If you miss a day, meaning you don't If you miss a day, meaning you don't If you miss a day, meaning you don't perform four to five things, there is no perform four to five things, there is no perform four to five things, there is no punishment. And in fact, it's important punishment. And in fact, it's important punishment. And in fact, it's important that you don't actually try and do what that you don't actually try and do what that you don't actually try and do what in the literature is called a habit slip in the literature is called a habit slip in the literature is called a habit slip compensation, which is just fancy compensation, which is just fancy compensation, which is just fancy psychological language for if you screw psychological language for if you screw psychological language for if you screw up and you don't get up and you don't get up and you don't get all four or five in one day, you don't all four or five in one day, you don't all four or five in one day, you don't do eight the next day in order to do eight the next day in order to do eight the next day in order to compensate. This actually brings me back to an This actually brings me back to an This actually brings me back to an example I had from graduate school. I example I had from graduate school. I example I had from graduate school. I remember when I started graduate school remember when I started graduate school remember when I started graduate school feeling very excited, but a little bit very excited, but a little bit very excited, but a little bit overwhelmed by the amount of things that overwhelmed by the amount of things that overwhelmed by the amount of things that I had to do because I had to both do I had to do because I had to both do I had to do because I had to both do research. I was doing course coursework research. I was doing course coursework research. I was doing course coursework at the time. Graduate student stipends at the time. Graduate student stipends at the time. Graduate student stipends and still now unfortunately were uh and still now unfortunately were uh and still now unfortunately were uh depressingly low. So, it was financially depressingly low. So, it was financially depressingly low. So, it was financially stressful. There were a number of things stressful. There were a number of things stressful. There were a number of things happening and I remember a happening and I remember a happening and I remember a neurologist, this was at UC Berkeley. neurologist, this was at UC Berkeley. neurologist, this was at UC Berkeley. It's really fantastic scientist and It's really fantastic scientist and It's really fantastic scientist and person. His name is Bob Knight. Some of person. His name is Bob Knight. Some of person. His name is Bob Knight. Some of you may know him. you may know him. you may know him. I remember he I went to him and I asked, I remember he I went to him and I asked, I remember he I went to him and I asked, you know, what is the process by which you know, what is the process by which you know, what is the process by which someone actually navigates graduate someone actually navigates graduate someone actually navigates graduate school successfully? And and he said, school successfully? And and he said, school successfully? And and he said, "Listen, you don't want to do anything "Listen, you don't want to do anything "Listen, you don't want to do anything or engage in a routine in any way that or engage in a routine in any way that or engage in a routine in any way that you can't keep up consistently for at you can't keep up consistently for at you can't keep up consistently for at least five and ideally six days per least five and ideally six days per least five and ideally six days per week." I thought, "Oh, that's pretty week." I thought, "Oh, that's pretty week." I thought, "Oh, that's pretty good." And he said, "Every four or five good." And he said, "Every four or five good." And he said, "Every four or five years, you might have to update that, years, you might have to update that, years, you might have to update that, but you need to decide what you can do but you need to decide what you can do but you need to decide what you can do consistently, what you can do every day consistently, what you can do every day consistently, what you can do every day or at least six days a week or five days or at least six days a week or five days or at least six days a week or five days a week. And that was very, very useful a week. And that was very, very useful a week. And that was very, very useful to me. And it fits well with this notion to me. And it fits well with this notion to me. And it fits well with this notion of habit slips that if you happen to of habit slips that if you happen to of habit slips that if you happen to screw up and not be able to engage in screw up and not be able to engage in screw up and not be able to engage in whatever habits you're trying to learn whatever habits you're trying to learn whatever habits you're trying to learn for whatever reason, that the next day for whatever reason, that the next day for whatever reason, that the next day you just get right back on the on the you just get right back on the on the you just get right back on the on the horse, so to speak. horse, so to speak. horse, so to speak. However, there's a really interesting However, there's a really interesting However, there's a really interesting feature from the neuroscience literature feature from the neuroscience literature feature from the neuroscience literature and from the psychology literature that and from the psychology literature that and from the psychology literature that says that chunking this 21 days into says that chunking this 21 days into says that chunking this 21 days into two-day bins can be very, very useful. two-day bins can be very, very useful. two-day bins can be very, very useful. While it is true that the unit of the While it is true that the unit of the While it is true that the unit of the day that our cells use is a circadian day that our cells use is a circadian day that our cells use is a circadian one, a 24-hour clock, one, a 24-hour clock, one, a 24-hour clock, there does seem to be something powerful there does seem to be something powerful there does seem to be something powerful about engaging in particular habits in a about engaging in particular habits in a about engaging in particular habits in a particular sequence particular sequence particular sequence for two days in a row and then for two days in a row and then for two days in a row and then resetting. So, thinking, "Okay, I can do resetting. So, thinking, "Okay, I can do resetting. So, thinking, "Okay, I can do this for a day, and if I can do it for a this for a day, and if I can do it for a this for a day, and if I can do it for a day, I can probably do it for two days." day, I can probably do it for two days." day, I can probably do it for two days." And then resetting. So, every two days And then resetting. So, every two days And then resetting. So, every two days you're resetting. So, you're chunking you're resetting. So, you're chunking you're resetting. So, you're chunking this 21 days into a series of two-day this 21 days into a series of two-day this 21 days into a series of two-day bins in which you are trying to perform bins in which you are trying to perform bins in which you are trying to perform four to five new habits and then four to five new habits and then four to five new habits and then completing that 21 days. completing that 21 days. completing that 21 days. Now, everything I've described about Now, everything I've described about Now, everything I've described about this 21-day program with six things that this 21-day program with six things that this 21-day program with six things that you're trying to do as new habits and you're trying to do as new habits and you're trying to do as new habits and only performing four to five and not only performing four to five and not only performing four to five and not compensating, etc., compensating, etc., compensating, etc., there's nothing neuroscientifically there's nothing neuroscientifically there's nothing neuroscientifically unique about it, unique about it, unique about it, except for the fact except for the fact except for the fact that it's not just 21 days broken up that it's not just 21 days broken up that it's not just 21 days broken up into two-day chunks. into two-day chunks. into two-day chunks. After 21 days, you stop engaging in this After 21 days, you stop engaging in this After 21 days, you stop engaging in this 21-day deliberate four to five things 21-day deliberate four to five things 21-day deliberate four to five things per day type schedule. per day type schedule. per day type schedule. And you simply go into autopilot. You And you simply go into autopilot. You And you simply go into autopilot. You ask yourself how many of those ask yourself how many of those ask yourself how many of those particular habits that I was particular habits that I was particular habits that I was deliberately trying to learn in the deliberately trying to learn in the deliberately trying to learn in the previous 21 days previous 21 days previous 21 days are automatically incorporated into my are automatically incorporated into my are automatically incorporated into my schedule? How many of them am I schedule? How many of them am I schedule? How many of them am I naturally doing? In other words, every naturally doing? In other words, every naturally doing? In other words, every 21 days you don't update and start 21 days you don't update and start 21 days you don't update and start adding new habits. You simply try and adding new habits. You simply try and adding new habits. You simply try and maintain the ones that you've built in maintain the ones that you've built in maintain the ones that you've built in that first 21 days. And this I think is that first 21 days. And this I think is that first 21 days. And this I think is extremely important because in all of extremely important because in all of extremely important because in all of the habit literature that I could find, the habit literature that I could find, the habit literature that I could find, sure there was a lot of psychological sure there was a lot of psychological sure there was a lot of psychological data, neuroscience data, behavioral data, neuroscience data, behavioral data, neuroscience data, behavioral science data around here's how you form science data around here's how you form science data around here's how you form a habit, here's how you break a habit. a habit, here's how you break a habit. a habit, here's how you break a habit. There was even some kind of tests for There was even some kind of tests for There was even some kind of tests for whether or not a habit had whether or not a habit had whether or not a habit had really achieved context independence, really achieved context independence, really achieved context independence, whether or not it was a strongly formed whether or not it was a strongly formed whether or not it was a strongly formed habit. But there wasn't a lot of habit. But there wasn't a lot of habit. But there wasn't a lot of information at least by my search of information at least by my search of information at least by my search of what to do once you've formed a habit what to do once you've formed a habit what to do once you've formed a habit and how to evaluate whether or not that and how to evaluate whether or not that and how to evaluate whether or not that habit is likely to persist long into the is likely to persist long into the is likely to persist long into the future. So, here's the idea. So, here's the idea. So, here's the idea. You set out these six things that you You set out these six things that you You set out these six things that you would like to learn or that you would like to learn or that you would like to learn or that you would like to acquire in your life, these like to acquire in your life, these like to acquire in your life, these habits. You only expect that you're going to You only expect that you're going to You only expect that you're going to perform four or five each day. You do perform four or five each day. You do perform four or five each day. You do that for 21 days. Again, if you miss a that for 21 days. Again, if you miss a that for 21 days. Again, if you miss a day, you just hop right back on the next day, you just hop right back on the next day, you just hop right back on the next day. However, you should think about the day. However, you should think about the day. However, you should think about the functional units within this 21 one-day functional units within this 21 one-day functional units within this 21 one-day period as two days. You can try and nail period as two days. You can try and nail period as two days. You can try and nail four to five of these things for two four to five of these things for two four to five of these things for two days. If you happen to get all six, days. If you happen to get all six, days. If you happen to get all six, great, but that's not necessarily great, but that's not necessarily great, but that's not necessarily required. So, you can do it two days, required. So, you can do it two days, required. So, you can do it two days, then reset, two days, then reset, two then reset, two days, then reset, two then reset, two days, then reset, two days. And then in the next 21 days, days. And then in the next 21 days, days. And then in the next 21 days, you're not trying to acquire any new you're not trying to acquire any new you're not trying to acquire any new habits. You're not going to throw in six habits. You're not going to throw in six habits. You're not going to throw in six more habits that you want to learn. more habits that you want to learn. more habits that you want to learn. You're simply going to assess how well, You're simply going to assess how well, You're simply going to assess how well, how deeply you've rewired your nervous how deeply you've rewired your nervous how deeply you've rewired your nervous system to be able to perform system to be able to perform system to be able to perform those six habits of the previous 21 those six habits of the previous 21 those six habits of the previous 21 days. And this is extremely useful, I believe, And this is extremely useful, I believe, And this is extremely useful, I believe, because it will allow you to assess whether or it will allow you to assess whether or it will allow you to assess whether or not you can indeed make room, if you not you can indeed make room, if you not you can indeed make room, if you even have room, I should say, for even have room, I should say, for even have room, I should say, for more habits. Right? Many people are more habits. Right? Many people are more habits. Right? Many people are trying to cram so many new behaviors trying to cram so many new behaviors trying to cram so many new behaviors into their nervous system that they into their nervous system that they into their nervous system that they don't stand a chance of learning all don't stand a chance of learning all don't stand a chance of learning all those behaviors. What you may find is those behaviors. What you may find is those behaviors. What you may find is that you kept up two of those things that you kept up two of those things that you kept up two of those things very consistently throughout the 21 very consistently throughout the 21 very consistently throughout the 21 days. And perhaps there was one of them days. And perhaps there was one of them days. And perhaps there was one of them that you did sporadically. And that you did sporadically. And that you did sporadically. And that there were three others that frankly you there were three others that frankly you there were three others that frankly you didn't manage to execute. You may also didn't manage to execute. You may also didn't manage to execute. You may also be one of these people, one of these be one of these people, one of these be one of these people, one of these mutants that sets out to do six new mutants that sets out to do six new mutants that sets out to do six new things per day for 21 days and performs things per day for 21 days and performs things per day for 21 days and performs every single one of them. Terrific, more every single one of them. Terrific, more every single one of them. Terrific, more power to you. In that case, for the power to you. In that case, for the power to you. In that case, for the following 21 days, following 21 days, following 21 days, let's see whether or not you can let's see whether or not you can let's see whether or not you can continue to perform those very same six continue to perform those very same six continue to perform those very same six things every day for 21 days. And then, things every day for 21 days. And then, things every day for 21 days. And then, and only then, would you want to add and only then, would you want to add and only then, would you want to add more habits in. So, you could repeat more habits in. So, you could repeat more habits in. So, you could repeat this 21-day process, you know, 21 days this 21-day process, you know, 21 days this 21-day process, you know, 21 days of new habit, 21 days of testing of new habit, 21 days of testing of new habit, 21 days of testing those new habits as whether or not those new habits as whether or not those new habits as whether or not they're reflexive or not. You could do they're reflexive or not. You could do they're reflexive or not. You could do that uh forever if you wanted. But, the that uh forever if you wanted. But, the that uh forever if you wanted. But, the idea is that this isn't something that idea is that this isn't something that idea is that this isn't something that you're doing all year long. It's that you're doing all year long. It's that you're doing all year long. It's that you perhaps starting the new year, or you perhaps starting the new year, or you perhaps starting the new year, or regardless of when you're listening to regardless of when you're listening to regardless of when you're listening to this, you set out to make that 21-day this, you set out to make that 21-day this, you set out to make that 21-day really the stimulus period in which the really the stimulus period in which the really the stimulus period in which the habits get wired in. And then the habits get wired in. And then the habits get wired in. And then the following month, and maybe even the following month, and maybe even the following month, and maybe even the following months, or periods of 21 days, following months, or periods of 21 days, following months, or periods of 21 days, are really the kind of thermometer, the are really the kind of thermometer, the are really the kind of thermometer, the test bed of how well you've embedded test bed of how well you've embedded test bed of how well you've embedded those particular habits. And if indeed those particular habits. And if indeed those particular habits. And if indeed you want to continue to add new habits, you want to continue to add new habits, you want to continue to add new habits, or you find that certain habits that you or you find that certain habits that you or you find that certain habits that you weren't able to embed in your nervous weren't able to embed in your nervous weren't able to embed in your nervous system and make reflexive, you want to system and make reflexive, you want to system and make reflexive, you want to then bring those in, fantastic. But, then bring those in, fantastic. But, then bring those in, fantastic. But, it's only once you've achieved all those it's only once you've achieved all those it's only once you've achieved all those six habits as reflexive that you would six habits as reflexive that you would six habits as reflexive that you would move forward. And I think this sort of move forward. And I think this sort of move forward. And I think this sort of system, while it could have been system, while it could have been system, while it could have been replaced with many other different replaced with many other different replaced with many other different systems. Again, there's nothing wholly systems. Again, there's nothing wholly systems. Again, there's nothing wholly about the system. But, this particular about the system. But, this particular about the system. But, this particular system has a number of features, the system has a number of features, the system has a number of features, the lack of compensation for missed days, lack of compensation for missed days, lack of compensation for missed days, the fact that it's a fairly the fact that it's a fairly the fact that it's a fairly high-intensity program for 21 days, but high-intensity program for 21 days, but high-intensity program for 21 days, but then you test yourself, a kind of a then you test yourself, a kind of a then you test yourself, a kind of a competition test with yourself, if you competition test with yourself, if you competition test with yourself, if you will. Those features, and the fact that habit Those features, and the fact that habit Those features, and the fact that habit slips, missing of particular habits, and slips, missing of particular habits, and slips, missing of particular habits, and not doing all six, is kind of built into not doing all six, is kind of built into not doing all six, is kind of built into the system, I think makes it a very the system, I think makes it a very the system, I think makes it a very reasonable one. It's very uh adaptable reasonable one. It's very uh adaptable reasonable one. It's very uh adaptable to the real world. And I think it's one to the real world. And I think it's one to the real world. And I think it's one that provided you obey the that provided you obey the that provided you obey the phase one, phase two, phase three type phase one, phase two, phase three type phase one, phase two, phase three type system that we talked about earlier, you system that we talked about earlier, you system that we talked about earlier, you collapse these two programs um with one collapse these two programs um with one collapse these two programs um with one another, which hopefully will be easy another, which hopefully will be easy another, which hopefully will be easy based on the descriptions I've given. based on the descriptions I've given. based on the descriptions I've given. Well, if you do that, I think there's a Well, if you do that, I think there's a Well, if you do that, I think there's a very high probability that the habits very high probability that the habits very high probability that the habits that you try and form will achieve this that you try and form will achieve this that you try and form will achieve this context dependence and that it will take context dependence and that it will take context dependence and that it will take progressively less and less limbic progressively less and less limbic progressively less and less limbic friction to perform them. Thus far, friction to perform them. Thus far, friction to perform them. Thus far, we've almost exclusively been discussing we've almost exclusively been discussing we've almost exclusively been discussing how to form habits. But what about how to form habits. But what about how to form habits. But what about breaking habits? Certainly, many people breaking habits? Certainly, many people breaking habits? Certainly, many people out there would like to break habits out there would like to break habits out there would like to break habits that they feel don't serve them well. that they feel don't serve them well. that they feel don't serve them well. One of the challenges in breaking habits One of the challenges in breaking habits One of the challenges in breaking habits is that many habits occur very, very is that many habits occur very, very is that many habits occur very, very quickly. And so, there isn't an quickly. And so, there isn't an quickly. And so, there isn't an opportunity to intervene until the habit opportunity to intervene until the habit opportunity to intervene until the habit has already been initiated and in some has already been initiated and in some has already been initiated and in some cases completed. cases completed. cases completed. Well, there are a couple of tools that Well, there are a couple of tools that Well, there are a couple of tools that neuroscience and psychology tell us can neuroscience and psychology tell us can neuroscience and psychology tell us can be very beneficial. be very beneficial. be very beneficial. Some of those things are somewhat Some of those things are somewhat Some of those things are somewhat intuitive and relate to what I call intuitive and relate to what I call intuitive and relate to what I call foundational practices, meaning things foundational practices, meaning things foundational practices, meaning things that set the overall tone in your body that set the overall tone in your body that set the overall tone in your body and brain such that you would be less and brain such that you would be less and brain such that you would be less likely to engage in a particular habit likely to engage in a particular habit likely to engage in a particular habit or that would raise your level of or that would raise your level of or that would raise your level of awareness both of your situation and to awareness both of your situation and to awareness both of your situation and to how you feel inside. So, things like how you feel inside. So, things like how you feel inside. So, things like stress reduction, things like getting stress reduction, things like getting stress reduction, things like getting good sleep, things like quality good sleep, things like quality good sleep, things like quality nutrition, things like having positive nutrition, things like having positive nutrition, things like having positive routines arranged throughout your day, routines arranged throughout your day, routines arranged throughout your day, all of those, of course, will support all of those, of course, will support all of those, of course, will support you in trying to break particular you in trying to break particular you in trying to break particular habits. And while that can be very habits. And while that can be very habits. And while that can be very useful, it's admittedly very generic useful, it's admittedly very generic useful, it's admittedly very generic advice. It doesn't point to any one advice. It doesn't point to any one advice. It doesn't point to any one specific protocol. In order to identify specific protocol. In order to identify specific protocol. In order to identify a specific protocol that one could apply a specific protocol that one could apply a specific protocol that one could apply in order to break habits, we have to in order to break habits, we have to in order to break habits, we have to look at the mirror image of the sort of look at the mirror image of the sort of look at the mirror image of the sort of neuroplasticity that we talked about at neuroplasticity that we talked about at neuroplasticity that we talked about at the beginning of the episode. the beginning of the episode. the beginning of the episode. At the beginning of the episode, we At the beginning of the episode, we At the beginning of the episode, we talked about a form of neuroplasticity talked about a form of neuroplasticity talked about a form of neuroplasticity called long-term potentiation involving called long-term potentiation involving called long-term potentiation involving the NMDA receptor. the NMDA receptor. the NMDA receptor. Just to refresh your memory a little Just to refresh your memory a little Just to refresh your memory a little bit, it basically says that if a set of bit, it basically says that if a set of bit, it basically says that if a set of neurons is very electrically active, neurons is very electrically active, neurons is very electrically active, it's likely that over time those neurons it's likely that over time those neurons it's likely that over time those neurons will communicate with themselves more will communicate with themselves more will communicate with themselves more easily because of changes in things like NMDA because of changes in things like NMDA because of changes in things like NMDA receptor activity, the recruitment of receptor activity, the recruitment of receptor activity, the recruitment of additional receptors, etc. It's additional receptors, etc. It's additional receptors, etc. It's essentially a cellular and molecular essentially a cellular and molecular essentially a cellular and molecular explanation for how something goes from explanation for how something goes from explanation for how something goes from unlearned to learned to reflexive. Now, unlearned to learned to reflexive. Now, unlearned to learned to reflexive. Now, in order to break synapses or to break in order to break synapses or to break in order to break synapses or to break apart neural connections that are apart neural connections that are apart neural connections that are serving a habit that you don't want to serving a habit that you don't want to serving a habit that you don't want to engage in, engage in, engage in, we need to engage the process called we need to engage the process called we need to engage the process called long-term depression. And long-term depression. And long-term depression. And long-term depression has nothing to do with a depression has nothing to do with a depression has nothing to do with a state of mental depression or a state of mental depression or a state of mental depression or a reduction in mood. So, I really want to reduction in mood. So, I really want to reduction in mood. So, I really want to be clear that when I say depression in be clear that when I say depression in be clear that when I say depression in this context, it has nothing to do with this context, it has nothing to do with this context, it has nothing to do with psychological depression. It has nothing psychological depression. It has nothing psychological depression. It has nothing to do with mood. It's simply called to do with mood. It's simply called to do with mood. It's simply called long-term depression because just as long-term depression because just as long-term depression because just as long-term potentiation says, if neuron A long-term potentiation says, if neuron A long-term potentiation says, if neuron A triggers the firing of neuron B and it triggers the firing of neuron B and it triggers the firing of neuron B and it does so very robustly over and over and does so very robustly over and over and does so very robustly over and over and over again, then neuron A will not have over again, then neuron A will not have over again, then neuron A will not have to fire as intensely or as frequently in to fire as intensely or as frequently in to fire as intensely or as frequently in order to activate neuron B in the future order to activate neuron B in the future order to activate neuron B in the future because they become potentiated, right? because they become potentiated, right? because they become potentiated, right? The threshold for co-activation has been The threshold for co-activation has been The threshold for co-activation has been reduced. There's a much higher reduced. There's a much higher reduced. There's a much higher probability that they will be activated probability that they will be activated probability that they will be activated together at low levels of intensity. together at low levels of intensity. together at low levels of intensity. That's essentially what long-term That's essentially what long-term That's essentially what long-term potentiation is. Long-term depression potentiation is. Long-term depression potentiation is. Long-term depression says that if neuron A is active and says that if neuron A is active and says that if neuron A is active and neuron B is not active within a neuron B is not active within a neuron B is not active within a particular time window, then the particular time window, then the particular time window, then the connection between neuron A and B will connection between neuron A and B will connection between neuron A and B will weaken over time even if they started weaken over time even if they started weaken over time even if they started off very strongly connected. Okay? So, off very strongly connected. Okay? So, off very strongly connected. Okay? So, I'm going to repeat because this is I'm going to repeat because this is I'm going to repeat because this is pretty detailed neurobiological pretty detailed neurobiological pretty detailed neurobiological mechanism whereby if neuron A is active mechanism whereby if neuron A is active mechanism whereby if neuron A is active and neuron B is active but at a and neuron B is active but at a and neuron B is active but at a different time or outside of particular different time or outside of particular different time or outside of particular what we call temporal window, meaning what we call temporal window, meaning what we call temporal window, meaning outside a particular time window, then outside a particular time window, then outside a particular time window, then through long-term depression, the through long-term depression, the through long-term depression, the connection between neuron A and neuron B connection between neuron A and neuron B connection between neuron A and neuron B will weaken. And just will weaken. And just will weaken. And just as a point of interest, the NMDA as a point of interest, the NMDA as a point of interest, the NMDA receptor is also involved in long-term receptor is also involved in long-term receptor is also involved in long-term depression, although there are other depression, although there are other depression, although there are other molecular components involved as well. molecular components involved as well. molecular components involved as well. So, how do you take two neurons that So, how do you take two neurons that So, how do you take two neurons that underlie a habit out of synchrony? How underlie a habit out of synchrony? How underlie a habit out of synchrony? How do you get them to fire asynchronously? do you get them to fire asynchronously? do you get them to fire asynchronously? This is pretty interesting with respect This is pretty interesting with respect This is pretty interesting with respect to the cellular molecular biology, but to the cellular molecular biology, but to the cellular molecular biology, but at the behavioral level, it's especially at the behavioral level, it's especially at the behavioral level, it's especially interesting. The way that one would do interesting. The way that one would do interesting. The way that one would do this is, let's say for instance, you this is, let's say for instance, you this is, let's say for instance, you have a habit of have a habit of have a habit of picking up your phone mid work session, picking up your phone mid work session, picking up your phone mid work session, okay? That's a reflexive habit I think okay? That's a reflexive habit I think okay? That's a reflexive habit I think that most people have experienced. that most people have experienced. that most people have experienced. And we often hear the idea that, oh, you And we often hear the idea that, oh, you And we often hear the idea that, oh, you know, the phone is so filled with access know, the phone is so filled with access know, the phone is so filled with access to dopamine and incredible things that to dopamine and incredible things that to dopamine and incredible things that we're just drawn to it. But, if you we're just drawn to it. But, if you we're just drawn to it. But, if you notice what's happened with phone use notice what's happened with phone use notice what's happened with phone use over time, most people, including myself over time, most people, including myself over time, most people, including myself sometimes, I admit, find ourselves just sometimes, I admit, find ourselves just sometimes, I admit, find ourselves just looking at our phone or find ourselves looking at our phone or find ourselves looking at our phone or find ourselves in a particular app without actually in a particular app without actually in a particular app without actually having engaged in the conscious set of having engaged in the conscious set of having engaged in the conscious set of steps of, oh, I'm really curious what's steps of, oh, I'm really curious what's steps of, oh, I'm really curious what's going on in this particular app. I'm going on in this particular app. I'm going on in this particular app. I'm really curious what's going on in this really curious what's going on in this really curious what's going on in this particular website, and you just kind of particular website, and you just kind of particular website, and you just kind of find yourself, in air quotes, uh, for find yourself, in air quotes, uh, for find yourself, in air quotes, uh, for those of you listening, I'm making air those of you listening, I'm making air those of you listening, I'm making air quotes. You just sort of find yourself doing it You just sort of find yourself doing it You just sort of find yourself doing it because of the behavior of picking up because of the behavior of picking up because of the behavior of picking up your phone is sort of reflexive or has your phone is sort of reflexive or has your phone is sort of reflexive or has become fully reflexive. You see this a become fully reflexive. You see this a become fully reflexive. You see this a lot at meals where multiple people are lot at meals where multiple people are lot at meals where multiple people are there, and no one's looking at their there, and no one's looking at their there, and no one's looking at their phone, and then all of a sudden someone phone, and then all of a sudden someone phone, and then all of a sudden someone takes out their phone, and you'll notice takes out their phone, and you'll notice takes out their phone, and you'll notice that other people just naturally take that other people just naturally take that other people just naturally take out their phone. It's this kind of, um, out their phone. It's this kind of, um, out their phone. It's this kind of, um, observed, uh, observation-induced observed, uh, observation-induced observed, uh, observation-induced reflex. And I would wager that most reflex. And I would wager that most reflex. And I would wager that most people aren't consciously aware of the people aren't consciously aware of the people aren't consciously aware of the immediate steps involved. So, immediate steps involved. So, immediate steps involved. So, the literature says there are a number the literature says there are a number the literature says there are a number of ways to break these sorts of habitual of ways to break these sorts of habitual of ways to break these sorts of habitual behaviors or reflexive behaviors. behaviors or reflexive behaviors. behaviors or reflexive behaviors. Most of those approaches involve Most of those approaches involve Most of those approaches involve establishing some sort of reward for not establishing some sort of reward for not establishing some sort of reward for not performing the activity performing the activity performing the activity or some sort of punishment for forming or some sort of punishment for forming or some sort of punishment for forming the activity. I've heard of, um, some the activity. I've heard of, um, some the activity. I've heard of, um, some basic things that people will do like basic things that people will do like basic things that people will do like they'll even put like a rubber band on they'll even put like a rubber band on they'll even put like a rubber band on their wrist, and And time they complain their wrist, and And time they complain their wrist, and And time they complain or, um, every time they do some behavior or, um, every time they do some behavior or, um, every time they do some behavior like pick up their phone, they'll give like pick up their phone, they'll give like pick up their phone, they'll give themselves a snap on the wrist. The themselves a snap on the wrist. The themselves a snap on the wrist. The rationale there is that you're trying to rationale there is that you're trying to rationale there is that you're trying to create a somatic a very physical create a somatic a very physical create a somatic a very physical representation of something that makes representation of something that makes representation of something that makes it very real and harder to overlook. it very real and harder to overlook. it very real and harder to overlook. Other people will just do a tick mark on Other people will just do a tick mark on Other people will just do a tick mark on a piece of paper. The sort of a piece of paper. The sort of a piece of paper. The sort of what gets measured is what gets managed what gets measured is what gets managed what gets measured is what gets managed kind of mindset where if every time you kind of mindset where if every time you kind of mindset where if every time you do something, you take away the do something, you take away the do something, you take away the judgment. This is very new agey, I judgment. This is very new agey, I judgment. This is very new agey, I realize, but this is what you find out realize, but this is what you find out realize, but this is what you find out there if you search the literature there if you search the literature there if you search the literature even on PubMed peer-reviewed articles even on PubMed peer-reviewed articles even on PubMed peer-reviewed articles that every time you engage in a that every time you engage in a that every time you engage in a behavior, you just measure the fact that behavior, you just measure the fact that behavior, you just measure the fact that you that you that you that you did that behavior. You just mark it down did that behavior. You just mark it down did that behavior. You just mark it down at the end of the day. People are at the end of the day. People are at the end of the day. People are supposed to look at that and say, "Oh my supposed to look at that and say, "Oh my supposed to look at that and say, "Oh my goodness, I can't believe that I spent goodness, I can't believe that I spent goodness, I can't believe that I spent you know, 3 hours doing something or I you know, 3 hours doing something or I you know, 3 hours doing something or I did it 46 times." And in fact, a lot of did it 46 times." And in fact, a lot of did it 46 times." And in fact, a lot of apps, social media apps will start to apps, social media apps will start to apps, social media apps will start to give you warnings now if you opt in that give you warnings now if you opt in that give you warnings now if you opt in that you've been on the app for an hour. you've been on the app for an hour. you've been on the app for an hour. Would you like to leave? Most people Would you like to leave? Most people Would you like to leave? Most people just click right past it and go back in. just click right past it and go back in. just click right past it and go back in. I think very few people I think very few people I think very few people say, "Oh my goodness, it's been an hour say, "Oh my goodness, it's been an hour say, "Oh my goodness, it's been an hour and therefore you're right. I absolutely and therefore you're right. I absolutely and therefore you're right. I absolutely shouldn't engage in this anymore." It's shouldn't engage in this anymore." It's shouldn't engage in this anymore." It's just far too easy to just blow past just far too easy to just blow past just far too easy to just blow past those reminders. those reminders. those reminders. Well, the literature on habit formation and the literature on habit formation and the literature on habit formation and habit reduction, breaking habits, has been reduction, breaking habits, has been reduction, breaking habits, has been analyzed. There's a beautiful analyzed. There's a beautiful analyzed. There's a beautiful meta-analysis which involves looking at meta-analysis which involves looking at meta-analysis which involves looking at a number of different studies all a number of different studies all a number of different studies all together comparing the statistical strength of comparing the statistical strength of comparing the statistical strength of each of those studies, looking at each of those studies, looking at each of those studies, looking at different conditions, what sorts of different conditions, what sorts of different conditions, what sorts of habits were trying to be made or broken. habits were trying to be made or broken. habits were trying to be made or broken. Um the first author on this review is Um the first author on this review is Um the first author on this review is Fritz, f r i t z. Um I'll certainly put Fritz, f r i t z. Um I'll certainly put Fritz, f r i t z. Um I'll certainly put a link to this. Um a link to this. Um a link to this. Um it's Heather Fritz and it's intervention it's Heather Fritz and it's intervention it's Heather Fritz and it's intervention to modify habits, a scoping review. And to modify habits, a scoping review. And to modify habits, a scoping review. And it is indeed a very broad-scale review. it is indeed a very broad-scale review. it is indeed a very broad-scale review. It's from the Journal of Occupational It's from the Journal of Occupational It's from the Journal of Occupational Participation and Health. It's published Participation and Health. It's published Participation and Health. It's published in 2020. It's a really nice article. A in 2020. It's a really nice article. A in 2020. It's a really nice article. A couple of things I learned from this couple of things I learned from this couple of things I learned from this article and then I'll get into the article and then I'll get into the article and then I'll get into the specific tool for breaking habits. specific tool for breaking habits. specific tool for breaking habits. Perhaps the most interesting thing that Perhaps the most interesting thing that Perhaps the most interesting thing that I took from this review was the finding I took from this review was the finding I took from this review was the finding that notifications to either engage in habits or to not to either engage in habits or to not to either engage in habits or to not engage in habits actually were not very engage in habits actually were not very engage in habits actually were not very effective over time. They were effective over time. They were effective over time. They were effective in the immediate period when people in the immediate period when people in the immediate period when people started using these notifications as started using these notifications as started using these notifications as were little sticky notes like don't go were little sticky notes like don't go were little sticky notes like don't go into the refrigerator between the hours into the refrigerator between the hours into the refrigerator between the hours of whatever and whatever or of whatever and whatever or of whatever and whatever or just visual reminders, physical just visual reminders, physical just visual reminders, physical reminders or electronic reminders or electronic reminders or electronic reminders were effective in the immediate term but were effective in the immediate term but were effective in the immediate term but in the long term did not predict whether in the long term did not predict whether in the long term did not predict whether or not people would effectively stick to or not people would effectively stick to or not people would effectively stick to habits they were trying to stick to or habits they were trying to stick to or habits they were trying to stick to or break habits that they were trying to break habits that they were trying to break habits that they were trying to break. So sadly that doesn't seem to break. So sadly that doesn't seem to break. So sadly that doesn't seem to work very well work very well work very well and perhaps they just need to come up and perhaps they just need to come up and perhaps they just need to come up with more robust reminders. I don't know, more robust reminders. I don't know, more robust reminders. I don't know, mild electric shock or something like mild electric shock or something like mild electric shock or something like that because what we do know that because what we do know that because what we do know only sort of kidding about mild electric only sort of kidding about mild electric only sort of kidding about mild electric shock, but what we do know from both shock, but what we do know from both shock, but what we do know from both human and animal studies is that things human and animal studies is that things human and animal studies is that things like electric shock, things like electric shock, things like electric shock, things like monetary penalties, right? Having to pay monetary penalties, right? Having to pay monetary penalties, right? Having to pay out every time you engage in a out every time you engage in a out every time you engage in a particular behavior, those are pretty particular behavior, those are pretty particular behavior, those are pretty effective ways to break habits. effective ways to break habits. effective ways to break habits. The problem is when people are not being The problem is when people are not being The problem is when people are not being monitored for habit use um monitored for habit use um monitored for habit use um for instance, you can imagine a for instance, you can imagine a for instance, you can imagine a situation where you say I'm not going to situation where you say I'm not going to situation where you say I'm not going to pick up my phone for the four hours in pick up my phone for the four hours in pick up my phone for the four hours in the early part of the day so that I can the early part of the day so that I can the early part of the day so that I can get, you know, real dedicated focus work get, you know, real dedicated focus work get, you know, real dedicated focus work done. Um unless someone's monitoring them then Um unless someone's monitoring them then Um unless someone's monitoring them then people don't tend to people don't tend to people don't tend to monitor themselves completely enough monitor themselves completely enough monitor themselves completely enough that they punish themselves completely that they punish themselves completely that they punish themselves completely enough that they break the behavior. In enough that they break the behavior. In enough that they break the behavior. In other words, the punishment isn't other words, the punishment isn't other words, the punishment isn't bad enough in order to break the habit bad enough in order to break the habit bad enough in order to break the habit which just speaks to how powerful these which just speaks to how powerful these which just speaks to how powerful these habits are once they become reflexive. habits are once they become reflexive. habits are once they become reflexive. They're just very hard to override. They're just very hard to override. They're just very hard to override. So turns out that the key to generating So turns out that the key to generating So turns out that the key to generating long term depression in these pathways long term depression in these pathways long term depression in these pathways is actually is actually is actually to take the period immediately following take the period immediately following take the period immediately following the bad habit execution meaning let's the bad habit execution meaning let's the bad habit execution meaning let's say you tell yourself you're not going say you tell yourself you're not going say you tell yourself you're not going to pick up your phone, you're not going to pick up your phone, you're not going to pick up your phone, you're not going to bite your nails, you're not going to bite your nails, you're not going to bite your nails, you're not going to reflexively walk to the refrigerator at reflexively walk to the refrigerator at reflexively walk to the refrigerator at particular time of day, but you find particular time of day, but you find particular time of day, but you find yourself doing it anyway. yourself doing it anyway. yourself doing it anyway. And what actually has to happen is And what actually has to happen is And what actually has to happen is bringing conscious awareness to the bringing conscious awareness to the bringing conscious awareness to the period immediately afterward, which I period immediately afterward, which I period immediately afterward, which I think most people recognize. They think most people recognize. They think most people recognize. They realize, "Oh, I just did it again. I realize, "Oh, I just did it again. I realize, "Oh, I just did it again. I just did it again." And in that moment, just did it again." And in that moment, just did it again." And in that moment, capture the sequence of events, not that capture the sequence of events, not that capture the sequence of events, not that led to the bad habit execution, but led to the bad habit execution, but led to the bad habit execution, but actually to take advantage of the fact actually to take advantage of the fact actually to take advantage of the fact that the neurons that were responsible that the neurons that were responsible that the neurons that were responsible for generating that bad habit were for generating that bad habit were for generating that bad habit were active a moment ago, were active a moment ago, were active a moment ago, and to actually engage in a replacement and to actually engage in a replacement and to actually engage in a replacement behavior immediately afterward. Now, behavior immediately afterward. Now, behavior immediately afterward. Now, this is really interesting and I think this is really interesting and I think this is really interesting and I think powerful because I would have thought powerful because I would have thought powerful because I would have thought that you have to engage in a replacement that you have to engage in a replacement that you have to engage in a replacement behavior that truly replaces the bad behavior that truly replaces the bad behavior that truly replaces the bad habit behavior, right? Uh that you would habit behavior, right? Uh that you would habit behavior, right? Uh that you would have to be able to identify your state have to be able to identify your state have to be able to identify your state of mind or the sequence of events of mind or the sequence of events of mind or the sequence of events leading into the bad habit, but rather leading into the bad habit, but rather leading into the bad habit, but rather the stage or the period immediately the stage or the period immediately the stage or the period immediately after the bad habit execution is a after the bad habit execution is a after the bad habit execution is a unique opportunity to insert a different unique opportunity to insert a different unique opportunity to insert a different type of what we would call adaptive type of what we would call adaptive type of what we would call adaptive behavior, but that could be any behavior behavior, but that could be any behavior behavior, but that could be any behavior that's not in line with the bad that's not in line with the bad that's not in line with the bad behavior. So, let's give it an example. behavior. So, let's give it an example. behavior. So, let's give it an example. Let's say you find yourself um you're Let's say you find yourself um you're Let's say you find yourself um you're trying to do focused work, you pick up trying to do focused work, you pick up trying to do focused work, you pick up your phone, you're disappointed in your phone, you're disappointed in your phone, you're disappointed in yourself for picking up your phone, yourself for picking up your phone, yourself for picking up your phone, you could of course just put it down or you could of course just put it down or you could of course just put it down or you and re-engage you and re-engage you and re-engage in the work behavior, but if you were in the work behavior, but if you were in the work behavior, but if you were good at that, then you probably wouldn't good at that, then you probably wouldn't good at that, then you probably wouldn't have done it in the first place. And so, have done it in the first place. And so, have done it in the first place. And so, what turns out to be very effective is what turns out to be very effective is what turns out to be very effective is to go engage in some other positive to go engage in some other positive to go engage in some other positive habit. Now, this has two major effects. habit. Now, this has two major effects. habit. Now, this has two major effects. The first one is you start to link in The first one is you start to link in The first one is you start to link in time the execution of a bad behavior to time the execution of a bad behavior to time the execution of a bad behavior to this other good behavior. this other good behavior. this other good behavior. And in doing so, you start to recruit And in doing so, you start to recruit And in doing so, you start to recruit other neural circuits, other neurons other neural circuits, other neurons other neural circuits, other neurons that can start to that can start to that can start to somewhat dismantle the sequence of somewhat dismantle the sequence of somewhat dismantle the sequence of firing associated with the bad behavior. firing associated with the bad behavior. firing associated with the bad behavior. In other words, you start to create a In other words, you start to create a In other words, you start to create a kind of a double habit that starts with kind of a double habit that starts with kind of a double habit that starts with a bad habit and then ends with a good a bad habit and then ends with a good a bad habit and then ends with a good habit. And that seems to create a enough habit. And that seems to create a enough habit. And that seems to create a enough of a temporal mismatch so that then of a temporal mismatch so that then of a temporal mismatch so that then recognizing when you're heading toward recognizing when you're heading toward recognizing when you're heading toward the bad habit becomes more apparent to the bad habit becomes more apparent to the bad habit becomes more apparent to you. So again, I want to make this very, you. So again, I want to make this very, you. So again, I want to make this very, very concrete. Let's say that the very concrete. Let's say that the very concrete. Let's say that the behavior is reflexively picking up one's behavior is reflexively picking up one's behavior is reflexively picking up one's phone. You do that, you think, "Oh phone. You do that, you think, "Oh phone. You do that, you think, "Oh goodness, I did it again. Here's what goodness, I did it again. Here's what goodness, I did it again. Here's what I'm going to do." You would set that I'm going to do." You would set that I'm going to do." You would set that down, and then you would engage in some down, and then you would engage in some down, and then you would engage in some other positive behavior that you've other positive behavior that you've other positive behavior that you've deemed positive. And here it's very deemed positive. And here it's very deemed positive. And here it's very subjective, so it's hard for me to give subjective, so it's hard for me to give subjective, so it's hard for me to give an example that will necessarily make an example that will necessarily make an example that will necessarily make sense to everybody, sense to everybody, sense to everybody, you're working on hydration. So maybe you're working on hydration. So maybe you're working on hydration. So maybe you go have a glass of water. Maybe you go have a glass of water. Maybe you go have a glass of water. Maybe you are trying to you are trying to you are trying to do breathwork or something. Maybe you're do breathwork or something. Maybe you're do breathwork or something. Maybe you're you are trying to enhance your language you are trying to enhance your language you are trying to enhance your language speaking skills, and so you go and you speaking skills, and so you go and you speaking skills, and so you go and you spend 5 minutes doing spend 5 minutes doing spend 5 minutes doing a particular type of language learning. a particular type of language learning. a particular type of language learning. You literally exit whatever you were You literally exit whatever you were You literally exit whatever you were doing and perform that other new doing and perform that other new doing and perform that other new positive habit in the immediate period positive habit in the immediate period positive habit in the immediate period right after that, even for a short right after that, even for a short right after that, even for a short period of time. It's a little bit period of time. It's a little bit period of time. It's a little bit counterintuitive, but what this does is counterintuitive, but what this does is counterintuitive, but what this does is it creates a kind of a cognitive and a it creates a kind of a cognitive and a it creates a kind of a cognitive and a temporal mismatch temporal mismatch temporal mismatch between the initial bad behavior, which between the initial bad behavior, which between the initial bad behavior, which before is what we would call sort of a before is what we would call sort of a before is what we would call sort of a closed loop. And the engineers out there closed loop. And the engineers out there closed loop. And the engineers out there will know what I'm talking about, but in will know what I'm talking about, but in will know what I'm talking about, but in closed loop, it's a one behavior one set closed loop, it's a one behavior one set closed loop, it's a one behavior one set of neural firings leads to another, of neural firings leads to another, of neural firings leads to another, leads to another, and then just kind of leads to another, and then just kind of leads to another, and then just kind of sets the same thing in motion. It can be sets the same thing in motion. It can be sets the same thing in motion. It can be kind of a self-perpetuating system. By kind of a self-perpetuating system. By kind of a self-perpetuating system. By changing the number of features that are changing the number of features that are changing the number of features that are in that loop, it disrupts the closed in that loop, it disrupts the closed in that loop, it disrupts the closed nature of that loop. It creates what we nature of that loop. It creates what we nature of that loop. It creates what we call an open loop. And in an open loop, call an open loop. And in an open loop, call an open loop. And in an open loop, you are better able to intervene. So as you are better able to intervene. So as you are better able to intervene. So as I mentioned before, this might seem I mentioned before, this might seem I mentioned before, this might seem counterintuitive. You might think, "Why counterintuitive. You might think, "Why counterintuitive. You might think, "Why would I want to reward the execution of would I want to reward the execution of would I want to reward the execution of a bad habit with a good habit?" I don't a bad habit with a good habit?" I don't a bad habit with a good habit?" I don't want to reward myself for the bad habit, want to reward myself for the bad habit, want to reward myself for the bad habit, but really what you're trying to do is but really what you're trying to do is but really what you're trying to do is you're trying to change the nature of you're trying to change the nature of you're trying to change the nature of the neural circuits that are firing so the neural circuits that are firing so the neural circuits that are firing so that you can rewrite the script for that you can rewrite the script for that you can rewrite the script for that bad habit. bad habit. bad habit. A different way to put it would be A different way to put it would be A different way to put it would be imagine that the bad habit is like a imagine that the bad habit is like a imagine that the bad habit is like a chord on the piano that you play or a chord on the piano that you play or a chord on the piano that you play or a chord of notes or a sequence of notes chord of notes or a sequence of notes chord of notes or a sequence of notes that you would play. And it comes very that you would play. And it comes very that you would play. And it comes very easily. You can play it every single easily. You can play it every single easily. You can play it every single time. But let's say as you're trying to time. But let's say as you're trying to time. But let's say as you're trying to learn a new piece of music, you're just learn a new piece of music, you're just learn a new piece of music, you're just constantly inserting that at the constantly inserting that at the constantly inserting that at the inappropriate times. That was a you inappropriate times. That was a you inappropriate times. That was a you know, I think it's a decent enough know, I think it's a decent enough know, I think it's a decent enough analogy for a bad habit because it analogy for a bad habit because it analogy for a bad habit because it involves some motor execution. You just involves some motor execution. You just involves some motor execution. You just find yourself doing it. Rather than find yourself doing it. Rather than find yourself doing it. Rather than trying to prevent yourself from doing trying to prevent yourself from doing trying to prevent yourself from doing it, the next time you do it, add in a it, the next time you do it, add in a it, the next time you do it, add in a new chord or sequence that you're trying new chord or sequence that you're trying new chord or sequence that you're trying to learn. to learn. to learn. What this does then is it changes the What this does then is it changes the What this does then is it changes the whole nature of the sequence of neurons whole nature of the sequence of neurons whole nature of the sequence of neurons that are firing from bad habit through that are firing from bad habit through that are firing from bad habit through to the end of this newly applied good to the end of this newly applied good to the end of this newly applied good habit. So, this is the way in which you habit. So, this is the way in which you habit. So, this is the way in which you start to dismantle, or when I say start to dismantle, or when I say start to dismantle, or when I say dismantle, really weaken the likelihood dismantle, really weaken the likelihood dismantle, really weaken the likelihood that if neuron A fires, neuron B will that if neuron A fires, neuron B will that if neuron A fires, neuron B will fire. Because as you're starting off in fire. Because as you're starting off in fire. Because as you're starting off in the mode of very reflexively performing the mode of very reflexively performing the mode of very reflexively performing a bad habit, those neurons are firing a bad habit, those neurons are firing a bad habit, those neurons are firing together without you consciously being together without you consciously being together without you consciously being aware of it. It's aware of it. It's aware of it. It's almost impossible for you to intervene almost impossible for you to intervene almost impossible for you to intervene in yourself without a number of other in yourself without a number of other in yourself without a number of other features like severe punishment, severe features like severe punishment, severe features like severe punishment, severe consequence type outcomes. consequence type outcomes. consequence type outcomes. Rather, tacking on some additional Rather, tacking on some additional Rather, tacking on some additional sequences, like if neuron A fires, sequences, like if neuron A fires, sequences, like if neuron A fires, neuron B fires, and then you're saying, neuron B fires, and then you're saying, neuron B fires, and then you're saying, "Okay, well, if neuron B fires, I'm "Okay, well, if neuron B fires, I'm "Okay, well, if neuron B fires, I'm going to start inserting going to start inserting going to start inserting neuron C, D, E, F to fire, right? That's neuron C, D, E, F to fire, right? That's neuron C, D, E, F to fire, right? That's the C, D, E, F being the positive the C, D, E, F being the positive the C, D, E, F being the positive behavior that you're going to insert. behavior that you're going to insert. behavior that you're going to insert. And in doing so, you create a chain of And in doing so, you create a chain of And in doing so, you create a chain of neuronal activation that then is very neuronal activation that then is very neuronal activation that then is very easy to dismantle. And so, when people easy to dismantle. And so, when people easy to dismantle. And so, when people have applied this kind of approach, have applied this kind of approach, have applied this kind of approach, it removes the need to have constant it removes the need to have constant it removes the need to have constant conscious awareness of one's own conscious awareness of one's own conscious awareness of one's own behavior prior to that behavior, which behavior prior to that behavior, which behavior prior to that behavior, which is very, very difficult to achieve. is very, very difficult to achieve. is very, very difficult to achieve. Rather, what they find is that they are able to what they find is that they are able to what they find is that they are able to engage in remapping of the neural engage in remapping of the neural engage in remapping of the neural circuits associated with bad habits in circuits associated with bad habits in circuits associated with bad habits in ways that are very, very ways that are very, very ways that are very, very straightforward, right? Because you can straightforward, right? Because you can straightforward, right? Because you can always identify when you've done the always identify when you've done the always identify when you've done the thing you don't want to do and then a thing you don't want to do and then a thing you don't want to do and then a tack on to that something additional tack on to that something additional tack on to that something additional that's positive. Now, the nature of that that's positive. Now, the nature of that that's positive. Now, the nature of that positive thing is important. You don't positive thing is important. You don't positive thing is important. You don't want it to be something that's very hard want it to be something that's very hard want it to be something that's very hard to execute. You want it to be something to execute. You want it to be something to execute. You want it to be something that's positive and fairly easy to that's positive and fairly easy to that's positive and fairly easy to execute so that you're not struggling execute so that you're not struggling execute so that you're not struggling all the time to insert this on top of all the time to insert this on top of all the time to insert this on top of this bad behavior. this bad behavior. this bad behavior. Whatever that bad behavior might happen Whatever that bad behavior might happen Whatever that bad behavior might happen to be. But again, this is rooted in the to be. But again, this is rooted in the to be. But again, this is rooted in the biology of long-term depression. It maps biology of long-term depression. It maps biology of long-term depression. It maps very well to the behavioral change very well to the behavioral change very well to the behavioral change literature that I was able to glean that literature that I was able to glean that literature that I was able to glean that really shows that rather than just get really shows that rather than just get really shows that rather than just get reminders, rather than try and instill reminders, rather than try and instill reminders, rather than try and instill punishment, rather than setting up punishment, rather than setting up punishment, rather than setting up reward for breaking bad habits, that reward for breaking bad habits, that reward for breaking bad habits, that perhaps the simplest way to approach perhaps the simplest way to approach perhaps the simplest way to approach this is to this is to this is to tack on additional behaviors to the bad tack on additional behaviors to the bad tack on additional behaviors to the bad habits. Make sure those behaviors are habits. Make sure those behaviors are habits. Make sure those behaviors are good behaviors or behaviors that are good behaviors or behaviors that are good behaviors or behaviors that are adaptive for you and in doing so, you adaptive for you and in doing so, you adaptive for you and in doing so, you will soon find that the initiation of will soon find that the initiation of will soon find that the initiation of the bad habit takes on a whole new form the bad habit takes on a whole new form the bad habit takes on a whole new form or that you're not even inspired to do or that you're not even inspired to do or that you're not even inspired to do it at all. it at all. it at all. And of course, I want to acknowledge And of course, I want to acknowledge And of course, I want to acknowledge that breaking bad habits is really hard. that breaking bad habits is really hard. that breaking bad habits is really hard. We had an episode all about addiction We had an episode all about addiction We had an episode all about addiction with Dr. Anna Lembke from Stanford with Dr. Anna Lembke from Stanford with Dr. Anna Lembke from Stanford Medical School. She's a colleague of Medical School. She's a colleague of Medical School. She's a colleague of mine who runs the dual diagnosis mine who runs the dual diagnosis mine who runs the dual diagnosis addiction clinic at Stanford. And in addiction clinic at Stanford. And in addiction clinic at Stanford. And in that episode, we talked a lot about how that episode, we talked a lot about how that episode, we talked a lot about how addicts um for drugs, alcohol, people addicts um for drugs, alcohol, people addicts um for drugs, alcohol, people have addictions to certain types of have addictions to certain types of have addictions to certain types of behaviors or avoidance behaviors even, behaviors or avoidance behaviors even, behaviors or avoidance behaviors even, that in the case of addiction, there has that in the case of addiction, there has that in the case of addiction, there has to be a tremendous kind of full-scale a to be a tremendous kind of full-scale a to be a tremendous kind of full-scale a campaign for them to be able to campaign for them to be able to campaign for them to be able to intervene in their behavior. So, for intervene in their behavior. So, for intervene in their behavior. So, for those of you that are thinking about bad those of you that are thinking about bad those of you that are thinking about bad habit breaking in the context of habit breaking in the context of habit breaking in the context of addictive type behaviors, definitely addictive type behaviors, definitely addictive type behaviors, definitely check out that episode. Addiction does check out that episode. Addiction does check out that episode. Addiction does employ some of these principles around employ some of these principles around employ some of these principles around habit making and habit breaking, as it habit making and habit breaking, as it habit making and habit breaking, as it were. Uh but of course, because the uh were. Uh but of course, because the uh were. Uh but of course, because the uh consequences of certain habits in consequences of certain habits in consequences of certain habits in addiction can be so severe, there's a addiction can be so severe, there's a addiction can be so severe, there's a other sets of protocols and there's a other sets of protocols and there's a other sets of protocols and there's a kind of a psychological backdrop to it kind of a psychological backdrop to it kind of a psychological backdrop to it that's very important. It also relates that's very important. It also relates that's very important. It also relates to the biology of dopamine and you can to the biology of dopamine and you can to the biology of dopamine and you can find all of that in the episode with Dr. find all of that in the episode with Dr. find all of that in the episode with Dr. Anna Lembke. So, today we've covered a Anna Lembke. So, today we've covered a Anna Lembke. So, today we've covered a lot about the biology and psychology of lot about the biology and psychology of lot about the biology and psychology of habit formation and habit breaking. habit formation and habit breaking. habit formation and habit breaking. We talked about We talked about We talked about why certain habits are so hard to wire why certain habits are so hard to wire why certain habits are so hard to wire in, why certain habits are so hard to in, why certain habits are so hard to in, why certain habits are so hard to break down and eliminate, and how we can break down and eliminate, and how we can break down and eliminate, and how we can determine which habits are going to be determine which habits are going to be determine which habits are going to be easier for us to access, which habits easier for us to access, which habits easier for us to access, which habits are going to be harder for us to access are going to be harder for us to access are going to be harder for us to access and break. and break. and break. We talked a lot about this notion of We talked a lot about this notion of We talked a lot about this notion of limbic friction, and we talked about limbic friction, and we talked about limbic friction, and we talked about context dependence, and we talked about context dependence, and we talked about context dependence, and we talked about a number of different things a number of different things a number of different things as it relates to neural circuits and the as it relates to neural circuits and the as it relates to neural circuits and the formation of new connections in the formation of new connections in the formation of new connections in the brain and strengthening and weakening of brain and strengthening and weakening of brain and strengthening and weakening of connections in the brain. connections in the brain. connections in the brain. We also discussed two programs, programs We also discussed two programs, programs We also discussed two programs, programs designed specifically for you on the designed specifically for you on the designed specifically for you on the basis of the neurobiology literature and basis of the neurobiology literature and basis of the neurobiology literature and the literature on the psychology of the literature on the psychology of the literature on the psychology of habit formation and habit breaking. Just habit formation and habit breaking. Just habit formation and habit breaking. Just to briefly recap, to briefly recap, to briefly recap, one program involves dividing the one program involves dividing the one program involves dividing the 24-hour day into three phases, phase 24-hour day into three phases, phase 24-hour day into three phases, phase one, phase two, phase three, and to try one, phase two, phase three, and to try one, phase two, phase three, and to try and tackle specific habits at particular and tackle specific habits at particular and tackle specific habits at particular phases of the 24-hour cycle. phases of the 24-hour cycle. phases of the 24-hour cycle. The second program involved a 21-day The second program involved a 21-day The second program involved a 21-day process of engaging approximately six process of engaging approximately six process of engaging approximately six new habits per day, although the new habits per day, although the new habits per day, although the expectation, as I mentioned earlier, is expectation, as I mentioned earlier, is expectation, as I mentioned earlier, is that you're not going to perform all six that you're not going to perform all six that you're not going to perform all six of those, and an assessment in the of those, and an assessment in the of those, and an assessment in the following 21 days as to whether or not following 21 days as to whether or not following 21 days as to whether or not you have indeed formed those new habits you have indeed formed those new habits you have indeed formed those new habits or not. And there were a number of other or not. And there were a number of other or not. And there were a number of other features that I mentioned that were features that I mentioned that were features that I mentioned that were related to those two general programs, related to those two general programs, related to those two general programs, phase one, phase two, phase three, and phase one, phase two, phase three, and phase one, phase two, phase three, and the 21-day program and how those could the 21-day program and how those could the 21-day program and how those could be meshed together. be meshed together. be meshed together. So, I'm guessing some of you will So, I'm guessing some of you will So, I'm guessing some of you will probably have questions about those probably have questions about those probably have questions about those programs and how to apply them, but programs and how to apply them, but programs and how to apply them, but hopefully they were clear enough for you hopefully they were clear enough for you hopefully they were clear enough for you to get started. to get started. to get started. This is a good opportunity for me to This is a good opportunity for me to This is a good opportunity for me to mention that the Huberman Lab Podcast mention that the Huberman Lab Podcast mention that the Huberman Lab Podcast has something called the Neural Network has something called the Neural Network has something called the Neural Network Newsletter that is sent out Newsletter that is sent out Newsletter that is sent out approximately once a month. approximately once a month. approximately once a month. For the next newsletter, I will release For the next newsletter, I will release For the next newsletter, I will release a on paper version of these two systems a on paper version of these two systems a on paper version of these two systems and how they mesh together for habit and how they mesh together for habit and how they mesh together for habit formation and habit breaking. formation and habit breaking. formation and habit breaking. And if you'd like to access that, you And if you'd like to access that, you And if you'd like to access that, you can go to hubermanlab.com. You go to the can go to hubermanlab.com. You go to the can go to hubermanlab.com. You go to the menu, you can sign up for the menu, you can sign up for the menu, you can sign up for the newsletter. First of all, it's zero newsletter. First of all, it's zero newsletter. First of all, it's zero cost. Second of all, we have our privacy cost. Second of all, we have our privacy cost. Second of all, we have our privacy policy there, but I can tell you right policy there, but I can tell you right policy there, but I can tell you right now we don't share your email with any now we don't share your email with any now we don't share your email with any vendors or any other uh sources. Those vendors or any other uh sources. Those vendors or any other uh sources. Those emails stay um internal to us. emails stay um internal to us. emails stay um internal to us. And if you'd like to see what the sort And if you'd like to see what the sort And if you'd like to see what the sort of flavor of those newsletters is, the of flavor of those newsletters is, the of flavor of those newsletters is, the previous newsletters, for instance one previous newsletters, for instance one previous newsletters, for instance one on tools for sleep that I mentioned on tools for sleep that I mentioned on tools for sleep that I mentioned earlier, or uh tools for neuroplasticity earlier, or uh tools for neuroplasticity earlier, or uh tools for neuroplasticity in the classroom and outside the in the classroom and outside the in the classroom and outside the classroom as well, for teachers and for classroom as well, for teachers and for classroom as well, for teachers and for students of various kinds, those are students of various kinds, those are students of various kinds, those are also posted there. So, you can access also posted there. So, you can access also posted there. So, you can access any of the previous newsletters. My hope any of the previous newsletters. My hope any of the previous newsletters. My hope is that today you've learned both the is that today you've learned both the is that today you've learned both the biological mechanisms and the practical biological mechanisms and the practical biological mechanisms and the practical tools by which you can start to tools by which you can start to tools by which you can start to establish habits that for you deem establish habits that for you deem establish habits that for you deem adaptive, healthy, and that are going to adaptive, healthy, and that are going to adaptive, healthy, and that are going to support you and your goals, and that you support you and your goals, and that you support you and your goals, and that you can start to dismantle some of the can start to dismantle some of the can start to dismantle some of the habits that you find to be unhealthy or habits that you find to be unhealthy or habits that you find to be unhealthy or maladaptive for you and for your goals. maladaptive for you and for your goals. maladaptive for you and for your goals. If you're learning from and or enjoying If you're learning from and or enjoying If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific way YouTube channel. That's a terrific way YouTube channel. That's a terrific way to support us. In addition, on YouTube, to support us. In addition, on YouTube, to support us. In addition, on YouTube, you can leave us feedback in the comment you can leave us feedback in the comment you can leave us feedback in the comment section. You can also leave us section. You can also leave us section. You can also leave us suggestions for future guests that you'd suggestions for future guests that you'd suggestions for future guests that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab like us to host on the Huberman Lab like us to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And please also subscribe to Podcast. And please also subscribe to Podcast. And please also subscribe to the podcast on Apple and or Spotify. On the podcast on Apple and or Spotify. On the podcast on Apple and or Spotify. On Apple, you can leave us up to a Apple, you can leave us up to a Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review, and now Spotify has a five-star review, and now Spotify has a five-star review, and now Spotify has a feature by which you can also leave us feature by which you can also leave us feature by which you can also leave us review feedback. Please also check out review feedback. Please also check out review feedback. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this podcast episode. That's perhaps of this podcast episode. That's perhaps of this podcast episode. That's perhaps the best way to support our podcast. In the best way to support our podcast. In the best way to support our podcast. In addition, we have a Patreon. It's addition, we have a Patreon. It's addition, we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support the podcast at and there you can support the podcast at and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's any level that you like. During today's any level that you like. During today's podcast and in many previous episodes of podcast and in many previous episodes of podcast and in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I mentioned the Huberman Lab Podcast, I mentioned the Huberman Lab Podcast, I mentioned supplements. While supplements aren't supplements. While supplements aren't supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people necessary for everybody, many people necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from derive tremendous benefit from derive tremendous benefit from supplements. Supplements for sleep, supplements. Supplements for sleep, supplements. Supplements for sleep, supplements for focus, supplements for supplements for focus, supplements for supplements for focus, supplements for various other things related to mental various other things related to mental various other things related to mental and physical health and performance. One and physical health and performance. One and physical health and performance. One key issue anytime there's a discussion key issue anytime there's a discussion key issue anytime there's a discussion about supplements is you have to be sure about supplements is you have to be sure about supplements is you have to be sure that the supplements you are taking are that the supplements you are taking are that the supplements you are taking are of the very highest quality. And for of the very highest quality. And for of the very highest quality. And for that reason we've partnered with Thorne that reason we've partnered with Thorne that reason we've partnered with Thorne because Thorne has the very high because Thorne has the very high because Thorne has the very high stringency with respect to the quality stringency with respect to the quality stringency with respect to the quality of the ingredients they include and the of the ingredients they include and the of the ingredients they include and the precision of the amounts of the precision of the amounts of the precision of the amounts of the ingredients that they include in their ingredients that they include in their ingredients that they include in their supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take and get 20% off supplements that I take and get 20% off supplements that I take and get 20% off any of those supplements, you can go to any of those supplements, you can go to any of those supplements, you can go to thorne, t h o r n e.com/the letter thorne, t h o r n e.com/the letter thorne, t h o r n e.com/the letter u/huberman. And in addition to being able to get 20% And in addition to being able to get 20% And in addition to being able to get 20% off any of those supplements, if you off any of those supplements, if you off any of those supplements, if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site navigate deeper into the Thorne site navigate deeper into the Thorne site through that web portal, through that web portal, through that web portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the you can also get 20% off any of the you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If other supplements that Thorne makes. If other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following us on you're not already following us on you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter, please feel free Instagram and Twitter, please feel free Instagram and Twitter, please feel free to do so. to do so. to do so. There I teach neuroscience and There I teach neuroscience and There I teach neuroscience and neuroscience-related tools in short neuroscience-related tools in short neuroscience-related tools in short format. Some of that material overlaps format. Some of that material overlaps format. Some of that material overlaps with what you hear on the podcast, some with what you hear on the podcast, some with what you hear on the podcast, some of it is unique and different from of it is unique and different from of it is unique and different from what's on the podcast. And once again, I what's on the podcast. And once again, I what's on the podcast. And once again, I want to thank you for going on this want to thank you for going on this want to thank you for going on this journey of exploring the neuroscience journey of exploring the neuroscience journey of exploring the neuroscience and the psychology of habit formation and the psychology of habit formation and the psychology of habit formation and habit breaking. I hope it supports and habit breaking. I hope it supports and habit breaking. I hope it supports you in your goals. And last but you in your goals. And last but you in your goals. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.