Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. And now, my conversation with Dr. Karl And now, my conversation with Dr. Karl And now, my conversation with Dr. Karl Deisseroth. Well, thanks for being here. Deisseroth. Well, thanks for being here. Deisseroth. Well, thanks for being here. Thanks for having me. So, for people Thanks for having me. So, for people Thanks for having me. So, for people that might not be so familiar with the that might not be so familiar with the that might not be so familiar with the fields of neuroscience, etc. What is the fields of neuroscience, etc. What is the fields of neuroscience, etc. What is the difference between neurology and difference between neurology and difference between neurology and psychiatry? Psychiatry focuses on psychiatry? Psychiatry focuses on psychiatry? Psychiatry focuses on disorders where we can't disorders where we can't disorders where we can't see something that's physically wrong, see something that's physically wrong, see something that's physically wrong, where we don't have a measurable, where we don't have a measurable, where we don't have a measurable, where there's no blood test that makes the there's no blood test that makes the there's no blood test that makes the diagnosis. There's no brain scan that diagnosis. There's no brain scan that diagnosis. There's no brain scan that tells us this is schizophrenia, this is tells us this is schizophrenia, this is tells us this is schizophrenia, this is depression for an individual patient. depression for an individual patient. depression for an individual patient. And so, psychiatry is much more And so, psychiatry is much more And so, psychiatry is much more mysterious, and mysterious, and mysterious, and the only tools we have are words. the only tools we have are words. the only tools we have are words. Neurologists are fantastic physicians. Neurologists are fantastic physicians. Neurologists are fantastic physicians. They see the stroke on brain scans, they They see the stroke on brain scans, they They see the stroke on brain scans, they see the seizure and the pre-seizure see the seizure and the pre-seizure see the seizure and the pre-seizure activity with an EEG. activity with an EEG. activity with an EEG. Uh and they can measure and treat based Uh and they can measure and treat based Uh and they can measure and treat based on those measurables. on those measurables. on those measurables. In psychiatry, we have a harder job. We In psychiatry, we have a harder job. We In psychiatry, we have a harder job. We use words. use words. use words. We have rating scales for symptoms. We have rating scales for symptoms. We have rating scales for symptoms. We can measure depression and autism with can measure depression and autism with can measure depression and autism with rating scales, but those are words rating scales, but those are words rating scales, but those are words still. And ultimately, that's what psychiatry And ultimately, that's what psychiatry And ultimately, that's what psychiatry is built around. It's an odd is built around. It's an odd is built around. It's an odd situation because we've got the most situation because we've got the most situation because we've got the most complex, beautiful, mysterious, beautiful, mysterious, beautiful, mysterious, incredibly engineered incredibly engineered incredibly engineered object in the universe, and yet all we object in the universe, and yet all we object in the universe, and yet all we have are words to find our way in. have are words to find our way in. have are words to find our way in. So, do you find that if a patient is So, do you find that if a patient is So, do you find that if a patient is very verbal or hyper verbal, that you very verbal or hyper verbal, that you very verbal or hyper verbal, that you have an easier time diagnosing them as have an easier time diagnosing them as have an easier time diagnosing them as opposed to somebody who's more quiet and opposed to somebody who's more quiet and opposed to somebody who's more quiet and reserved? Or it's I can imagine the reserved? Or it's I can imagine the reserved? Or it's I can imagine the opposite might be true as well. Well, it opposite might be true as well. Well, it opposite might be true as well. Well, it because we only have words, you put your because we only have words, you put your because we only have words, you put your finger on a key point. If they don't finger on a key point. If they don't finger on a key point. If they don't speak that much, in principle, it's speak that much, in principle, it's speak that much, in principle, it's harder. The lack of speech can be a symptom. We The lack of speech can be a symptom. We The lack of speech can be a symptom. We can see that in depression. We can see can see that in depression. We can see can see that in depression. We can see that in the negative symptoms of that in the negative symptoms of that in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. We can see that in schizophrenia. We can see that in schizophrenia. We can see that in autism. Sometimes by itself, that is a autism. Sometimes by itself, that is a autism. Sometimes by itself, that is a symptom reduced speech. But ultimately, symptom reduced speech. But ultimately, symptom reduced speech. But ultimately, you do need something. You need some you do need something. You need some you do need something. You need some words to help guide you. And that some words to help guide you. And that some words to help guide you. And that in fact there's in fact there's in fact there's challenges that I can tell you about challenges that I can tell you about challenges that I can tell you about where patients with depression where patients with depression where patients with depression who are so depressed they can't speak. who are so depressed they can't speak. who are so depressed they can't speak. That makes it a bit of a challenge to That makes it a bit of a challenge to That makes it a bit of a challenge to distinguish depression from some of the distinguish depression from some of the distinguish depression from some of the other reasons they might not be other reasons they might not be other reasons they might not be speaking. And this is a sort of the art speaking. And this is a sort of the art speaking. And this is a sort of the art and the science of psychiatry. and the science of psychiatry. and the science of psychiatry. Do you think we will ever have a blood Do you think we will ever have a blood Do you think we will ever have a blood test for depression or schizophrenia or test for depression or schizophrenia or test for depression or schizophrenia or autism? And would that be a good or a autism? And would that be a good or a autism? And would that be a good or a bad thing? bad thing? bad thing? I think ultimately there will be I think ultimately there will be I think ultimately there will be quantitative tests. quantitative tests. quantitative tests. Already efforts are being made to look Already efforts are being made to look Already efforts are being made to look at certain rhythms in the brain using at certain rhythms in the brain using at certain rhythms in the brain using external EEGs to look at brain waves external EEGs to look at brain waves external EEGs to look at brain waves effectively. But ultimately, what's going on in the But ultimately, what's going on in the But ultimately, what's going on in the brain in psychiatric disease is physical brain in psychiatric disease is physical brain in psychiatric disease is physical and it's due to the circuits and the and it's due to the circuits and the and it's due to the circuits and the connections and the projections in the connections and the projections in the connections and the projections in the brain that are brain that are brain that are not working as they would in a typical not working as they would in a typical not working as they would in a typical situation. And I do think we'll have those measurable I do think we'll have those measurable I do think we'll have those measurable at some point. Could it be abused or at some point. Could it be abused or at some point. Could it be abused or misused? Certainly, but that's I think misused? Certainly, but that's I think misused? Certainly, but that's I think true for all of medicine. I want to true for all of medicine. I want to true for all of medicine. I want to know, and I'm sure there are several, know, and I'm sure there are several, know, and I'm sure there are several, but what do you see as the biggest but what do you see as the biggest but what do you see as the biggest challenge facing psychiatry and the challenge facing psychiatry and the challenge facing psychiatry and the treatment of mental illness today? treatment of mental illness today? treatment of mental illness today? I think we have I think we have I think we have we're making progress on what the we're making progress on what the we're making progress on what the biggest challenge is, which I think biggest challenge is, which I think biggest challenge is, which I think there's still such a strong stigma for there's still such a strong stigma for there's still such a strong stigma for psychiatric disease that patients often psychiatric disease that patients often psychiatric disease that patients often don't come to us don't come to us don't come to us and uh they feel that they should be able to they feel that they should be able to they feel that they should be able to handle this on their own. handle this on their own. handle this on their own. And that can slow treatment. It can And that can slow treatment. It can And that can slow treatment. It can lead to, you know, worsening symptoms. lead to, you know, worsening symptoms. lead to, you know, worsening symptoms. We know, for example, patients who have We know, for example, patients who have We know, for example, patients who have uh untreated anxiety issues, if you go uh untreated anxiety issues, if you go uh untreated anxiety issues, if you go for a year or more with a serious for a year or more with a serious for a year or more with a serious untreated anxiety issue, that can untreated anxiety issue, that can untreated anxiety issue, that can convert to depression. You can add convert to depression. You can add convert to depression. You can add another uh problem on top of the anxiety. And uh problem on top of the anxiety. And uh problem on top of the anxiety. And so, it would be so, it would be so, it would be you know, why do people not come for you know, why do people not come for you know, why do people not come for treatment? They they feel like this treatment? They they feel like this treatment? They they feel like this is something they should be able to is something they should be able to is something they should be able to master on their own, uh which can master on their own, uh which can master on their own, uh which can be true, but uh usually be true, but uh usually be true, but uh usually uh some help is a good thing. uh some help is a good thing. uh some help is a good thing. That raises a question related to That raises a question related to That raises a question related to something I heard you say many years ago something I heard you say many years ago something I heard you say many years ago at a lecture, which was that at a lecture, which was that at a lecture, which was that um this was a scientific lecture, and um this was a scientific lecture, and um this was a scientific lecture, and you said, "You know, we don't know how you said, "You know, we don't know how you said, "You know, we don't know how other people feel. Most of the time, we other people feel. Most of the time, we other people feel. Most of the time, we don't even really know how we feel." If don't even really know how we feel." If don't even really know how we feel." If I may, you could elaborate on that a I may, you could elaborate on that a I may, you could elaborate on that a little bit. And the um dearth of little bit. And the um dearth of little bit. And the um dearth of ways that we have to talk about of ways that we have to talk about of ways that we have to talk about feelings. I mean, there's so many words, feelings. I mean, there's so many words, feelings. I mean, there's so many words, I don't know how many, but I'm guessing I don't know how many, but I'm guessing I don't know how many, but I'm guessing there more than a dozen words to there more than a dozen words to there more than a dozen words to describe the state that I call sadness. describe the state that I call sadness. describe the state that I call sadness. But, as far as I understand, we don't But, as far as I understand, we don't But, as far as I understand, we don't have any way of comparing that in a in a have any way of comparing that in a in a have any way of comparing that in a in a real objective sense. So, how, as a real objective sense. So, how, as a real objective sense. So, how, as a psychiatrist, when your job is to use psychiatrist, when your job is to use psychiatrist, when your job is to use words to diagnose, words to diagnose, words to diagnose, words of the patient to diagnose, do you words of the patient to diagnose, do you words of the patient to diagnose, do you maneuver around that? And what is maneuver around that? And what is maneuver around that? And what is this landscape that we call feelings or this landscape that we call feelings or this landscape that we call feelings or emotions? This is uh really interesting. Uh people This is uh really interesting. Uh people This is uh really interesting. Uh people Here we have a there's a tension between Here we have a there's a tension between Here we have a there's a tension between the words that we've built up in the words that we've built up in the words that we've built up in the clinic that mean something to the to the clinic that mean something to the to the clinic that mean something to the to the physicians. And then there's the colloquial use of And then there's the colloquial use of And then there's the colloquial use of words that may not be the same. And so, words that may not be the same. And so, words that may not be the same. And so, that's the first level we have to sort that's the first level we have to sort that's the first level we have to sort out. When someone says, out. When someone says, out. When someone says, you know, I'm depressed, uh what you know, I'm depressed, uh what you know, I'm depressed, uh what exactly do they mean by that? exactly do they mean by that? exactly do they mean by that? Uh that may be different from what Uh that may be different from what Uh that may be different from what we're talking about in terms of we're talking about in terms of we're talking about in terms of depression. So, part of psychiatry is to depression. So, part of psychiatry is to depression. So, part of psychiatry is to get beyond that word and to get into how get beyond that word and to get into how get beyond that word and to get into how they're actually feeling. Get rid of they're actually feeling. Get rid of they're actually feeling. Get rid of the jargon and get to real-world the jargon and get to real-world the jargon and get to real-world examples of how they're feeling. So, examples of how they're feeling. So, examples of how they're feeling. So, you know, you know, you know, how do you what how much do you look how do you what how much do you look how do you what how much do you look forward into the future? How much forward into the future? How much forward into the future? How much uh hope do you have? How much planning uh hope do you have? How much planning uh hope do you have? How much planning are you doing for the future? So, these are you doing for the future? So, these are you doing for the future? So, these here now you're getting into actual here now you're getting into actual here now you're getting into actual things you can talk about that are things you can talk about that are things you can talk about that are unambiguous. If someone says, "Yeah, I unambiguous. If someone says, "Yeah, I unambiguous. If someone says, "Yeah, I can't even I can't even think about can't even I can't even think about can't even I can't even think about tomorrow. I I'm not tomorrow. I I'm not tomorrow. I I'm not I don't see how I'm going to get to I don't see how I'm going to get to I don't see how I'm going to get to tomorrow." That that's a nice precise tomorrow." That that's a nice precise tomorrow." That that's a nice precise thing that, you know, it's sad, thing that, you know, it's sad, thing that, you know, it's sad, it's tragic, but it's also that it's tragic, but it's also that it's tragic, but it's also that means something means something means something and we know what that means. That's the and we know what that means. That's the and we know what that means. That's the hopelessness symptom of depression. hopelessness symptom of depression. hopelessness symptom of depression. And and that is what I try to do when I And and that is what I try to do when I And and that is what I try to do when I do a psychiatric interview. I try to get do a psychiatric interview. I try to get do a psychiatric interview. I try to get past the jargon and get to what's past the jargon and get to what's past the jargon and get to what's actually happening in the patient's life actually happening in the patient's life actually happening in the patient's life and in their mind. and in their mind. and in their mind. But as you say, ultimately, you know, But as you say, ultimately, you know, But as you say, ultimately, you know, this shows up across this shows up across this shows up across I address this issue every day in my life, address this issue every day in my life, address this issue every day in my life, whether it's in the lab, where we're whether it's in the lab, where we're whether it's in the lab, where we're looking at we're looking at we're looking at animals, whether fish or mice or rats, animals, whether fish or mice or rats, animals, whether fish or mice or rats, and studying their behavior, or when I'm and studying their behavior, or when I'm and studying their behavior, or when I'm in a conversation with just a friend in a conversation with just a friend in a conversation with just a friend or a colleague, or a colleague, or a colleague, or when I'm talking to a patient, I or when I'm talking to a patient, I or when I'm talking to a patient, I never really know what's going on inside never really know what's going on inside never really know what's going on inside the mind of the other person. the mind of the other person. the mind of the other person. I get I get some feedback. I get words. I get I get some feedback. I get words. I get I get some feedback. I get words. I get behaviors. I get actions, but I get behaviors. I get actions, but I get behaviors. I get actions, but I never really know. Are there any very never really know. Are there any very never really know. Are there any very good treatments for psychiatric disease? good treatments for psychiatric disease? good treatments for psychiatric disease? Meaning, are there currently any pills, Meaning, are there currently any pills, Meaning, are there currently any pills, potions, forms of communication that potions, forms of communication that potions, forms of communication that reliably work every time reliably work every time reliably work every time or work in most patients? And could you or work in most patients? And could you or work in most patients? And could you give a couple examples of great give a couple examples of great give a couple examples of great successes of psychiatry if they exist? successes of psychiatry if they exist? successes of psychiatry if they exist? Yes. And psychiatry, despite the depths of And psychiatry, despite the depths of And psychiatry, despite the depths of our the mystery we struggle with, our the mystery we struggle with, our the mystery we struggle with, many of our treatments are actually, you many of our treatments are actually, you many of our treatments are actually, you know, we're we may be doing better know, we're we may be doing better know, we're we may be doing better than some other specialties in terms of than some other specialties in terms of than some other specialties in terms of actually causing, you know, therapeutic actually causing, you know, therapeutic actually causing, you know, therapeutic benefit for patients. We do help benefit for patients. We do help benefit for patients. We do help patients, you know, patients who suffer from you know, patients who suffer from you know, patients who suffer from By the way, both medications and talk By the way, both medications and talk By the way, both medications and talk therapy have been shown to be extremely therapy have been shown to be extremely therapy have been shown to be extremely effective in many cases. For example, effective in many cases. For example, effective in many cases. For example, people with panic disorder, people with panic disorder, people with panic disorder, cognitive behavioral therapy, just cognitive behavioral therapy, just cognitive behavioral therapy, just working with words, helping people working with words, helping people working with words, helping people identify the early signs of when they're identify the early signs of when they're identify the early signs of when they're starting to move toward a panic attack, starting to move toward a panic attack, starting to move toward a panic attack, what are the cognitions that are what are the cognitions that are what are the cognitions that are happening, you can train people to derail that and you can train people to derail that and you can train people to derail that and you can very potently treat panic and you can very potently treat panic and you can very potently treat panic disorder that way. There are many disorder that way. There are many disorder that way. There are many psychiatric medications that are very psychiatric medications that are very psychiatric medications that are very effective for the conditions that effective for the conditions that effective for the conditions that they're treating. they're treating. they're treating. Antipsychotic medications, they have Antipsychotic medications, they have Antipsychotic medications, they have side effects, but boy, do they work. side effects, but boy, do they work. side effects, but boy, do they work. They really can clear up auditory They really can clear up auditory They really can clear up auditory hallucinations, the paranoia. And then, hallucinations, the paranoia. And then, hallucinations, the paranoia. And then, you know, this is a frustrating and yet you know, this is a frustrating and yet you know, this is a frustrating and yet heartening aspect of psychiatry. There heartening aspect of psychiatry. There heartening aspect of psychiatry. There are treatments like electroconvulsive are treatments like electroconvulsive are treatments like electroconvulsive therapy, which is electroconvulsive therapy, which is electroconvulsive therapy, which is where, you know, it's extremely where, you know, it's extremely where, you know, it's extremely effective for depression. We have effective for depression. We have effective for depression. We have patients who patients who patients who nothing else works for them nothing else works for them nothing else works for them or they can't tolerate medications, and or they can't tolerate medications, and or they can't tolerate medications, and you can administer under a very safe, you can administer under a very safe, you can administer under a very safe, controlled condition where the patient's controlled condition where the patient's controlled condition where the patient's body is not moving. They're put into a body is not moving. They're put into a body is not moving. They're put into a very safe situation where the body very safe situation where the body very safe situation where the body doesn't move or seize. It's just an doesn't move or seize. It's just an doesn't move or seize. It's just an internal a process that's triggered in the brain. a process that's triggered in the brain. a process that's triggered in the brain. This is an extraordinarily effective This is an extraordinarily effective This is an extraordinarily effective treatment for treatment-resistant treatment for treatment-resistant treatment for treatment-resistant depression. At the same time, I find it depression. At the same time, I find it depression. At the same time, I find it as heartening as it is to see as heartening as it is to see as heartening as it is to see patients respond to this with patients respond to this with patients respond to this with who have severe depression, I'm also who have severe depression, I'm also who have severe depression, I'm also frustrated by it. Why why can't we do frustrated by it. Why why can't we do frustrated by it. Why why can't we do something more precise than that something more precise than that something more precise than that for these very severe cases? In all of for these very severe cases? In all of for these very severe cases? In all of these cases though, in psychiatry, the these cases though, in psychiatry, the these cases though, in psychiatry, the frustrating thing is that we don't the frustrating thing is that we don't the frustrating thing is that we don't have the level of understanding that a the level of understanding that a the level of understanding that a cardiologist has in thinking about the cardiologist has in thinking about the cardiologist has in thinking about the heart. You know, the heart is, we now heart. You know, the heart is, we now heart. You know, the heart is, we now know, it's a pump. It's pumping blood, know, it's a pump. It's pumping blood, know, it's a pump. It's pumping blood, and so you can look at everything about and so you can look at everything about and so you can look at everything about how it's working or not working in terms how it's working or not working in terms how it's working or not working in terms of that frame. It's clearly a pump. of that frame. It's clearly a pump. of that frame. It's clearly a pump. We don't really have that level of We don't really have that level of We don't really have that level of what is this circuit really there what is this circuit really there what is this circuit really there for in psychiatry? What are the pieces for in psychiatry? What are the pieces for in psychiatry? What are the pieces that are going to be required to that are going to be required to that are going to be required to cure autism, cure autism, cure autism, cure Parkinson's, cure schizophrenia? I cure Parkinson's, cure schizophrenia? I cure Parkinson's, cure schizophrenia? I would imagine there are several I would imagine there are several I would imagine there are several elements in bins here. Um understanding elements in bins here. Um understanding elements in bins here. Um understanding that the natural biology, understanding that the natural biology, understanding that the natural biology, understanding what the activity patterns are, how to what the activity patterns are, how to what the activity patterns are, how to modify those. Maybe um you could just modify those. Maybe um you could just modify those. Maybe um you could just tell us what you think it What is the tell us what you think it What is the tell us what you think it What is the bento box of the perfect the bento box of the perfect the bento box of the perfect cure? Yeah. cure? Yeah. cure? Yeah. I think the first thing we need is I think the first thing we need is I think the first thing we need is understanding. What is the elements in understanding. What is the elements in understanding. What is the elements in the brain that's analogous to the brain that's analogous to the brain that's analogous to the pumping of heart? When we think about pumping of heart? When we think about pumping of heart? When we think about the symptoms of depression, the symptoms of depression, the symptoms of depression, that's maybe, you know, we think about that's maybe, you know, we think about that's maybe, you know, we think about motivation and dopamine neurons. motivation and dopamine neurons. motivation and dopamine neurons. And so then that turns our attention as And so then that turns our attention as And so then that turns our attention as neuroscientists, we think, okay, neuroscientists, we think, okay, neuroscientists, we think, okay, let's think about the parts of the brain let's think about the parts of the brain let's think about the parts of the brain that are involved in dealing with that are involved in dealing with that are involved in dealing with merging complex data streams that are merging complex data streams that are merging complex data streams that are very high in bit rate, but that need to very high in bit rate, but that need to very high in bit rate, but that need to be fused together into a unitary be fused together into a unitary be fused together into a unitary concept. And that starts to guide us and maybe we And that starts to guide us and maybe we And that starts to guide us and maybe we can and we know other animals are social can and we know other animals are social can and we know other animals are social in their own way and we can study those in their own way and we can study those in their own way and we can study those animals. And so that there's that's how animals. And so that there's that's how animals. And so that there's that's how I think about it. There's hope for the I think about it. There's hope for the I think about it. There's hope for the future thinking about the symptoms as an future thinking about the symptoms as an future thinking about the symptoms as an engineer might engineer might engineer might and trying to identify the circuits that and trying to identify the circuits that and trying to identify the circuits that are likely working at to make this are likely working at to make this are likely working at to make this typical behavior happen and that will typical behavior happen and that will typical behavior happen and that will help us understand how it becomes help us understand how it becomes help us understand how it becomes atypical. We need to know the circuits. atypical. We need to know the circuits. atypical. We need to know the circuits. We need to know the cells Yeah. in the We need to know the cells Yeah. in the We need to know the cells Yeah. in the various brain regions and portions various brain regions and portions various brain regions and portions of the body and um of the body and um of the body and um and how they connect to one another and how they connect to one another and how they connect to one another and what the patterns of activity are under what the patterns of activity are under what the patterns of activity are under a normal, quote unquote, healthy a normal, quote unquote, healthy a normal, quote unquote, healthy interaction. Yeah. interaction. Yeah. interaction. Yeah. If we understand that, If we understand that, If we understand that, then it seems that then it seems that then it seems that the next step, which of course could be the next step, which of course could be the next step, which of course could be carried out in parallel, right? That carried out in parallel, right? That carried out in parallel, right? That work can be done alongside work where work can be done alongside work where work can be done alongside work where various elements within those circuits various elements within those circuits various elements within those circuits are tweaked just right. Like the tuning are tweaked just right. Like the tuning are tweaked just right. Like the tuning of a piano in the subtle way or maybe of a piano in the subtle way or maybe of a piano in the subtle way or maybe even like the replacement of a whole set even like the replacement of a whole set even like the replacement of a whole set of keys if the piano is lacking keys so of keys if the piano is lacking keys so of keys if the piano is lacking keys so to speak. to speak. to speak. In 2015, there was this what I thought In 2015, there was this what I thought In 2015, there was this what I thought was a very nice article published in the was a very nice article published in the was a very nice article published in the New Yorker describing your work and the New Yorker describing your work and the New Yorker describing your work and the current state of current state of current state of your work in the laboratory and the your work in the laboratory and the your work in the laboratory and the clinic and an interaction with a clinic and an interaction with a clinic and an interaction with a patient. So this is a recall woman who was So this is a recall woman who was So this is a recall woman who was severely depressed. severely depressed. severely depressed. And you reported in that article some of And you reported in that article some of And you reported in that article some of the discussion with this patient and the discussion with this patient and the discussion with this patient and then in real time then in real time then in real time increase the activation of the so-called increase the activation of the so-called increase the activation of the so-called vagus nerve, this 10th cranial nerve vagus nerve, this 10th cranial nerve vagus nerve, this 10th cranial nerve that extends out of skull and innervates that extends out of skull and innervates that extends out of skull and innervates many of the viscera in and body. many of the viscera in and body. many of the viscera in and body. What is the potential for What is the potential for What is the potential for channelrhodopsins or related types of algae engineering or related types of algae engineering or related types of algae engineering to be used to manipulate the vagus to be used to manipulate the vagus to be used to manipulate the vagus because I believe in that instance it because I believe in that instance it because I believe in that instance it wasn't channelrhodopsin stimulation, it wasn't channelrhodopsin stimulation, it wasn't channelrhodopsin stimulation, it was electrical stimulation, right? Or to was electrical stimulation, right? Or to was electrical stimulation, right? Or to manipulate for instance a very small manipulate for instance a very small manipulate for instance a very small localized region of the brain. Let me localized region of the brain. Let me localized region of the brain. Let me frame it a little bit differently. frame it a little bit differently. frame it a little bit differently. In light of what we were talking about a In light of what we were talking about a In light of what we were talking about a couple minutes ago. couple minutes ago. couple minutes ago. My understanding is that if somebody has My understanding is that if somebody has My understanding is that if somebody has severe depression and they take any severe depression and they take any severe depression and they take any number of the available number of the available number of the available pharmaceutical agents that are out pharmaceutical agents that are out pharmaceutical agents that are out there, SSRIs, serotonergic agents, there, SSRIs, serotonergic agents, there, SSRIs, serotonergic agents, increase dopamine, increase whatever, increase dopamine, increase whatever, increase dopamine, increase whatever, that sometimes they experience relief that sometimes they experience relief that sometimes they experience relief but there often serious side effects. but there often serious side effects. but there often serious side effects. Sometimes they don't experience relief Sometimes they don't experience relief Sometimes they don't experience relief but as I understand it, channelrhodopsins as I understand it, channelrhodopsins as I understand it, channelrhodopsins and their related technology in and their related technology in and their related technology in principle would allow you would allow you would allow you to turn on or off the specific regions to turn on or off the specific regions to turn on or off the specific regions of the brain that lead to the depressive of the brain that lead to the depressive of the brain that lead to the depressive symptoms or maybe you turn up a symptoms or maybe you turn up a symptoms or maybe you turn up a happiness circuit or an or a happiness circuit or an or a happiness circuit or an or a positive anticipation circuit. a positive anticipation circuit. a positive anticipation circuit. Where are we at now in terms of bringing Where are we at now in terms of bringing Where are we at now in terms of bringing this technology to the nervous system this technology to the nervous system this technology to the nervous system and let's start with body and then move and let's start with body and then move and let's start with body and then move into the skull. into the skull. into the skull. Yeah. So starting with the body a good example So starting with the body a good example So starting with the body a good example because it because it because it highlights the opportunity and how highlights the opportunity and how highlights the opportunity and how far we have to go. So, let's take this far we have to go. So, let's take this far we have to go. So, let's take this example of vagus nerve stimulation. So, example of vagus nerve stimulation. So, example of vagus nerve stimulation. So, the vagus nerve, it's the 10th cranial the vagus nerve, it's the 10th cranial the vagus nerve, it's the 10th cranial nerve, it comes from the brain, it goes nerve, it comes from the brain, it goes nerve, it comes from the brain, it goes down, it innervates the heart, down, it innervates the heart, down, it innervates the heart, innervates the gut. And by innervate, I innervates the gut. And by innervate, I innervates the gut. And by innervate, I mean it sends little connections down to mean it sends little connections down to mean it sends little connections down to help uh guide what happens in these help uh guide what happens in these help uh guide what happens in these organs in the in the in the these organs in the in the in the these organs in the in the in the abdomen and chest. abdomen and chest. abdomen and chest. Uh it also collects information back. Uh it also collects information back. Uh it also collects information back. And and there's information coming back And and there's information coming back And and there's information coming back from all those organs that go also go from all those organs that go also go from all those organs that go also go through this vagus nerve, the 10th through this vagus nerve, the 10th through this vagus nerve, the 10th cranial nerve, back to the brain. cranial nerve, back to the brain. cranial nerve, back to the brain. And so, this is somewhat of a of a of a And so, this is somewhat of a of a of a And so, this is somewhat of a of a of a superhighway to the brain then, was the superhighway to the brain then, was the superhighway to the brain then, was the idea. And maybe the idea is maybe we idea. And maybe the idea is maybe we idea. And maybe the idea is maybe we could put a little cuff, a little could put a little cuff, a little could put a little cuff, a little electrical uh device around the vagus nerve itself, uh device around the vagus nerve itself, uh device around the vagus nerve itself, so a way of getting into the brain so a way of getting into the brain so a way of getting into the brain without putting something physical into the putting something physical into the putting something physical into the brain. And why the vagus? I mean, it's brain. And why the vagus? I mean, it's brain. And why the vagus? I mean, it's there, but and it's accessible. That's there, but and it's accessible. That's there, but and it's accessible. That's the reason. That's the reason. reason, the reason. That's the reason. reason, the reason. That's the reason. reason, yes. Really? Yeah. You're not kidding. yes. Really? Yeah. You're not kidding. yes. Really? Yeah. You're not kidding. I'm not kidding. It's So, stimulating I'm not kidding. It's So, stimulating I'm not kidding. It's So, stimulating the vagus to treat depression simply the vagus to treat depression simply the vagus to treat depression simply because it's accessible. It started as because it's accessible. It started as because it's accessible. It started as actually as an as an epilepsy actually as an as an epilepsy actually as an as an epilepsy treatment and it can help with treatment and it can help with treatment and it can help with epilepsy, but the vagus nerve lands on a epilepsy, but the vagus nerve lands on a epilepsy, but the vagus nerve lands on a particular spot on the brain called the particular spot on the brain called the particular spot on the brain called the solitary tract nucleus, which is just solitary tract nucleus, which is just solitary tract nucleus, which is just one synapse away from the serotonin and one synapse away from the serotonin and one synapse away from the serotonin and dopamine and the norepinephrine. dopamine and the norepinephrine. dopamine and the norepinephrine. a link to chemical systems in the brain a link to chemical systems in the brain a link to chemical systems in the brain that make it a rational choice. that make it a rational choice. that make it a rational choice. It yes, it's not it's not irrational, It yes, it's not it's not irrational, It yes, it's not it's not irrational, but I can tell you that even if that but I can tell you that even if that but I can tell you that even if that were not true, the same thing would have were not true, the same thing would have were not true, the same thing would have been tried. been tried. been tried. You got to would have done it anyway. You got to would have done it anyway. You got to would have done it anyway. Because it's accessible, yeah. I see. Because it's accessible, yeah. I see. Because it's accessible, yeah. I see. How do you think it's working when it How do you think it's working when it How do you think it's working when it does work? Is it triggering the does work? Is it triggering the does work? Is it triggering the activation of neurons that release activation of neurons that release activation of neurons that release more serotonin or dopamine? It could be, more serotonin or dopamine? It could be, more serotonin or dopamine? It could be, uh but I would say we don't have uh but I would say we don't have uh but I would say we don't have evidence for that. Um and so, I evidence for that. Um and so, I evidence for that. Um and so, I just don't know. just don't know. just don't know. But, uh what is clear is that it's dose But, uh what is clear is that it's dose But, uh what is clear is that it's dose limited uh in how high and strongly we can uh in how high and strongly we can uh in how high and strongly we can stimulate. And why? It's because it's an stimulate. And why? It's because it's an stimulate. And why? It's because it's an electrode and it's stimulating electrode and it's stimulating electrode and it's stimulating everything nearby. everything nearby. everything nearby. And when you turn on the vagus nerve And when you turn on the vagus nerve And when you turn on the vagus nerve stimulator, the voice patient's voice stimulator, the voice patient's voice stimulator, the voice patient's voice becomes strangulated and hoarse. becomes strangulated and hoarse. becomes strangulated and hoarse. They can have trouble swallowing, they They can have trouble swallowing, they They can have trouble swallowing, they can have trouble speaking for sure, even can have trouble speaking for sure, even can have trouble speaking for sure, even some trouble breathing because some trouble breathing because some trouble breathing because everything in the neck, every everything in the neck, every everything in the neck, every electrically responsive cell and electrically responsive cell and electrically responsive cell and projection in the in the neck is being projection in the in the neck is being projection in the in the neck is being affected by this electrode. And so you affected by this electrode. And so you affected by this electrode. And so you can go up just so far with the intensity can go up just so far with the intensity can go up just so far with the intensity and then you have to stop. and then you have to stop. and then you have to stop. So, you know, to your initial So, you know, to your initial So, you know, to your initial question, could a more precise question, could a more precise question, could a more precise stimulation method like optogenetics stimulation method like optogenetics stimulation method like optogenetics help in this setting? help in this setting? help in this setting? In principle, it could because that In principle, it could because that In principle, it could because that would if you would target the light would if you would target the light would if you would target the light sensitivity to just the right kind of sensitivity to just the right kind of sensitivity to just the right kind of cell, let's say cell X that goes from point A let's say cell X that goes from point A let's say cell X that goes from point A to point B that you know causes symptom to point B that you know causes symptom to point B that you know causes symptom relief of a particular kind, then you're relief of a particular kind, then you're relief of a particular kind, then you're in business. You can have that be the in business. You can have that be the in business. You can have that be the only cell that's light sensitive. You're only cell that's light sensitive. You're only cell that's light sensitive. You're not going to affect any of the other not going to affect any of the other not going to affect any of the other cells, the larynx and the pharynx and cells, the larynx and the pharynx and cells, the larynx and the pharynx and the projections passing through. So, that's projections passing through. So, that's projections passing through. So, that's the hope. That's the opportunity. The the hope. That's the opportunity. The the hope. That's the opportunity. The problem is that we don't yet have that level of is that we don't yet have that level of is that we don't yet have that level of specific knowledge. We don't know, okay, specific knowledge. We don't know, okay, specific knowledge. We don't know, okay, it's the cell starting in point A going it's the cell starting in point A going it's the cell starting in point A going to point B that relieves this particular to point B that relieves this particular to point B that relieves this particular symptom. to fix this key on the piano. Yeah. I'm to fix this key on the piano. Yeah. I'm to fix this key on the piano. Yeah. I'm imagining a little tiny um blue light imagining a little tiny um blue light imagining a little tiny um blue light emitting um thing object that's um thing object that's um thing object that's a little bigger than a clump of cells or a little bigger than a clump of cells or a little bigger than a clump of cells or maybe about the size of a clump of maybe about the size of a clump of maybe about the size of a clump of cells. So, we're talking about a little cells. So, we're talking about a little cells. So, we're talking about a little tiny stamp tiny stamp tiny stamp uh each edge half a millimeter in size. uh each edge half a millimeter in size. uh each edge half a millimeter in size. I can imagine that being put under my I can imagine that being put under my I can imagine that being put under my skin and then I would what I'd hit an skin and then I would what I'd hit an skin and then I would what I'd hit an app on my phone and I'd say I'd say, app on my phone and I'd say I'd say, app on my phone and I'd say I'd say, "Dr. Deisseroth, I'm not feeling great "Dr. Deisseroth, I'm not feeling great "Dr. Deisseroth, I'm not feeling great today. Can I increase the stimulation?" today. Can I increase the stimulation?" today. Can I increase the stimulation?" And you say, "Go for it." And then I And you say, "Go for it." And then I And you say, "Go for it." And then I ramp it up. Is that how it would go? ramp it up. Is that how it would go? ramp it up. Is that how it would go? I mean, that's effectively what we I mean, that's effectively what we I mean, that's effectively what we already do with the vagus nerve already do with the vagus nerve already do with the vagus nerve stimulation. The the doctor in this case stimulation. The the doctor in this case stimulation. The the doctor in this case and I have this in some of my patients and I have this in some of my patients and I have this in some of my patients in the clinic. I do vagus nerve in the clinic. I do vagus nerve in the clinic. I do vagus nerve stimulation. I talk to them and I say, stimulation. I talk to them and I say, stimulation. I talk to them and I say, "How are you I would go through the "How are you I would go through the "How are you I would go through the symptoms. I use the psychiatric symptoms. I use the psychiatric symptoms. I use the psychiatric interview to elicit their internal interview to elicit their internal interview to elicit their internal states and then I have a radio frequency states and then I have a radio frequency states and then I have a radio frequency controller that I can dial in Right controller that I can dial in Right controller that I can dial in Right there in real time. there in real time. there in real time. in real time. in real time. in real time. the remote control to essentially to the remote control to essentially to the remote control to essentially to their brain, although it's remote their brain, although it's remote their brain, although it's remote control. Through a couple steps, but yeah, yeah. Through a couple steps, but yeah, yeah. Through a couple steps, but yeah, yeah. And I can I can turn up I can turn up And I can I can turn up I can turn up And I can I can turn up I can turn up the frequency, I can turn up the frequency, I can turn up the frequency, I can turn up the intensity uh all with the radio intensity uh all with the radio intensity uh all with the radio frequency and frequency and frequency and uh control and then it's uh control and then it's uh control and then it's reprogrammed or uh redosed uh and then reprogrammed or uh redosed uh and then reprogrammed or uh redosed uh and then the patient can then this altered the patient can then this altered the patient can then this altered dose. In most patients I don't expect an dose. In most patients I don't expect an dose. In most patients I don't expect an immediate mood change. What I do is I immediate mood change. What I do is I immediate mood change. What I do is I increase the dose until uh increase the dose until uh increase the dose until uh a next level up while asking the patient a next level up while asking the patient a next level up while asking the patient for side effects. Can you still breathe for side effects. Can you still breathe for side effects. Can you still breathe okay? Can you still swallow okay? And I okay? Can you still swallow okay? And I okay? Can you still swallow okay? And I can hear their voice as well and I can hear their voice as well and I can hear their voice as well and I can get a sense can get a sense can get a sense looking at their face. looking at their face. looking at their face. looking at their face. And so I can get looking at their face. And so I can get looking at their face. And so I can get a sense is there a am I in a still in a sense is there a am I in a still in a sense is there a am I in a still in a safe side effect regime? And I and safe side effect regime? And I and safe side effect regime? And I and then, you know, I stop at a and then, you know, I stop at a and then, you know, I stop at a particular point that looks safe and particular point that looks safe and particular point that looks safe and then patient goes home, then patient goes home, then patient goes home, comes back a month later and I get the comes back a month later and I get the comes back a month later and I get the report on how things were over that report on how things were over that report on how things were over that month. That's very exciting. month. That's very exciting. month. That's very exciting. What are your thoughts about um brain What are your thoughts about um brain What are your thoughts about um brain machine interface? It's something that's machine interface? It's something that's machine interface? It's something that's been happening for a long time now. been happening for a long time now. been happening for a long time now. Devices, little probes that are going to Devices, little probes that are going to Devices, little probes that are going to stimulate different patterns of activity stimulate different patterns of activity stimulate different patterns of activity in ensembles of neurons. First of all, in ensembles of neurons. First of all, in ensembles of neurons. First of all, it's an it's an amazing uh scientific it's an it's an amazing uh scientific it's an it's an amazing uh scientific discovery approach. Uh as you mentioned, discovery approach. Uh as you mentioned, discovery approach. Uh as you mentioned, we and others here at Stanford are using we and others here at Stanford are using we and others here at Stanford are using uh electrodes collecting information uh electrodes collecting information uh electrodes collecting information from tens of thousands of neurons. Even from tens of thousands of neurons. Even from tens of thousands of neurons. Even separate from the Neuralink work, as you separate from the Neuralink work, as you separate from the Neuralink work, as you point out, many people have been doing point out, many people have been doing point out, many people have been doing this uh this uh this uh in humans as well as in non-human in humans as well as in non-human in humans as well as in non-human primates. Um primates. Um primates. Um and this is pretty uh powerful. It's and this is pretty uh powerful. It's and this is pretty uh powerful. It's important. This will let us uh important. This will let us uh important. This will let us uh understand what's going on in the brain understand what's going on in the brain understand what's going on in the brain in uh in psychiatric disease and neurological in psychiatric disease and neurological in psychiatric disease and neurological disease and will give us ideas for disease and will give us ideas for disease and will give us ideas for treatment. I see that as something that treatment. I see that as something that treatment. I see that as something that will be part of psychiatry uh will be part of psychiatry uh will be part of psychiatry uh in the long run. Already with deep in the long run. Already with deep in the long run. Already with deep brain stimulation approaches, we can brain stimulation approaches, we can brain stimulation approaches, we can help people with psychiatric disorders. people with psychiatric disorders. people with psychiatric disorders. And that's putting just a single And that's putting just a single And that's putting just a single electrode, not even a complex, you electrode, not even a complex, you electrode, not even a complex, you know, closed-loop system where you're both closed-loop system where you're both closed-loop system where you're both playing in and getting information back. playing in and getting information back. playing in and getting information back. Even just a single stimulation electrode Even just a single stimulation electrode Even just a single stimulation electrode in the brain can help people with in the brain can help people with in the brain can help people with OCD, for example, quite powerfully. One OCD, for example, quite powerfully. One OCD, for example, quite powerfully. One of the questions I get asked a lot is of the questions I get asked a lot is of the questions I get asked a lot is about ADHD and attention deficit of about ADHD and attention deficit of about ADHD and attention deficit of various kinds. I have the hunch that one various kinds. I have the hunch that one various kinds. I have the hunch that one reason I get asked so often is that reason I get asked so often is that reason I get asked so often is that people are feeling really people are feeling really people are feeling really distracted and distracted and distracted and challenged in funneling their attention challenged in funneling their attention challenged in funneling their attention and their behavior. But and their behavior. But and their behavior. But uh and there are a number of reasons for and there are a number of reasons for and there are a number of reasons for that, of course. But what is true ADHD that, of course. But what is true ADHD that, of course. But what is true ADHD and what does it look like, what can be and what does it look like, what can be and what does it look like, what can be done for it, and what if any role for done for it, and what if any role for done for it, and what if any role for channelrhodopsins or these downstream channelrhodopsins or these downstream channelrhodopsins or these downstream technologies that you're developing? technologies that you're developing? technologies that you're developing? What do they What do they offer for What do they What do they offer for What do they What do they offer for people that suffer from ADHD or have a people that suffer from ADHD or have a people that suffer from ADHD or have a family member that suffers from ADHD? family member that suffers from ADHD? family member that suffers from ADHD? Yeah. This is This is This is a pretty interesting branch of a pretty interesting branch of a pretty interesting branch of psychiatry. There's no question that psychiatry. There's no question that psychiatry. There's no question that people have been helped by the people have been helped by the people have been helped by the treatments. There's, you know, active, you know, There's, you know, active, you know, There's, you know, active, you know, debate over, you know, debate over, you know, debate over, you know, what fraction of people who have these what fraction of people who have these what fraction of people who have these symptoms can or should be treated. This is can or should be treated. This is can or should be treated. This is typically Adderall or stimulants of some typically Adderall or stimulants of some typically Adderall or stimulants of some kind. Yeah, for example, stimulants, kind. Yeah, for example, stimulants, kind. Yeah, for example, stimulants, that's right. So, ADHD, it's as its that's right. So, ADHD, it's as its that's right. So, ADHD, it's as its name suggests, it has symptoms of it can name suggests, it has symptoms of it can name suggests, it has symptoms of it can have either a hyperactive state or an have either a hyperactive state or an have either a hyperactive state or an inattentive state. inattentive state. inattentive state. And those can be completely separate from those can be completely separate from those can be completely separate from each other. You could have a patient who each other. You could have a patient who each other. You could have a patient who effectively is not hyperactive at all, but can't is not hyperactive at all, but can't is not hyperactive at all, but can't remain focused on the what's going remain focused on the what's going remain focused on the what's going on around them. on around them. on around them. body can be still, body can be still, body can be still, their mind is darting around. their mind is darting around. their mind is darting around. That's right. That's right. That's right. That's Or they can be very hyperactive with Or they can be very hyperactive with Or they can be very hyperactive with their body. their body. their body. Yeah. It happens both Yeah. It happens both Yeah. It happens both Probably rarely is somebody hyperactive Probably rarely is somebody hyperactive Probably rarely is somebody hyperactive with their body, but their mind is with their body, but their mind is with their body, but their mind is still. I notice I have to think still. I notice I have to think still. I notice I have to think complex abstract thoughts. I notice I complex abstract thoughts. I notice I complex abstract thoughts. I notice I have to be very still. So, my body has have to be very still. So, my body has have to be very still. So, my body has to be almost completely unmoving for me to be almost completely unmoving for me to be almost completely unmoving for me to think very abstractly to think very abstractly to think very abstractly and deeply. Other people are and deeply. Other people are and deeply. Other people are different. Some people when they're different. Some people when they're different. Some people when they're running, they get their best thoughts. I running, they get their best thoughts. I running, they get their best thoughts. I can't even imagine that. My brain does can't even imagine that. My brain does can't even imagine that. My brain does not work that way at all. I have to be not work that way at all. I have to be not work that way at all. I have to be totally motionless. totally motionless. totally motionless. Which is just kind of interesting. Which is just kind of interesting. Which is just kind of interesting. you go about that? I sit much like you go about that? I sit much like you go about that? I sit much like this. You know, I this. You know, I this. You know, I try to have time in each day where I try to have time in each day where I try to have time in each day where I am I'm literally sitting am I'm literally sitting am I'm literally sitting almost in this in this position, but almost in this in this position, but almost in this in this position, but without distraction and thinking. without distraction and thinking. without distraction and thinking. And and it's kind of a it's almost And and it's kind of a it's almost And and it's kind of a it's almost meditative in some ways, except it's meditative in some ways, except it's meditative in some ways, except it's not it's not it's not a true meditation, but I am I am a true meditation, but I am I am a true meditation, but I am I am thinking while not moving and I'm thinking while not moving and I'm thinking while not moving and I'm thinking about this. thinking about this. thinking about this. to structure your thoughts in that time. to structure your thoughts in that time. to structure your thoughts in that time. Interesting. Yeah. So, but everybody as you say is So, but everybody as you say is So, but everybody as you say is very different. And so, with ADHD, very different. And so, with ADHD, very different. And so, with ADHD, you have the key thing is we want to you have the key thing is we want to you have the key thing is we want to make sure that this is present across make sure that this is present across make sure that this is present across different domains of life, school and different domains of life, school and different domains of life, school and home, to show that it really is a home, to show that it really is a home, to show that it really is a pervasive pattern and not something pervasive pattern and not something pervasive pattern and not something specific to you know, the teacher or the specific to you know, the teacher or the specific to you know, the teacher or the home situation or something. the home situation or something. the home situation or something. And then you can help patients It's And then you can help patients It's And then you can help patients It's interesting that ADHD is one of interesting that ADHD is one of interesting that ADHD is one of those disorders where people are trying those disorders where people are trying those disorders where people are trying to work on quantitative EEG based to work on quantitative EEG based to work on quantitative EEG based diagnoses, and so there's some progress diagnoses, and so there's some progress diagnoses, and so there's some progress toward making a diagnosis with looking at making a diagnosis with looking at making a diagnosis with looking at particular externally detectable particular externally detectable particular externally detectable brainwave rhythms. brainwave rhythms. brainwave rhythms. cap with some electrodes that don't cap with some electrodes that don't cap with some electrodes that don't penetrate the skull. penetrate the skull. penetrate the skull. That's right. And this can be done in an That's right. And this can be done in an That's right. And this can be done in an hour or two-hour session. That's right. hour or two-hour session. That's right. hour or two-hour session. That's right. It has to be done in the clinic. It has to be done in the clinic. It has to be done in the clinic. Right. Yeah, in the clinic, right. You Right. Yeah, in the clinic, right. You Right. Yeah, in the clinic, right. You have to have the right recording have to have the right recording have to have the right recording apparatus and so on, but apparatus and so on, but apparatus and so on, but that's in principle as you but that's in principle as you but that's in principle as you increasing confidence comes in exactly increasing confidence comes in exactly increasing confidence comes in exactly which measurements which measurements which measurements uh one could even imagine moving toward, one could even imagine moving toward, one could even imagine moving toward, you know, home tests. Um but we're not you know, home tests. Um but we're not you know, home tests. Um but we're not there yet. there yet. there yet. Amazing. I think um one of the reasons I Amazing. I think um one of the reasons I Amazing. I think um one of the reasons I get asked about it so much is a lot of get asked about it so much is a lot of get asked about it so much is a lot of people wonder if they have ADHD. Uh do people wonder if they have ADHD. Uh do people wonder if they have ADHD. Uh do you think that some of the lifestyle you think that some of the lifestyle you think that some of the lifestyle factors that um factors that um factors that um inhabit us all these days could induce a inhabit us all these days could induce a inhabit us all these days could induce a subclinical or a clinical-like subclinical or a clinical-like subclinical or a clinical-like um ADHD, meaning if I look at people's um ADHD, meaning if I look at people's um ADHD, meaning if I look at people's phone use, including my own, and I don't phone use, including my own, and I don't phone use, including my own, and I don't think of it like addiction. It looks to think of it like addiction. It looks to think of it like addiction. It looks to me and feels to be more like OCD. And me and feels to be more like OCD. And me and feels to be more like OCD. And I'll come clean here by saying when I I'll come clean here by saying when I I'll come clean here by saying when I was younger, when I was a kid, I had a was younger, when I was a kid, I had a was younger, when I was a kid, I had a grunting tic. I used to hide it. I grunting tic. I used to hide it. I grunting tic. I used to hide it. I actually used to hide in the closet cuz actually used to hide in the closet cuz actually used to hide in the closet cuz my dad would make me stop. And I used my dad would make me stop. And I used my dad would make me stop. And I used to Yeah, I couldn't feel any relief of to Yeah, I couldn't feel any relief of to Yeah, I couldn't feel any relief of my mind until I my mind until I my mind until I would do this. And actually now, if I would do this. And actually now, if I would do this. And actually now, if I get very tired, if I've been pushing get very tired, if I've been pushing get very tired, if I've been pushing long hours, it'll come back. So long hours, it'll come back. So long hours, it'll come back. So interesting. I was not treated for it. interesting. I was not treated for it. interesting. I was not treated for it. Um but I will confess that I've had the Um but I will confess that I've had the Um but I will confess that I've had the experience of I always liked sports experience of I always liked sports experience of I always liked sports where I involve a lot of impact, where I involve a lot of impact, where I involve a lot of impact, fortunately not football, because I went fortunately not football, because I went fortunately not football, because I went to a high school where the football team to a high school where the football team to a high school where the football team was terrible. Maybe that would have was terrible. Maybe that would have was terrible. Maybe that would have avoided more impact. But things like avoided more impact. But things like avoided more impact. But things like skateboarding, boxing, skateboarding, boxing, skateboarding, boxing, they bring relief. I feel clarity after they bring relief. I feel clarity after they bring relief. I feel clarity after a head hit, which I avoid. But uh but I a head hit, which I avoid. But uh but I a head hit, which I avoid. But uh but I used to say that's the only time I feel used to say that's the only time I feel used to say that's the only time I feel truly clear for a long And then truly clear for a long And then truly clear for a long And then eventually it dissipated. By about age eventually it dissipated. By about age eventually it dissipated. By about age 16, 17, it just disappeared. 16, 17, it just disappeared. 16, 17, it just disappeared. Um so I have great uh empathy for those Um so I have great uh empathy for those Um so I have great uh empathy for those that feel like there's something that feel like there's something that feel like there's something contained in them that won't allow them contained in them that won't allow them contained in them that won't allow them to focus on what they want on. to focus on what they want on. to focus on what they want on. And these days, with the phone and And these days, with the phone and And these days, with the phone and all these uh email, etc., I wonder all these uh email, etc., I wonder all these uh email, etc., I wonder and I empathize a bit when I hear people and I empathize a bit when I hear people and I empathize a bit when I hear people saying like saying like saying like I think I might have ADHD or ADD. I think I might have ADHD or ADD. I think I might have ADHD or ADD. Do you think it's possible that our Do you think it's possible that our Do you think it's possible that our behaviors and our interaction with the behaviors and our interaction with the behaviors and our interaction with the sensory world, which is really what sensory world, which is really what sensory world, which is really what phones and email really are, could phones and email really are, could phones and email really are, could induce ADD or reactivate it? induce ADD or reactivate it? induce ADD or reactivate it? Yeah, know, Yeah, know, Yeah, know, This is a great question. I think This is a great question. I think This is a great question. I think about it a lot. There's you know, and about it a lot. There's you know, and about it a lot. There's you know, and you mentioned this tic-like and you mentioned this tic-like and you mentioned this tic-like behavior in yourself. It's very behavior in yourself. It's very behavior in yourself. It's very common that people who have tics have common that people who have tics have common that people who have tics have this building up of something that can this building up of something that can this building up of something that can only be relieved by executing the tic, only be relieved by executing the tic, only be relieved by executing the tic, which can be a motor movement or a which can be a motor movement or a which can be a motor movement or a vocalization or even a thought. vocalization or even a thought. vocalization or even a thought. And and And and And and people do I think these days do have people do I think these days do have people do I think these days do have this if they haven't checked their phone this if they haven't checked their phone this if they haven't checked their phone in a while, they do have a build-up a in a while, they do have a build-up a in a while, they do have a build-up a build-up a build-up until they can they build-up a build-up until they can they build-up a build-up until they can they can check it and relieve it. can check it and relieve it. can check it and relieve it. Um and there's some Um and there's some Um and there's some similarities. You know, there is a similarities. You know, there is a similarities. You know, there is a little reward that comes with the with little reward that comes with the with little reward that comes with the with the checking. Um the checking. Um the checking. Um but the key question in all of but the key question in all of but the key question in all of psychiatry what we do is we don't psychiatry what we do is we don't psychiatry what we do is we don't diagnose something unless diagnose something unless diagnose something unless it's disrupting what we call social or it's disrupting what we call social or it's disrupting what we call social or occupational functioning. Like you could occupational functioning. Like you could occupational functioning. Like you could have any number of symptoms, but literally any number of symptoms, but literally any number of symptoms, but literally every psychiatric diagnosis every psychiatric diagnosis every psychiatric diagnosis requires that it has to be disrupting requires that it has to be disrupting requires that it has to be disrupting someone's social or occupational someone's social or occupational someone's social or occupational functioning. And these days, you know, checking your And these days, you know, checking your And these days, you know, checking your phone is pretty adaptive. That pretty phone is pretty adaptive. That pretty phone is pretty adaptive. That pretty much helps your social and occupational much helps your social and occupational much helps your social and occupational functioning. And so we can't functioning. And so we can't functioning. And so we can't we can't make we can't make it a we can't make we can't make it a we can't make we can't make it a psychiatric diagnosis. It's psychiatric diagnosis. It's psychiatric diagnosis. It's at least in the world of today. I'd love at least in the world of today. I'd love at least in the world of today. I'd love your thoughts on your thoughts on your thoughts on psychedelic medicine. Putting them into psychedelic medicine. Putting them into psychedelic medicine. Putting them into patients and seeing tremendous positive patients and seeing tremendous positive patients and seeing tremendous positive effects, but also effects, but also effects, but also tremendous examples of tremendous examples of tremendous examples of induced psychiatric illness. In other induced psychiatric illness. In other induced psychiatric illness. In other words, many people lost their minds as a words, many people lost their minds as a words, many people lost their minds as a consequence of overuse of psychedelics. consequence of overuse of psychedelics. consequence of overuse of psychedelics. I'll probably lose a few I'll probably lose a few I'll probably lose a few people out there. people out there. people out there. Uh but I do want to talk about but I do want to talk about but I do want to talk about what is the state of these compounds? what is the state of these compounds? what is the state of these compounds? And I realize it's a huge category of And I realize it's a huge category of And I realize it's a huge category of compounds, but LSD and psilocybin as I compounds, but LSD and psilocybin as I compounds, but LSD and psilocybin as I understand trigger activation of understand trigger activation of understand trigger activation of particular serotonin receptor particular serotonin receptor particular serotonin receptor mechanisms. May or may not lead to more mechanisms. May or may not lead to more mechanisms. May or may not lead to more widespread activation of the brain more widespread activation of the brain more widespread activation of the brain more that one would see otherwise. But when that one would see otherwise. But when that one would see otherwise. But when you look at the clinical and you look at the clinical and you look at the clinical and experimental literature, experimental literature, experimental literature, what is your sort of top contour sense what is your sort of top contour sense what is your sort of top contour sense of how effective these tools are going of how effective these tools are going of how effective these tools are going to be for treating depression? to be for treating depression? to be for treating depression? Well, you're right to highlight Well, you're right to highlight Well, you're right to highlight both the opportunity and the peril both the opportunity and the peril both the opportunity and the peril that is there. Um that is there. Um that is there. Um And of course, we want to help patients, And of course, we want to help patients, And of course, we want to help patients, and of course, we want to explore and of course, we want to explore and of course, we want to explore anything that might be helpful. And anything that might be helpful. And anything that might be helpful. And but we want to do it in a safe and but we want to do it in a safe and but we want to do it in a safe and rigorous way. rigorous way. rigorous way. But, I do think we should explore But, I do think we should explore But, I do think we should explore these avenues. These are um these avenues. These are um these avenues. These are um agents that alter reality and alter the agents that alter reality and alter the agents that alter reality and alter the experience of reality, I should say, experience of reality, I should say, experience of reality, I should say, in relatively precise ways. They in relatively precise ways. They in relatively precise ways. They do have problems. They can be addictive. do have problems. They can be addictive. do have problems. They can be addictive. They can cause lasting change that is They can cause lasting change that is They can cause lasting change that is not desirable. not desirable. not desirable. Now, that said, uh even as these medications that said, uh even as these medications that said, uh even as these medications exist now, as you know, there's exist now, as you know, there's exist now, as you know, there's an impulse to use them in very small an impulse to use them in very small an impulse to use them in very small doses and to use them as adjunctive doses and to use them as adjunctive doses and to use them as adjunctive treatments for the therapy of treatments for the therapy of treatments for the therapy of various kinds. And I I'm also supportive various kinds. And I I'm also supportive various kinds. And I I'm also supportive of that if done, you know, carefully and of that if done, you know, carefully and of that if done, you know, carefully and rigorously. and rigorously. and rigorously. Of course, there's risk, but there's Of course, there's risk, but there's Of course, there's risk, but there's risk with many other kinds of risk with many other kinds of risk with many other kinds of treatment, and I'm not sure that the treatment, and I'm not sure that the treatment, and I'm not sure that the risks for these medications risks for these medications risks for these medications uh vastly outweigh the risks that we uh vastly outweigh the risks that we uh vastly outweigh the risks that we normally tolerate in other branches of normally tolerate in other branches of normally tolerate in other branches of medicine. Why would they work? I mean, medicine. Why would they work? I mean, medicine. Why would they work? I mean, the um the um the um you know, you know, you know, let's say let's say let's say that indeed their main effect is to that indeed their main effect is to that indeed their main effect is to create more create more create more uh more connectivity at least in the in uh more connectivity at least in the in uh more connectivity at least in the in the moment uh between brain areas. So, the moment uh between brain areas. So, the moment uh between brain areas. So, psychedelics seem to be a trajectory psychedelics seem to be a trajectory psychedelics seem to be a trajectory I'm not off too far off from the dream I'm not off too far off from the dream I'm not off too far off from the dream state where space and time are essentially not where space and time are essentially not where space and time are essentially not as rigid. as rigid. as rigid. And there is this element of And there is this element of And there is this element of synesthesia, of blending of the senses. synesthesia, of blending of the senses. synesthesia, of blending of the senses. Um you know, feeling colors and um Um you know, feeling colors and um Um you know, feeling colors and um hearing uh light and things of that sort. It, uh light and things of that sort. It, uh light and things of that sort. It, you hear these reports, anyway. you hear these reports, anyway. you hear these reports, anyway. Um, why would having that dream-like Um, why would having that dream-like Um, why would having that dream-like experience somehow relieve depression long-term? somehow relieve depression long-term? somehow relieve depression long-term? Do we have any idea why that might be? Do we have any idea why that might be? Do we have any idea why that might be? Okay. I, uh, we have some ideas and no deep I, uh, we have some ideas and no deep I, uh, we have some ideas and no deep understanding. Uh, one way I think understanding. Uh, one way I think understanding. Uh, one way I think about the psychedelics is they, um, about the psychedelics is they, um, about the psychedelics is they, um, increase our willingness to our they increase our willingness to our they increase our willingness to our they increase the willingness of our brain to increase the willingness of our brain to increase the willingness of our brain to accept, uh, unlikely, uh, accept, uh, unlikely, uh, accept, uh, unlikely, uh, ways of constructing the world, unlikely ways of constructing the world, unlikely ways of constructing the world, unlikely hypotheses, as it were, as to what's hypotheses, as it were, as to what's hypotheses, as it were, as to what's going on. The brain, in particular going on. The brain, in particular going on. The brain, in particular cortex, I think, is a hypothesis cortex, I think, is a hypothesis cortex, I think, is a hypothesis generation and testing machine. It's generation and testing machine. It's generation and testing machine. It's coming up with models about everything. coming up with models about everything. coming up with models about everything. It's got a It's got a It's got a lot of bits of data coming in and it's lot of bits of data coming in and it's lot of bits of data coming in and it's making models and updating the models making models and updating the models making models and updating the models and changing them, theories, hypotheses and changing them, theories, hypotheses and changing them, theories, hypotheses for what's going on. for what's going on. for what's going on. And some of those never reach our And some of those never reach our And some of those never reach our conscious mind. And this is something I conscious mind. And this is something I conscious mind. And this is something I talk about in projections in the in the talk about in projections in the in the talk about in projections in the in the book, uh, quite a bit, is book, uh, quite a bit, is book, uh, quite a bit, is many of these are filtered out before many of these are filtered out before many of these are filtered out before they get to our conscious mind. And they get to our conscious mind. And they get to our conscious mind. And that's good. We we think how that's good. We we think how that's good. We we think how distracted we'd be if we were constantly distracted we'd be if we were constantly distracted we'd be if we were constantly having to evaluate all these, you know, having to evaluate all these, you know, having to evaluate all these, you know, hypotheses about, you know, what kinds hypotheses about, you know, what kinds hypotheses about, you know, what kinds of shapes or objects or processes were of shapes or objects or processes were of shapes or objects or processes were out there. out there. out there. And so a lot of this is handled, uh, And so a lot of this is handled, uh, And so a lot of this is handled, uh, before it gets to consciousness. What before it gets to consciousness. What before it gets to consciousness. What the psychedelics seem to do is they the psychedelics seem to do is they the psychedelics seem to do is they change the change the change the uh, threshold for us to become aware of uh, threshold for us to become aware of uh, threshold for us to become aware of these incomplete hypotheses or wrong these incomplete hypotheses or wrong these incomplete hypotheses or wrong hypotheses or hypotheses or hypotheses or concepts that might be noise, uh, but or concepts that might be noise, uh, but or concepts that might be noise, uh, but are just wrong and so are never allowed are just wrong and so are never allowed are just wrong and so are never allowed to get into our conscious mind. to get into our conscious mind. to get into our conscious mind. Now, uh, you know, that that's pretty Now, uh, you know, that that's pretty Now, uh, you know, that that's pretty interesting and it goes wrong in interesting and it goes wrong in interesting and it goes wrong in psychiatric disorders, I think, uh, in psychiatric disorders, I think, uh, in psychiatric disorders, I think, uh, in schizophrenia, that sometimes the in schizophrenia, that sometimes the in schizophrenia, that sometimes the paranoid, uh, paranoid, uh, paranoid, uh, delusions that people have are examples delusions that people have are examples delusions that people have are examples of these, uh, these, uh, these, uh, poor models that escape into the poor models that escape into the poor models that escape into the conscious mind and become, uh, accepted conscious mind and become, uh, accepted conscious mind and become, uh, accepted as reality and they never should have as reality and they never should have as reality and they never should have gotten out there. gotten out there. gotten out there. Now, how could something like this in Now, how could something like this in Now, how could something like this in the right way the right way the right way help with something like depression? help with something like depression? help with something like depression? Patients with depression often are Patients with depression often are Patients with depression often are stuck. They they can't look into the future world of look into the future world of look into the future world of possibilities as effectively. There's possibilities as effectively. There's possibilities as effectively. There's everything seems everything seems everything seems uh hopeless and what does that really mean? hopeless and what does that really mean? hopeless and what does that really mean? They they discount the value of their They they discount the value of their They they discount the value of their own action. They discount the value of own action. They discount the value of own action. They discount the value of the world at giving rise to a future the world at giving rise to a future the world at giving rise to a future that matters. Everything seems to run that matters. Everything seems to run that matters. Everything seems to run out like a river just running out into a out like a river just running out into a out like a river just running out into a desert and drying up. desert and drying up. desert and drying up. And what these agents may do that increase what these agents may do that increase what these agents may do that increase the flow through circuitry, if you the flow through circuitry, if you the flow through circuitry, if you will, the percolation of activity will, the percolation of activity will, the percolation of activity through circuitry may end up doing for through circuitry may end up doing for through circuitry may end up doing for depression is increasing the depression is increasing the depression is increasing the escape of some tendrils of escape of some tendrils of escape of some tendrils of process of forward progression through process of forward progression through process of forward progression through the world. through the world. through the world. Um that's a concept. That's how I think Um that's a concept. That's how I think Um that's a concept. That's how I think about it. about it. about it. There are ways we can make that There are ways we can make that There are ways we can make that rigorous. We we can indeed identify in rigorous. We we can indeed identify in rigorous. We we can indeed identify in the brain by recording, we can see cells the brain by recording, we can see cells the brain by recording, we can see cells that represent that represent that represent steps along a path and steps along a path and steps along a path and look into the future. look into the future. look into the future. And we can rigorously define these cells And we can rigorously define these cells And we can rigorously define these cells and we can see if these are altered on and we can see if these are altered on and we can see if these are altered on psychedelics. And so that's one of the psychedelics. And so that's one of the psychedelics. And so that's one of the reasons that we're reasons that we're reasons that we're uh working with these agents in the uh working with these agents in the uh working with these agents in the laboratory to see are is this really the laboratory to see are is this really the laboratory to see are is this really the case? Are are these opening up case? Are are these opening up case? Are are these opening up new paths or representations of paths new paths or representations of paths new paths or representations of paths into the future? Mhm. MDMA, into the future? Mhm. MDMA, into the future? Mhm. MDMA, ecstasy, is a unique compound in that it ecstasy, is a unique compound in that it ecstasy, is a unique compound in that it leads to big increases in leads to big increases in leads to big increases in brain levels of dopamine and serotonin brain levels of dopamine and serotonin brain levels of dopamine and serotonin simultaneously. And I realized that the simultaneously. And I realized that the simultaneously. And I realized that the neuromodulators like dopamine and neuromodulators like dopamine and neuromodulators like dopamine and serotonin often work in concert, not serotonin often work in concert, not serotonin often work in concert, not alone the way they're commonly described alone the way they're commonly described alone the way they're commonly described in the in the in the you know the more general popular you know the more general popular you know the more general popular discussions. However, discussions. However, discussions. However, uh it is a unique compound and it's it is a unique compound and it's it is a unique compound and it's different than these serotonergic different than these serotonergic different than these serotonergic compounds like LSD and psilocybin. compounds like LSD and psilocybin. compounds like LSD and psilocybin. And there are And there are And there are now data um still emerging that it might now data um still emerging that it might now data um still emerging that it might be an in some cases be an in some cases be an in some cases can be useful for the treatment of can be useful for the treatment of can be useful for the treatment of trauma, PTSD and similar things. trauma, PTSD and similar things. trauma, PTSD and similar things. Why why would that work? And do you And a why would that work? And do you And a why would that work? And do you And a larger question, perhaps the more larger question, perhaps the more larger question, perhaps the more important question is important question is important question is psychedelics, MDMA, LSD, all those psychedelics, MDMA, LSD, all those psychedelics, MDMA, LSD, all those compounds, there in my mind there are compounds, there in my mind there are compounds, there in my mind there are two components. There's the experience two components. There's the experience two components. There's the experience you have while you're on them and then you have while you're on them and then you have while you're on them and then there's the effect they have after. there's the effect they have after. there's the effect they have after. People are generating variations of People are generating variations of People are generating variations of these compounds that are these compounds that are these compounds that are non-hallucinatory variations. But variations. But variations. But how crucial do you think it is to have how crucial do you think it is to have how crucial do you think it is to have the let's stay with MDMA the experience the let's stay with MDMA the experience the let's stay with MDMA the experience of huge levels of dopamine, huge levels of huge levels of dopamine, huge levels of huge levels of dopamine, huge levels of serotonin, atypical levels of dopamine serotonin, atypical levels of dopamine serotonin, atypical levels of dopamine and serotonin released, having this and serotonin released, having this and serotonin released, having this highly abnormal experience in order to highly abnormal experience in order to highly abnormal experience in order to be normal again? Yeah. be normal again? Yeah. be normal again? Yeah. I think the brain learns from those I think the brain learns from those I think the brain learns from those experiences. That's that's the way I see experiences. That's that's the way I see experiences. That's that's the way I see it and so for example, people on who it and so for example, people on who it and so for example, people on who have taken MDMA have taken MDMA have taken MDMA they will as you say they'll have they will as you say they'll have they will as you say they'll have they'll be the acute phase of being you they'll be the acute phase of being you they'll be the acute phase of being you know on the drug and experiencing know on the drug and experiencing know on the drug and experiencing this extreme connectedness with other this extreme connectedness with other this extreme connectedness with other people for example. people for example. people for example. And then the drug uh wears off And then the drug uh wears off And then the drug uh wears off and but the brain learned from that and but the brain learned from that and but the brain learned from that experience. And so what people will experience. And so what people will experience. And so what people will report is yeah, I'm not I'm not in that report is yeah, I'm not I'm not in that report is yeah, I'm not I'm not in that state but I saw what was possible, you state but I saw what was possible, you state but I saw what was possible, you know, I saw yeah, you can know, I saw yeah, you can know, I saw yeah, you can there don't need to be barriers or at there don't need to be barriers or at there don't need to be barriers or at least not as many barriers as I least not as many barriers as I least not as many barriers as I thought. I can connect with more people thought. I can connect with more people thought. I can connect with more people in a in a in a in a way that is helpful. And so I in a way that is helpful. And so I in a way that is helpful. And so I think it it's the learning think it it's the learning think it it's the learning that happens in that state that actually that happens in that state that actually that happens in that state that actually matters. And this as you described that matters. And this as you described that matters. And this as you described that sounds a lot like what I understand that sounds a lot like what I understand that sounds a lot like what I understand to be the hallmark feature of really to be the hallmark feature of really to be the hallmark feature of really good psychoanalysis that the good psychoanalysis that the good psychoanalysis that the relationship between patient and relationship between patient and relationship between patient and therapist hopefully evolves to the point therapist hopefully evolves to the point therapist hopefully evolves to the point where these kinds of tests can be run within these kinds of tests can be run within these kinds of tests can be run within the context of that relationship and the context of that relationship and the context of that relationship and then exported to other relations. Is then exported to other relations. Is then exported to other relations. Is that Exactly right. Yeah. And and that Exactly right. Yeah. And and that Exactly right. Yeah. And and that probably I'm assuming is still the goal probably I'm assuming is still the goal probably I'm assuming is still the goal of really good psychiatry also. It's a of really good psychiatry also. It's a of really good psychiatry also. It's a part of part of part of it is intimacy really. It it should be it is intimacy really. It it should be it is intimacy really. It it should be when we have when we have when we have time I think all good psychiatrists time I think all good psychiatrists time I think all good psychiatrists try to achieve that level of try to achieve that level of try to achieve that level of connection and learning. Try to help connection and learning. Try to help connection and learning. Try to help patients create a new create a new create a new a new model that is stable, that is a new model that is stable, that is a new model that is stable, that is learned and that can help instruct learned and that can help instruct learned and that can help instruct future behavior. future behavior. future behavior. One of the things that I took from One of the things that I took from One of the things that I took from reading your book in addition to reading your book in addition to reading your book in addition to learning so much science and the future learning so much science and the future learning so much science and the future of psychiatry and brain science was of psychiatry and brain science was of psychiatry and brain science was um you know, amidst these very many you know, amidst these very many you know, amidst these very many very tragic cases and sadness and a very tragic cases and sadness and a very tragic cases and sadness and a lot of the weight that puts lot of the weight that puts lot of the weight that puts on the clinician on you also that on the clinician on you also that on the clinician on you also that there's a that there's a there's a that there's a there's a that there's a central chord of optimism that where central chord of optimism that where central chord of optimism that where we're headed is we're headed is we're headed is not just not just not just possible but very likely and better. possible but very likely and better. possible but very likely and better. Yeah. And um Yeah. And um Yeah. And um you know, it you know, it you know, it are you an optimist? I am and this are you an optimist? I am and this are you an optimist? I am and this is By the way, this was a really is By the way, this was a really is By the way, this was a really interesting experience in writing interesting experience in writing interesting experience in writing Projections because Projections because Projections because I had a I had a I had a dual goal. I wanted it to be for dual goal. I wanted it to be for dual goal. I wanted it to be for everybody, literally everybody in the everybody, literally everybody in the everybody, literally everybody in the world who wants to read it. world who wants to read it. world who wants to read it. And yet at the same time I wanted to And yet at the same time I wanted to And yet at the same time I wanted to uh stay absolutely rigorously close to uh stay absolutely rigorously close to uh stay absolutely rigorously close to the science, what was actually known the science, what was actually known the science, what was actually known um when I speaking about science, when I when I speaking about science, when I when I speaking about science, when I was speaking about the neurobiology of was speaking about the neurobiology of was speaking about the neurobiology of the of the brain or psychiatry. I the of the brain or psychiatry. I the of the brain or psychiatry. I wanted to wanted to wanted to not have any of my scientific to not have any of my scientific to not have any of my scientific colleagues think, "Oh, he's going colleagues think, "Oh, he's going colleagues think, "Oh, he's going too far. He's saying too much." And so, too far. He's saying too much." And so, too far. He's saying too much." And so, I had these two goals which I kept I had these two goals which I kept I had these two goals which I kept in my mind the entire time. And and a in my mind the entire time. And and a in my mind the entire time. And and a lot of this trying to find exactly the lot of this trying to find exactly the lot of this trying to find exactly the right word we talked about was right word we talked about was right word we talked about was on this path of staying excruciatingly on this path of staying excruciatingly on this path of staying excruciatingly rigorous in the science and yet rigorous in the science and yet rigorous in the science and yet letting people see the hope, the letting people see the hope, the letting people see the hope, the where things were, have everybody see where things were, have everybody see where things were, have everybody see that we've come a long way, we have a that we've come a long way, we have a that we've come a long way, we have a long way to go, long way to go, long way to go, but the trajectory and the path but the trajectory and the path but the trajectory and the path is beautiful. And so, that is beautiful. And so, that is beautiful. And so, that was the goal I think uh was the goal I think uh was the goal I think uh you know, you know, you know, of course that sounds almost impossible of course that sounds almost impossible of course that sounds almost impossible to jointly satisfy those two jointly satisfy those two jointly satisfy those two those two goals, but I kept that in my those two goals, but I kept that in my those two goals, but I kept that in my mind the whole way through. And yes, I mind the whole way through. And yes, I mind the whole way through. And yes, I am optimistic I and I hope that came am optimistic I and I hope that came am optimistic I and I hope that came through in the book. Well, it certainly through in the book. Well, it certainly through in the book. Well, it certainly did. And at least from this colleague, did. And at least from this colleague, did. And at least from this colleague, um uh you did achieve both. And um uh you did achieve both. And um uh you did achieve both. And um it's a wonderful It's it's a masterful it's a wonderful It's it's a masterful it's a wonderful It's it's a masterful book, really, and one that as a book, really, and one that as a book, really, and one that as a scientist and um somebody who is a scientist and um somebody who is a scientist and um somebody who is a uh fellow brain explorer uh hits all the uh fellow brain explorer uh hits all the uh fellow brain explorer uh hits all the marks of rigor and is incredibly marks of rigor and is incredibly marks of rigor and is incredibly interesting, and there's a ton of interesting, and there's a ton of interesting, and there's a ton of storytelling. Definitely uh check out storytelling. Definitely uh check out storytelling. Definitely uh check out the book. Um there are other people in the book. Um there are other people in the book. Um there are other people in our community that of course are going our community that of course are going our community that of course are going to uh to uh to uh be reaching out on your behalf, but it's be reaching out on your behalf, but it's be reaching out on your behalf, but it's incredible you juggled this it's incredible you juggled this it's incredible you juggled this enormous number of things. Um enormous number of things. Um enormous number of things. Um perhaps even more perhaps even more perhaps even more important, however, is that it's all in important, however, is that it's all in important, however, is that it's all in service to this larger thing of service to this larger thing of service to this larger thing of relieving suffering. So, thank you so relieving suffering. So, thank you so relieving suffering. So, thank you so much for your time today, for the book, much for your time today, for the book, much for your time today, for the book, and the work that went into the book, I and the work that went into the book, I and the work that went into the book, I can't even imagine, for the laboratory can't even imagine, for the laboratory can't even imagine, for the laboratory work and the development channel opsins work and the development channel opsins work and the development channel opsins clarity and all the related clarity and all the related clarity and all the related technologies, and for the clinical technologies, and for the clinical technologies, and for the clinical work you're doing, and for sharing work you're doing, and for sharing work you're doing, and for sharing with us. Well, thank you for all with us. Well, thank you for all with us. Well, thank you for all you're doing and reaching out. I I'm you're doing and reaching out. I I'm you're doing and reaching out. I I'm very impressed by it. It's important and very impressed by it. It's important and very impressed by it. It's important and it's so valuable and thank you and it's so valuable and thank you and it's so valuable and thank you for taking the time and for all your for taking the time and for all your for taking the time and for all your gracious words about the book. Thank gracious words about the book. Thank gracious words about the book. Thank you.