Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Michael Snyder. Dr. Michael today is Dr. Michael Snyder. Dr. Michael today is Dr. Michael Snyder. Dr. Michael Snyder is a professor of genetics at Snyder is a professor of genetics at Snyder is a professor of genetics at Stanford University School of Medicine. Stanford University School of Medicine. Stanford University School of Medicine. His laboratory focuses on how different His laboratory focuses on how different His laboratory focuses on how different people respond differently to different people respond differently to different people respond differently to different types of food and health interventions. types of food and health interventions. types of food and health interventions. and his overall goal is to figure out and his overall goal is to figure out and his overall goal is to figure out how different genes and proteins that how different genes and proteins that how different genes and proteins that different people express impact people's different people express impact people's different people express impact people's immune system function, reaction to immune system function, reaction to immune system function, reaction to different foods and diets, blood sugar different foods and diets, blood sugar different foods and diets, blood sugar regulation, immune system, and regulation, immune system, and regulation, immune system, and longevity. Today's episode could longevity. Today's episode could longevity. Today's episode could basically be summarized as, as you basically be summarized as, as you basically be summarized as, as you suspected, not everybody responds the suspected, not everybody responds the suspected, not everybody responds the same way to the same behavioral drug, same way to the same behavioral drug, same way to the same behavioral drug, supplement, or other treatment designed supplement, or other treatment designed supplement, or other treatment designed to improve health span and lifespan. For to improve health span and lifespan. For to improve health span and lifespan. For instance, the Snyder Laboratory instance, the Snyder Laboratory instance, the Snyder Laboratory published a paper earlier this year published a paper earlier this year published a paper earlier this year showing that different people spike showing that different people spike showing that different people spike insulin in response to different types insulin in response to different types insulin in response to different types of carbohydrates. Things like the of carbohydrates. Things like the of carbohydrates. Things like the glycemic index, which we may be familiar glycemic index, which we may be familiar glycemic index, which we may be familiar with because they are essentially a with because they are essentially a with because they are essentially a readout of how much a given food impacts readout of how much a given food impacts readout of how much a given food impacts blood sugar, depends on who you are. blood sugar, depends on who you are. blood sugar, depends on who you are. They identified so-called potato They identified so-called potato They identified so-called potato spikers. They literally refer to them as spikers. They literally refer to them as spikers. They literally refer to them as potato spikers in this paper versus potato spikers in this paper versus potato spikers in this paper versus grape spikers. People whose insulin grape spikers. People whose insulin grape spikers. People whose insulin spikes in response to potatoes but not spikes in response to potatoes but not spikes in response to potatoes but not grapes and vice versa. And while this grapes and vice versa. And while this grapes and vice versa. And while this might seem kind of silly or trivial or might seem kind of silly or trivial or might seem kind of silly or trivial or micro slicing, the identification of micro slicing, the identification of micro slicing, the identification of these different subtypes of people in these different subtypes of people in these different subtypes of people in the general population who respond the general population who respond the general population who respond differently to different types of foods differently to different types of foods differently to different types of foods is extremely important because I think is extremely important because I think is extremely important because I think most all of us are getting a little bit most all of us are getting a little bit most all of us are getting a little bit tired of all these discussions about tired of all these discussions about tired of all these discussions about carbohydrates are good, carbohydrates are good, carbohydrates are good, carbohydrates are bad, these carbohydrates are good, are bad, these carbohydrates are good, are bad, these carbohydrates are good, these carbohydrates are bad and on and these carbohydrates are bad and on and these carbohydrates are bad and on and on. Turns out it depends on which genes on. Turns out it depends on which genes on. Turns out it depends on which genes and which proteins you make. In other and which proteins you make. In other and which proteins you make. In other words, individual variability matters. words, individual variability matters. words, individual variability matters. We talk about that individual We talk about that individual We talk about that individual variability in the context of nutrition. variability in the context of nutrition. variability in the context of nutrition. Also in the context of fiber, it turns Also in the context of fiber, it turns Also in the context of fiber, it turns out that fiber is something that people out that fiber is something that people out that fiber is something that people generally believe is good for your generally believe is good for your generally believe is good for your health. I certainly believe that. Well, health. I certainly believe that. Well, health. I certainly believe that. Well, different types of fibers impact people different types of fibers impact people different types of fibers impact people differently. Some people experience differently. Some people experience differently. Some people experience systemic inflammation of their brain and systemic inflammation of their brain and systemic inflammation of their brain and body when they eat certain types of body when they eat certain types of body when they eat certain types of fibers. That's bad. Other people fibers. That's bad. Other people fibers. That's bad. Other people experience systematic decreases in experience systematic decreases in experience systematic decreases in inflammation when they eat certain types inflammation when they eat certain types inflammation when they eat certain types of fibers. The key is to identify which of fibers. The key is to identify which of fibers. The key is to identify which category you're in and therefore which category you're in and therefore which category you're in and therefore which fibers to eat. And as it turns out, fibers to eat. And as it turns out, fibers to eat. And as it turns out, different foods have different fiber different foods have different fiber different foods have different fiber types. So, it's tractable. There are types. So, it's tractable. There are types. So, it's tractable. There are things you can do about it. We also talk things you can do about it. We also talk things you can do about it. We also talk about GLP-1 drugs and how those impact about GLP-1 drugs and how those impact about GLP-1 drugs and how those impact longevity. This is something that's very longevity. This is something that's very longevity. This is something that's very controversial and very timely right now. controversial and very timely right now. controversial and very timely right now. And we discuss how different And we discuss how different And we discuss how different psychological interventions, yep, the psychological interventions, yep, the psychological interventions, yep, the Snyder lab has even looked at how Snyder lab has even looked at how Snyder lab has even looked at how different psychological interventions different psychological interventions different psychological interventions impact the genes you make and the impact the genes you make and the impact the genes you make and the proteins you make and their effect on proteins you make and their effect on proteins you make and their effect on health span and lifespan. So today's health span and lifespan. So today's health span and lifespan. So today's discussion is sure to change your mind discussion is sure to change your mind discussion is sure to change your mind about a lot of things related to about a lot of things related to about a lot of things related to nutrition and fitness and medicine. nutrition and fitness and medicine. nutrition and fitness and medicine. However, I promise that thanks to Dr. However, I promise that thanks to Dr. However, I promise that thanks to Dr. Michael Snyder, it will not confuse you. Michael Snyder, it will not confuse you. Michael Snyder, it will not confuse you. In fact, it will clarify many things In fact, it will clarify many things In fact, it will clarify many things that perhaps before the episode were that perhaps before the episode were that perhaps before the episode were confusing to you and many other people. confusing to you and many other people. confusing to you and many other people. Dr. Snyder's laboratory is recognized Dr. Snyder's laboratory is recognized Dr. Snyder's laboratory is recognized for doing extremely rigorous analyses of for doing extremely rigorous analyses of for doing extremely rigorous analyses of the genes and proteins that can explain the genes and proteins that can explain the genes and proteins that can explain individual variability and what people individual variability and what people individual variability and what people should do or not do in order to maximize should do or not do in order to maximize should do or not do in order to maximize their health and longevity. Before we their health and longevity. Before we their health and longevity. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer information bring zerocost to consumer information bring zerocost to consumer information about science and science related tools about science and science related tools about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Michael Snyder. Dr. Michael Snyder, Dr. Michael Snyder. Dr. Michael Snyder, Dr. Michael Snyder. Dr. Michael Snyder, welcome. &gt;&gt; Great to be here. I'd like to start by &gt;&gt; Great to be here. I'd like to start by &gt;&gt; Great to be here. I'd like to start by talking about glucose regulation and talking about glucose regulation and talking about glucose regulation and food and food choice, exercise, sleep, food and food choice, exercise, sleep, food and food choice, exercise, sleep, and how they all interact. But I want to and how they all interact. But I want to and how they all interact. But I want to make it very simple to start. make it very simple to start. make it very simple to start. How is it that what we eat impacts our How is it that what we eat impacts our How is it that what we eat impacts our glucose response? And maybe you could glucose response? And maybe you could glucose response? And maybe you could tell us a little bit about what a tell us a little bit about what a tell us a little bit about what a healthy glucose response looks like. healthy glucose response looks like. healthy glucose response looks like. Because by most people's view, any Because by most people's view, any Because by most people's view, any inflection in blood glucose is a quote inflection in blood glucose is a quote inflection in blood glucose is a quote unquote spike. But what are the sorts of unquote spike. But what are the sorts of unquote spike. But what are the sorts of spikes that matter for health and what spikes that matter for health and what spikes that matter for health and what are the sorts of spikes in blood glucose are the sorts of spikes in blood glucose are the sorts of spikes in blood glucose or what are called glucose excursions or what are called glucose excursions or what are called glucose excursions that you know you go okay well that's a that you know you go okay well that's a that you know you go okay well that's a normal response to eating some food and normal response to eating some food and normal response to eating some food and then it goes back down to baseline. I then it goes back down to baseline. I then it goes back down to baseline. I think this is especially important think this is especially important think this is especially important nowadays with all the interest in nowadays with all the interest in nowadays with all the interest in metabolic health in how particular types metabolic health in how particular types metabolic health in how particular types of foods like processed foods are indeed of foods like processed foods are indeed of foods like processed foods are indeed far worse for us and on and on. So um if far worse for us and on and on. So um if far worse for us and on and on. So um if you could just give us your view and you could just give us your view and you could just give us your view and understanding of glucose excursions, understanding of glucose excursions, understanding of glucose excursions, what they mean when they're good when what they mean when they're good when what they mean when they're good when they're bad. they're bad. they're bad. &gt;&gt; Well, I would say that um you know high &gt;&gt; Well, I would say that um you know high &gt;&gt; Well, I would say that um you know high long prolonged spikes is obviously long prolonged spikes is obviously long prolonged spikes is obviously pretty bad. Um, but certain things like pretty bad. Um, but certain things like pretty bad. Um, but certain things like if you eat a grape, grapes pretty loaded if you eat a grape, grapes pretty loaded if you eat a grape, grapes pretty loaded with sugar, but it's a pretty transient with sugar, but it's a pretty transient with sugar, but it's a pretty transient spike. It'll go up. Uh, and so that spike. It'll go up. Uh, and so that spike. It'll go up. Uh, and so that would be a transient one. Uh, actually would be a transient one. Uh, actually would be a transient one. Uh, actually when you do strength training, for when you do strength training, for when you do strength training, for example, for exercise, you break down example, for exercise, you break down example, for exercise, you break down glucagon, which is a, you know, it's a glucagon, which is a, you know, it's a glucagon, which is a, you know, it's a polymer of sugar that you break down, polymer of sugar that you break down, polymer of sugar that you break down, gives you energy. That's important for gives you energy. That's important for gives you energy. That's important for when you're doing exercise and training, when you're doing exercise and training, when you're doing exercise and training, and that will give a glucose spike. I and that will give a glucose spike. I and that will give a glucose spike. I get a glucose spike every morning when I get a glucose spike every morning when I get a glucose spike every morning when I weight train. So that would be a normal weight train. So that would be a normal weight train. So that would be a normal healthy one, but it's transient. It goes healthy one, but it's transient. It goes healthy one, but it's transient. It goes away pretty quickly. away pretty quickly. away pretty quickly. &gt;&gt; What's quickly? &gt;&gt; What's quickly? &gt;&gt; What's quickly? &gt;&gt; Within uh 30 minutes maybe most 60 &gt;&gt; Within uh 30 minutes maybe most 60 &gt;&gt; Within uh 30 minutes maybe most 60 minutes. Um now I'm a special case. I'm minutes. Um now I'm a special case. I'm minutes. Um now I'm a special case. I'm a type two diabetic so my spikes go a type two diabetic so my spikes go a type two diabetic so my spikes go higher and longer than most people. Um higher and longer than most people. Um higher and longer than most people. Um so yeah, mine are not good spikes, but so yeah, mine are not good spikes, but so yeah, mine are not good spikes, but we can get into that. So what is a good we can get into that. So what is a good we can get into that. So what is a good spike? Well, the calibration people spike? Well, the calibration people spike? Well, the calibration people mostly uses time and range. It's a mostly uses time and range. It's a mostly uses time and range. It's a simple metric. Meaning, if you're a simple metric. Meaning, if you're a simple metric. Meaning, if you're a healthy person, your glucose is normally healthy person, your glucose is normally healthy person, your glucose is normally for most people around 90. Um, and if for most people around 90. Um, and if for most people around 90. Um, and if you're off, you will go higher than you're off, you will go higher than you're off, you will go higher than that. For most people, you want to keep that. For most people, you want to keep that. For most people, you want to keep your glucose between 70 and 140 if your glucose between 70 and 140 if your glucose between 70 and 140 if you're healthy. For diabetics, they say you're healthy. For diabetics, they say you're healthy. For diabetics, they say try and keep it between 70 and 180. And try and keep it between 70 and 180. And try and keep it between 70 and 180. And that is what people try to do. And and that is what people try to do. And and that is what people try to do. And and most healthy people, it's pretty easy. most healthy people, it's pretty easy. most healthy people, it's pretty easy. And I think one of the things we've And I think one of the things we've And I think one of the things we've done, you've heard about continuous done, you've heard about continuous done, you've heard about continuous glucose monitors, these devices, and I'm glucose monitors, these devices, and I'm glucose monitors, these devices, and I'm wearing one, and I some of your staff I wearing one, and I some of your staff I wearing one, and I some of your staff I know are wearing them as well. And know are wearing them as well. And know are wearing them as well. And they're over the counter now. You put they're over the counter now. You put they're over the counter now. You put these on your arm and they measure your these on your arm and they measure your these on your arm and they measure your glucose every five minutes so you can glucose every five minutes so you can glucose every five minutes so you can see exactly what's going on. And so, uh, see exactly what's going on. And so, uh, see exactly what's going on. And so, uh, we put them on so-called normal people, we put them on so-called normal people, we put them on so-called normal people, pre-diabetics, and some diabetics. That pre-diabetics, and some diabetics. That pre-diabetics, and some diabetics. That was already well known. diabetics will was already well known. diabetics will was already well known. diabetics will spike their glucose through the roof too spike their glucose through the roof too spike their glucose through the roof too high for too long. Uh and then that high for too long. Uh and then that high for too long. Uh and then that people devis especially type ones people devis especially type ones people devis especially type ones control mechanisms for releasing control mechanisms for releasing control mechanisms for releasing insulin and controlling all of that. But insulin and controlling all of that. But insulin and controlling all of that. But for um the average person that wasn't so for um the average person that wasn't so for um the average person that wasn't so well known at the time we were doing well known at the time we were doing well known at the time we were doing this and it was a bit of a surprise to this and it was a bit of a surprise to this and it was a bit of a surprise to see that a lot of people some were did see that a lot of people some were did see that a lot of people some were did have very good glucose control but some have very good glucose control but some have very good glucose control but some pre-diabetics were what we call moderate pre-diabetics were what we call moderate pre-diabetics were what we call moderate spikers. we came up with named spikers. we came up with named spikers. we came up with named glucotypes as it's a way of quantifying glucotypes as it's a way of quantifying glucotypes as it's a way of quantifying this and uh and then some people are this and uh and then some people are this and uh and then some people are spiking just as bad as diabetics and had spiking just as bad as diabetics and had spiking just as bad as diabetics and had no idea uh and so it's a way of no idea uh and so it's a way of no idea uh and so it's a way of revealing what was going on. So it's revealing what was going on. So it's revealing what was going on. So it's recommended that you try to stay in this recommended that you try to stay in this recommended that you try to stay in this 7140 but it is a bit arbitrary but it's 7140 but it is a bit arbitrary but it's 7140 but it is a bit arbitrary but it's not a bad rule of thumb to work by not a bad rule of thumb to work by not a bad rule of thumb to work by for the average person. But again, some for the average person. But again, some for the average person. But again, some people have very good glucose people have very good glucose people have very good glucose control. Some are moderate spikers and control. Some are moderate spikers and control. Some are moderate spikers and some are severe. And it's pretty clear some are severe. And it's pretty clear some are severe. And it's pretty clear that excessive spiking, especially in that excessive spiking, especially in that excessive spiking, especially in diabetics, is associated with diabetics, is associated with diabetics, is associated with cardiovascular disease and other things. cardiovascular disease and other things. cardiovascular disease and other things. There's some pretty strong papers out There's some pretty strong papers out There's some pretty strong papers out there on that. So, you do want to keep there on that. So, you do want to keep there on that. So, you do want to keep it under control. And there's a very it under control. And there's a very it under control. And there's a very strong correlation between this time and strong correlation between this time and strong correlation between this time and range measurement I mentioned and range measurement I mentioned and range measurement I mentioned and something called hemoglobin A1C. That's something called hemoglobin A1C. That's something called hemoglobin A1C. That's a measure of your steadystate glucose. a measure of your steadystate glucose. a measure of your steadystate glucose. And so if you have high hemoglobin A1C, And so if you have high hemoglobin A1C, And so if you have high hemoglobin A1C, that's typically how we classify people that's typically how we classify people that's typically how we classify people for diabetes and pre-diabetes. If you're for diabetes and pre-diabetes. If you're for diabetes and pre-diabetes. If you're over 65 or over, you're classified as over 65 or over, you're classified as over 65 or over, you're classified as diabetic. If you're 57 to 64, you're diabetic. If you're 57 to 64, you're diabetic. If you're 57 to 64, you're pre-diabetic. And if you're under that, pre-diabetic. And if you're under that, pre-diabetic. And if you're under that, you're so-called normal. And this you're so-called normal. And this you're so-called normal. And this time and range will actually correlate time and range will actually correlate time and range will actually correlate very well with that. So it is it's very well with that. So it is it's very well with that. So it is it's a surrogate measure for that. But it's a surrogate measure for that. But it's a surrogate measure for that. But it's actually pretty cool because it's you actually pretty cool because it's you actually pretty cool because it's you can precisely see what's going on in can precisely see what's going on in can precisely see what's going on in real time unlike a hemoglobin A1C real time unlike a hemoglobin A1C real time unlike a hemoglobin A1C measurement which you get periodically. measurement which you get periodically. measurement which you get periodically. So if you want to dig into that further So if you want to dig into that further So if you want to dig into that further I would say that you know what's cool I would say that you know what's cool I would say that you know what's cool about these CGMs is that you wear them about these CGMs is that you wear them about these CGMs is that you wear them like I'm wearing one now. You can wear like I'm wearing one now. You can wear like I'm wearing one now. You can wear them the for about 14 days depends on them the for about 14 days depends on them the for about 14 days depends on the particular device and you see the particular device and you see the particular device and you see exactly what foods do what to you and exactly what foods do what to you and exactly what foods do what to you and we're all different. So some people we're all different. So some people we're all different. So some people spiked to bananas, some to potatoes, spiked to bananas, some to potatoes, spiked to bananas, some to potatoes, some to pasta, some to white bread, some to pasta, some to white bread, some to pasta, some to white bread, some to brown bread. And so uh this was shown to brown bread. And so uh this was shown to brown bread. And so uh this was shown by Aaron Seagull's lab at the Weissman by Aaron Seagull's lab at the Weissman by Aaron Seagull's lab at the Weissman and our lab had found something similar. and our lab had found something similar. and our lab had found something similar. Uh and it's very personal. And so we've Uh and it's very personal. And so we've Uh and it's very personal. And so we've been spending a lot of time trying to been spending a lot of time trying to been spending a lot of time trying to dig into what's behind that. dig into what's behind that. dig into what's behind that. &gt;&gt; So different people glucose spike to &gt;&gt; So different people glucose spike to &gt;&gt; So different people glucose spike to different foods. It's hard to predict on different foods. It's hard to predict on different foods. It's hard to predict on the basis of something like a chart of the basis of something like a chart of the basis of something like a chart of glycemic index for instance. Um, so if I glycemic index for instance. Um, so if I glycemic index for instance. Um, so if I understand correctly and I have glanced understand correctly and I have glanced understand correctly and I have glanced at those papers, um, you know, I might at those papers, um, you know, I might at those papers, um, you know, I might be able to eat mango with nothing else be able to eat mango with nothing else be able to eat mango with nothing else and my blood glucose doesn't go out of and my blood glucose doesn't go out of and my blood glucose doesn't go out of range or at least not for very long. range or at least not for very long. range or at least not for very long. Whereas somebody else might have a Whereas somebody else might have a Whereas somebody else might have a very big and prolonged spike in blood very big and prolonged spike in blood very big and prolonged spike in blood glucose to mango, but maybe there are glucose to mango, but maybe there are glucose to mango, but maybe there are things they can eat that I can't eat things they can eat that I can't eat things they can eat that I can't eat like I don't know, sourdough bread or like I don't know, sourdough bread or like I don't know, sourdough bread or something. By the way, I can eat something. By the way, I can eat something. By the way, I can eat sourdough bread, but just by way of sourdough bread, but just by way of sourdough bread, but just by way of example, &gt;&gt; 100%. Yeah. And so, and so really the &gt;&gt; 100%. Yeah. And so, and so really the &gt;&gt; 100%. Yeah. And so, and so really the only way to know, as you're pointing only way to know, as you're pointing only way to know, as you're pointing out, is to measure. I want to talk out, is to measure. I want to talk out, is to measure. I want to talk a lot about measurement today. For those a lot about measurement today. For those a lot about measurement today. For those that are just listening, not watching, that are just listening, not watching, that are just listening, not watching, uh Mike is wearing many sensors. How uh Mike is wearing many sensors. How uh Mike is wearing many sensors. How many sensors? You have got four watches. many sensors? You have got four watches. many sensors? You have got four watches. &gt;&gt; I have my four watches and my ring. And &gt;&gt; I have my four watches and my ring. And &gt;&gt; I have my four watches and my ring. And even my hearing aids are sensors, even my hearing aids are sensors, even my hearing aids are sensors, believe it or not. So, believe it or not. So, believe it or not. So, &gt;&gt; we're for a hearing, but uh &gt;&gt; we're for a hearing, but uh &gt;&gt; we're for a hearing, but uh &gt;&gt; we're going to get into all of that. Um &gt;&gt; we're going to get into all of that. Um &gt;&gt; we're going to get into all of that. Um &gt;&gt; but maybe we could talk a little bit &gt;&gt; but maybe we could talk a little bit &gt;&gt; but maybe we could talk a little bit about some of the subjective experience about some of the subjective experience about some of the subjective experience of blood glucose excursions, both of blood glucose excursions, both of blood glucose excursions, both healthy and unhealthy. Okay. Um, most healthy and unhealthy. Okay. Um, most healthy and unhealthy. Okay. Um, most people are familiar with eating a big people are familiar with eating a big people are familiar with eating a big meal like the, you know, the cliche is meal like the, you know, the cliche is meal like the, you know, the cliche is the, you know, the Thanksgiving meal the, you know, the Thanksgiving meal the, you know, the Thanksgiving meal after which you're tired where after which you're tired where after which you're tired where you stuffed yourself with protein and you stuffed yourself with protein and you stuffed yourself with protein and carbohydrates and dessert, etc. Maybe carbohydrates and dessert, etc. Maybe carbohydrates and dessert, etc. Maybe some alcohol too in some cases. But some alcohol too in some cases. But some alcohol too in some cases. But I think people are also familiar with, I think people are also familiar with, I think people are also familiar with, you know, eating a certain food. Um, you know, eating a certain food. Um, you know, eating a certain food. Um, like for me lately, I'll have my bowl of like for me lately, I'll have my bowl of like for me lately, I'll have my bowl of oatmeal with some berries and my protein oatmeal with some berries and my protein oatmeal with some berries and my protein drink after I train. And I'm noticing drink after I train. And I'm noticing drink after I train. And I'm noticing with each successive year, I'm getting with each successive year, I'm getting with each successive year, I'm getting really sleepy after I eat this. And I've really sleepy after I eat this. And I've really sleepy after I eat this. And I've swapped out the oatmeal for a swapped out the oatmeal for a swapped out the oatmeal for a different carbohydrate recently, just different carbohydrate recently, just different carbohydrate recently, just some white rice, and I feel fine, right? some white rice, and I feel fine, right? some white rice, and I feel fine, right? &gt;&gt; And I don't think this is my &gt;&gt; And I don't think this is my &gt;&gt; And I don't think this is my imagination. I mean, in one case, I want imagination. I mean, in one case, I want imagination. I mean, in one case, I want to take a nap afterwards. In the other to take a nap afterwards. In the other to take a nap afterwards. In the other case, I'm good to keep going, and I case, I'm good to keep going, and I case, I'm good to keep going, and I generally have a lot of energy. So, is generally have a lot of energy. So, is generally have a lot of energy. So, is what I just described atypical? What are what I just described atypical? What are what I just described atypical? What are some subjective effects of high some subjective effects of high some subjective effects of high glucose spikes? glucose spikes? glucose spikes? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, certainly uh sleepiness is &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, certainly uh sleepiness is &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, certainly uh sleepiness is one. I can put myself to sleep with a one. I can put myself to sleep with a one. I can put myself to sleep with a piece of pizza. Um I'm diabetic. I'm a piece of pizza. Um I'm diabetic. I'm a piece of pizza. Um I'm diabetic. I'm a unusual diabetic. We can talk about unusual diabetic. We can talk about unusual diabetic. We can talk about that, too. Uh and yeah, if I eat pizza, that, too. Uh and yeah, if I eat pizza, that, too. Uh and yeah, if I eat pizza, my glucose goes through the roof and um my glucose goes through the roof and um my glucose goes through the roof and um I will get sleepy. I will get sleepy. I will get sleepy. &gt;&gt; So, does that mean that you eat and you &gt;&gt; So, does that mean that you eat and you &gt;&gt; So, does that mean that you eat and you feel sleepy or there's a uh a period feel sleepy or there's a uh a period feel sleepy or there's a uh a period after you eat? Because this is what I after you eat? Because this is what I after you eat? Because this is what I experience where I feel very energized experience where I feel very energized experience where I feel very energized for a short while and then it's almost for a short while and then it's almost for a short while and then it's almost like my vision gets a little blurry and like my vision gets a little blurry and like my vision gets a little blurry and I feel kind of like um yeah like I just I feel kind of like um yeah like I just I feel kind of like um yeah like I just want to curl up and take a nap even if I want to curl up and take a nap even if I want to curl up and take a nap even if I slept great the night before. Is that a slept great the night before. Is that a slept great the night before. Is that a blood glucose response? blood glucose response? blood glucose response? &gt;&gt; I believe so. I mean there are multiple &gt;&gt; I believe so. I mean there are multiple &gt;&gt; I believe so. I mean there are multiple things that affect sleepiness and you things that affect sleepiness and you things that affect sleepiness and you probably know this better than me since probably know this better than me since probably know this better than me since uh you've covered sleep more but um yeah uh you've covered sleep more but um yeah uh you've covered sleep more but um yeah like tryptophan things like this can like tryptophan things like this can like tryptophan things like this can help induce sleep as well but certainly help induce sleep as well but certainly help induce sleep as well but certainly glucose these large glucose spikes uh I glucose these large glucose spikes uh I glucose these large glucose spikes uh I can say personally make me very can say personally make me very can say personally make me very sleepy uh and alcohol can make a lot of sleepy uh and alcohol can make a lot of sleepy uh and alcohol can make a lot of people sleepy too but you're right there people sleepy too but you're right there people sleepy too but you're right there can be a lag because that first little can be a lag because that first little can be a lag because that first little shot of glucose can be a stimulant um shot of glucose can be a stimulant um shot of glucose can be a stimulant um but uh very soon that shot can go very but uh very soon that shot can go very but uh very soon that shot can go very large uh of glucose and at least very large uh of glucose and at least very large uh of glucose and at least for me it makes me very sleepy. So for me it makes me very sleepy. So for me it makes me very sleepy. So I think it's very normal. I think it's very normal. I think it's very normal. &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there &gt;&gt; We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep and that includes things that we sleep and that includes things that we sleep and that includes things that we can take things like magnesium can take things like magnesium can take things like magnesium thrienate, theine, chamomile extract and thrienate, theine, chamomile extract and thrienate, theine, chamomile extract and glycine along with lesserk known things glycine along with lesserk known things glycine along with lesserk known things like saffron and valyan root. These are like saffron and valyan root. These are like saffron and valyan root. These are all clinically supported ingredients all clinically supported ingredients all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay that can help you fall asleep, stay that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep and wake up feeling more asleep and wake up feeling more asleep and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our refreshed. I'm excited to share that our refreshed. I'm excited to share that our longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink product called AGZ, a nightly drink product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep designed to help you get better sleep designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up feeling super and have you wake up feeling super and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've refreshed. Over the past few years, I've refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help worked with the team at AG1 to help worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the create this new AGZ formula. It has the create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting compounds in best sleep supporting compounds in best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy to exactly the right ratios in one easy to exactly the right ratios in one easy to drink mix. This removes all the drink mix. This removes all the drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forge the vast complexity of trying to forge the vast complexity of trying to forge the vast landscape of supplements focused on landscape of supplements focused on landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront for my savings and my investing for my savings and my investing for my savings and my investing for nearly a decade, and I absolutely love nearly a decade, and I absolutely love nearly a decade, and I absolutely love it. At the start of every year, I set it. At the start of every year, I set it. At the start of every year, I set new goals, and one of my goals for 2025 new goals, and one of my goals for 2025 new goals, and one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on saving money. Since I is to focus on saving money. Since I is to focus on saving money. Since I have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings in my Wealthfront cash account where I'm in my Wealthfront cash account where I'm in my Wealthfront cash account where I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage yield able to earn 4% annual percentage yield able to earn 4% annual percentage yield on my deposits, and you can as well. on my deposits, and you can as well. on my deposits, and you can as well. With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on your cash from partner banks until your cash from partner banks until your cash from partner banks until you're ready to either spend that money you're ready to either spend that money you're ready to either spend that money or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also get free instant withdrawals to eligible get free instant withdrawals to eligible get free instant withdrawals to eligible accounts every day, even on weekends and accounts every day, even on weekends and accounts every day, even on weekends and holidays. The 4% APY is not a holidays. The 4% APY is not a holidays. The 4% APY is not a promotional rate, and there's no limit promotional rate, and there's no limit promotional rate, and there's no limit to what you can deposit and earn. And to what you can deposit and earn. And to what you can deposit and earn. And you can even get protection for up to $8 you can even get protection for up to $8 you can even get protection for up to $8 million through FDIC insurance provided million through FDIC insurance provided million through FDIC insurance provided through Wealthfront's partner banks. through Wealthfront's partner banks. through Wealthfront's partner banks. Wealthfront gives you free instant Wealthfront gives you free instant Wealthfront gives you free instant withdrawals where it takes just minutes withdrawals where it takes just minutes withdrawals where it takes just minutes to transfer your money to eligible to transfer your money to eligible to transfer your money to eligible external accounts. It also takes just external accounts. It also takes just external accounts. It also takes just minutes to transfer your cash from the minutes to transfer your cash from the minutes to transfer your cash from the cash account to any of Wealthfront's cash account to any of Wealthfront's cash account to any of Wealthfront's automated investment accounts when automated investment accounts when automated investment accounts when you're ready to invest. There are you're ready to invest. There are you're ready to invest. There are already a million people using already a million people using already a million people using Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on your cash today. If you'd like to try your cash today. If you'd like to try your cash today. If you'd like to try Wealthfront, go to Wealthfront, go to Wealthfront, go to wealthfront.com/huberman to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into your first cash account. deposit into your first cash account. deposit into your first cash account. That's wealthfront.com/huberman That's wealthfront.com/huberman That's wealthfront.com/huberman to get started now. This has been a paid to get started now. This has been a paid to get started now. This has been a paid testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is subject to change. For more information, subject to change. For more information, subject to change. For more information, see the episode description. see the episode description. see the episode description. Yeah, there was this idea that um if Yeah, there was this idea that um if Yeah, there was this idea that um if something is rather high on the glycemic something is rather high on the glycemic something is rather high on the glycemic index, meaning it spikes your blood index, meaning it spikes your blood index, meaning it spikes your blood sugar robustly, that by combining that sugar robustly, that by combining that sugar robustly, that by combining that food with another food or let's say some food with another food or let's say some food with another food or let's say some fiber. Yeah. fiber. Yeah. fiber. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um you know, as opposed to fruit juice, &gt;&gt; Um you know, as opposed to fruit juice, &gt;&gt; Um you know, as opposed to fruit juice, you know, eating the whole fruit, which you know, eating the whole fruit, which you know, eating the whole fruit, which of course includes the fiber, um at of course includes the fiber, um at of course includes the fiber, um at least in a different form. Um or adding least in a different form. Um or adding least in a different form. Um or adding some fat, some fat, some fat, &gt;&gt; you know, so I've tried doing this, you &gt;&gt; you know, so I've tried doing this, you &gt;&gt; you know, so I've tried doing this, you know, adding a bit more fat to that know, adding a bit more fat to that know, adding a bit more fat to that meal, but you know, in some cases it meal, but you know, in some cases it meal, but you know, in some cases it still happens. It doesn't matter if you still happens. It doesn't matter if you still happens. It doesn't matter if you try and blunt the blood glucose response try and blunt the blood glucose response try and blunt the blood glucose response with fat or with fiber, you just with fat or with fiber, you just with fat or with fiber, you just find that you get that kind of like buzz find that you get that kind of like buzz find that you get that kind of like buzz and then crash, and then crash, and then crash, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And it's not the kind of crash where you &gt;&gt; And it's not the kind of crash where you &gt;&gt; And it's not the kind of crash where you can't do anything. It's it's actually can't do anything. It's it's actually can't do anything. It's it's actually more sinister than that. It's um it's more sinister than that. It's um it's more sinister than that. It's um it's more of a like a brain fog that then more of a like a brain fog that then more of a like a brain fog that then transitions into the desire to take a transitions into the desire to take a transitions into the desire to take a late morning nap, which if you slept late morning nap, which if you slept late morning nap, which if you slept well the night before, you really well the night before, you really well the night before, you really shouldn't be feeling. shouldn't be feeling. shouldn't be feeling. &gt;&gt; Well, you can mitigate that, of course, &gt;&gt; Well, you can mitigate that, of course, &gt;&gt; Well, you can mitigate that, of course, by doing a walk and try and burn off a by doing a walk and try and burn off a by doing a walk and try and burn off a little bit of that glucose. We can get little bit of that glucose. We can get little bit of that glucose. We can get into that. Tell us about walks because into that. Tell us about walks because into that. Tell us about walks because we we've talked a little bit about those we we've talked a little bit about those we we've talked a little bit about those on this podcast before, but what is the on this podcast before, but what is the on this podcast before, but what is the effect of a short walk and does it need effect of a short walk and does it need effect of a short walk and does it need to be a brisk walk or can to be a brisk walk or can to be a brisk walk or can &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think brisk walks seem to be &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think brisk walks seem to be &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think brisk walks seem to be better. Uh there's d there's studies better. Uh there's d there's studies better. Uh there's d there's studies from other people on that a from other people on that a from other people on that a brisk walk for 15 minutes or 20 minutes brisk walk for 15 minutes or 20 minutes brisk walk for 15 minutes or 20 minutes after you eat will help suppress those after you eat will help suppress those after you eat will help suppress those glucose spikes. Uh and so um and yeah, glucose spikes. Uh and so um and yeah, glucose spikes. Uh and so um and yeah, so there in fact some of these um so there in fact some of these um so there in fact some of these um companies that have set up around companies that have set up around companies that have set up around personalized management of glucose uh personalized management of glucose uh personalized management of glucose uh I'm involved with one called January and I'm involved with one called January and I'm involved with one called January and there's others out there too. They there's others out there too. They there's others out there too. They actually recommend that if you eat actually recommend that if you eat actually recommend that if you eat something that spikes your glucose, you something that spikes your glucose, you something that spikes your glucose, you should take a uh a brisk walk and that should take a uh a brisk walk and that should take a uh a brisk walk and that will suppress your spike and they can will suppress your spike and they can will suppress your spike and they can they'll actually teach you that and you they'll actually teach you that and you they'll actually teach you that and you can see it personally. And so one thing can see it personally. And so one thing can see it personally. And so one thing uh we've done is for example, most uh we've done is for example, most uh we've done is for example, most people spike to white rice, believe it people spike to white rice, believe it people spike to white rice, believe it or not, it's high glycemic index, but or not, it's high glycemic index, but or not, it's high glycemic index, but glycemic is more personal than people glycemic is more personal than people glycemic is more personal than people give credit for. Anyway, you will spike give credit for. Anyway, you will spike give credit for. Anyway, you will spike your glucose, but if you take a brisk your glucose, but if you take a brisk your glucose, but if you take a brisk 20-minute walk, you can just see that 20-minute walk, you can just see that 20-minute walk, you can just see that spike is much less. spike is much less. spike is much less. &gt;&gt; And is that simply due to the low-level &gt;&gt; And is that simply due to the low-level &gt;&gt; And is that simply due to the low-level mus muscle contractions associated with mus muscle contractions associated with mus muscle contractions associated with walking are just pulling they're just walking are just pulling they're just walking are just pulling they're just acting as a glucose scavenger? acting as a glucose scavenger? acting as a glucose scavenger? &gt;&gt; That's what I assumed. Yes. Uh that &gt;&gt; That's what I assumed. Yes. Uh that &gt;&gt; That's what I assumed. Yes. Uh that you're burning it off. Did you see this you're burning it off. Did you see this you're burning it off. Did you see this study out of um I forget the university study out of um I forget the university study out of um I forget the university in Texas. I think it might have been in Texas. I think it might have been in Texas. I think it might have been University of Houston where they looked University of Houston where they looked University of Houston where they looked at um people doing what they called at um people doing what they called at um people doing what they called soius push-ups. Did you see this study? soius push-ups. Did you see this study? soius push-ups. Did you see this study? &gt;&gt; No, I haven't seen it. &gt;&gt; No, I haven't seen it. &gt;&gt; No, I haven't seen it. &gt;&gt; This is wild. So they basically had &gt;&gt; This is wild. So they basically had &gt;&gt; This is wild. So they basically had someone uh subjects, it was more than someone uh subjects, it was more than someone uh subjects, it was more than one subject, of course, sit in a chair one subject, of course, sit in a chair one subject, of course, sit in a chair and um essentially do the equivalent of and um essentially do the equivalent of and um essentially do the equivalent of what gym goers would call a seated of what gym goers would call a seated of what gym goers would call a seated calf raise. They called it a calf raise. They called it a calf raise. They called it a calf push-up. But okay, that all that push-up. But okay, that all that push-up. But okay, that all that nomenclature is kind of silly. What it nomenclature is kind of silly. What it nomenclature is kind of silly. What it really is keeping your toes on the really is keeping your toes on the really is keeping your toes on the floor and lifting your heels. It's like floor and lifting your heels. It's like floor and lifting your heels. It's like being like a knee bouncer in class what being like a knee bouncer in class what being like a knee bouncer in class what we were all told we shouldn't do. It we were all told we shouldn't do. It we were all told we shouldn't do. It turns out the soius even though it's turns out the soius even though it's turns out the soius even though it's only 1% of the total body musculature only 1% of the total body musculature only 1% of the total body musculature &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; um &gt;&gt; acts as more of a glucose sponge than uh &gt;&gt; acts as more of a glucose sponge than uh &gt;&gt; acts as more of a glucose sponge than uh other muscles in the body which sort of other muscles in the body which sort of other muscles in the body which sort of makes sense given the walking makes sense given the walking makes sense given the walking &gt;&gt; okay &gt;&gt; okay &gt;&gt; okay &gt;&gt; we've been talking about &gt;&gt; we've been talking about &gt;&gt; we've been talking about &gt;&gt; and um now people had to continue doing &gt;&gt; and um now people had to continue doing &gt;&gt; and um now people had to continue doing this but um it was pretty effective. I this but um it was pretty effective. I this but um it was pretty effective. I know I'm I would prefer to see people go know I'm I would prefer to see people go know I'm I would prefer to see people go out and take a walk after they eat, but out and take a walk after they eat, but out and take a walk after they eat, but not all of us can get up and walk not all of us can get up and walk not all of us can get up and walk after a meal. If you're on a plane, after a meal. If you're on a plane, after a meal. If you're on a plane, sure, you can, you know, sure, you can, you know, sure, you can, you know, &gt;&gt; you don't want to fill the aisle because &gt;&gt; you don't want to fill the aisle because &gt;&gt; you don't want to fill the aisle because people need to go to the bathroom. You people need to go to the bathroom. You people need to go to the bathroom. You know, it gets it gets impractical. So, know, it gets it gets impractical. So, know, it gets it gets impractical. So, it's kind of interesting to think about it's kind of interesting to think about it's kind of interesting to think about just like what requirements are for just like what requirements are for just like what requirements are for low-level muscular contraction. Okay? low-level muscular contraction. Okay? low-level muscular contraction. Okay? &gt;&gt; And I and I would always want to see &gt;&gt; And I and I would always want to see &gt;&gt; And I and I would always want to see people exercising more as opposed to people exercising more as opposed to people exercising more as opposed to less. But you could imagine given the less. But you could imagine given the less. But you could imagine given the number of devices that you're wearing number of devices that you're wearing number of devices that you're wearing that after you eat a meal that you would that after you eat a meal that you would that after you eat a meal that you would have just a low-level muscle stimulator have just a low-level muscle stimulator have just a low-level muscle stimulator just stimulating your solius or just stimulating your solius or just stimulating your solius or something like that. Just scaven or a something like that. Just scaven or a something like that. Just scaven or a physical one maybe um you know I think physical one maybe um you know I think physical one maybe um you know I think there's a lot of benefits as you know there's a lot of benefits as you know there's a lot of benefits as you know from exercise per se. You make all of from exercise per se. You make all of from exercise per se. You make all of these things called exind that have these things called exind that have these things called exind that have &gt;&gt; a lot of benefits in general. So I &gt;&gt; a lot of benefits in general. So I &gt;&gt; a lot of benefits in general. So I think exercise probably broader than think exercise probably broader than think exercise probably broader than simply injecting itself. So, but anyway, simply injecting itself. So, but anyway, simply injecting itself. So, but anyway, maybe what you say would be helpful for maybe what you say would be helpful for maybe what you say would be helpful for people. Uh, you know what I do and I and people. Uh, you know what I do and I and people. Uh, you know what I do and I and there are others who do this too. You've there are others who do this too. You've there are others who do this too. You've heard of this phrase exercise snacks heard of this phrase exercise snacks heard of this phrase exercise snacks &gt;&gt; especially for people who sit all day. &gt;&gt; especially for people who sit all day. &gt;&gt; especially for people who sit all day. the idea of getting up and used to be the idea of getting up and used to be the idea of getting up and used to be well get up and walk uh you know some well get up and walk uh you know some well get up and walk uh you know some brief walk but now there's some ideas brief walk but now there's some ideas brief walk but now there's some ideas well maybe get up and do more than walk well maybe get up and do more than walk well maybe get up and do more than walk maybe do some of the things I hadn't maybe do some of the things I hadn't maybe do some of the things I hadn't heard the one you said but maybe that's heard the one you said but maybe that's heard the one you said but maybe that's a better thing to do a better thing to do a better thing to do &gt;&gt; or air squats or something that &gt;&gt; or air squats or something that &gt;&gt; or air squats or something that &gt;&gt; yeah exactly so we have people doing &gt;&gt; yeah exactly so we have people doing &gt;&gt; yeah exactly so we have people doing some squats now running a study like some squats now running a study like some squats now running a study like that and uh see what it does to their V2 that and uh see what it does to their V2 that and uh see what it does to their V2 max and overall you know health max and overall you know health max and overall you know health measurement so I'm a big believer measurement so I'm a big believer measurement so I'm a big believer yeah sitting for eight hours is yeah sitting for eight hours is yeah sitting for eight hours is probably not good for you. In fact, probably not good for you. In fact, probably not good for you. In fact, there are plenty of studies that show there are plenty of studies that show there are plenty of studies that show that and these breaks are good for that and these breaks are good for that and these breaks are good for you. Even walking is better than you. Even walking is better than you. Even walking is better than nothing. &gt;&gt; Do you use a standing desk or a &gt;&gt; Do you use a standing desk or a &gt;&gt; Do you use a standing desk or a treadmill under your desk? treadmill under your desk? treadmill under your desk? &gt;&gt; I don't do the treadmill. I have tried &gt;&gt; I don't do the treadmill. I have tried &gt;&gt; I don't do the treadmill. I have tried the standing one. I find I don't the standing one. I find I don't the standing one. I find I don't concentrate as well when I'm talking concentrate as well when I'm talking concentrate as well when I'm talking with people. So, I have to confess I do with people. So, I have to confess I do with people. So, I have to confess I do I prefer to sit I prefer to sit I prefer to sit &gt;&gt; so I can be a little more engaged. Uh I &gt;&gt; so I can be a little more engaged. Uh I &gt;&gt; so I can be a little more engaged. Uh I do have a lot of meetings, so for me do have a lot of meetings, so for me do have a lot of meetings, so for me that seems to be more effective. But it that seems to be more effective. But it that seems to be more effective. But it does mean I need to get up and take does mean I need to get up and take does mean I need to get up and take these breaks these breaks these breaks &gt;&gt; and uh so I haven't but for other &gt;&gt; and uh so I haven't but for other &gt;&gt; and uh so I haven't but for other people I know they like standing tests. people I know they like standing tests. people I know they like standing tests. I've heard for some people though I've heard for some people though I've heard for some people though or it may not be overall as effective. or it may not be overall as effective. or it may not be overall as effective. So I don't know. So I don't know. So I don't know. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think the exercise snacks are a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think the exercise snacks are a &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think the exercise snacks are a terrific thing that you know air squats terrific thing that you know air squats terrific thing that you know air squats even just pacing these kinds of things. even just pacing these kinds of things. even just pacing these kinds of things. I think we underestimate the extent I think we underestimate the extent I think we underestimate the extent to which our um evolutionary history to which our um evolutionary history to which our um evolutionary history drove a lot more movement every day than drove a lot more movement every day than drove a lot more movement every day than we sat 8 hours a day uh in ancient we sat 8 hours a day uh in ancient we sat 8 hours a day uh in ancient times. Yes, I 100% agree. Yeah. times. Yes, I 100% agree. Yeah. times. Yes, I 100% agree. Yeah. &gt;&gt; People had to be active. They had to be &gt;&gt; People had to be active. They had to be &gt;&gt; People had to be active. They had to be active to get gather their food and active to get gather their food and active to get gather their food and &gt;&gt; deal with the elements. Yeah. &gt;&gt; deal with the elements. Yeah. &gt;&gt; deal with the elements. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, these glucose excursions, if they're &gt;&gt; So, these glucose excursions, if they're &gt;&gt; So, these glucose excursions, if they're brief, not a problem. But if people are brief, not a problem. But if people are brief, not a problem. But if people are finding that certain foods or food finding that certain foods or food finding that certain foods or food combinations are making them feel sleepy combinations are making them feel sleepy combinations are making them feel sleepy afterwards, &gt;&gt; I do think that the glucose monitors are &gt;&gt; I do think that the glucose monitors are &gt;&gt; I do think that the glucose monitors are useful for parsing which foods are useful for parsing which foods are useful for parsing which foods are doing what. I I'd like to talk a are doing what. I I'd like to talk a are doing what. I I'd like to talk a little bit about meal timing and food little bit about meal timing and food little bit about meal timing and food timing. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Um for many years, just by virtue of &gt;&gt; Um for many years, just by virtue of &gt;&gt; Um for many years, just by virtue of preference, I will hydrate and I make preference, I will hydrate and I make preference, I will hydrate and I make sure to get electrolytes, water, and sure to get electrolytes, water, and sure to get electrolytes, water, and caffeine in the morning. caffeine in the morning. caffeine in the morning. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; And I try to exercise in the morning. Um &gt;&gt; And I try to exercise in the morning. Um &gt;&gt; And I try to exercise in the morning. Um if I don't, I'll do it in the afternoon, if I don't, I'll do it in the afternoon, if I don't, I'll do it in the afternoon, but generally in the morning, and my but generally in the morning, and my but generally in the morning, and my first meal always lands somewhere around first meal always lands somewhere around first meal always lands somewhere around 11:00 a.m. or so, roughly, plus or minus 11:00 a.m. or so, roughly, plus or minus 11:00 a.m. or so, roughly, plus or minus an hour. Is there any evidence that an hour. Is there any evidence that an hour. Is there any evidence that introducing a period of fasting at one introducing a period of fasting at one introducing a period of fasting at one point in the day versus say later in the point in the day versus say later in the point in the day versus say later in the day, like having breakfast, lunch, and day, like having breakfast, lunch, and day, like having breakfast, lunch, and an early dinner versus lunch, an early dinner versus lunch, an early dinner versus lunch, an afternoon snack, and a typical dinner afternoon snack, and a typical dinner afternoon snack, and a typical dinner of, you know, between, you know, 6:30 of, you know, between, you know, 6:30 of, you know, between, you know, 6:30 and 8:30 p.m. I think it's pretty and 8:30 p.m. I think it's pretty and 8:30 p.m. I think it's pretty typical, at least for Americans, is typical, at least for Americans, is typical, at least for Americans, is better or worse for glucose um control better or worse for glucose um control better or worse for glucose um control &gt;&gt; and general health. I know your lab's &gt;&gt; and general health. I know your lab's &gt;&gt; and general health. I know your lab's been focused on um I guess it's called been focused on um I guess it's called been focused on um I guess it's called intermittent fasting, but this intermittent fasting, but this intermittent fasting, but this timerestricted feeding, timerestricted feeding, timerestricted feeding, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; We're not talking about weight loss now. &gt;&gt; We're not talking about weight loss now. &gt;&gt; We're not talking about weight loss now. I'm just talking about glucose control. I'm just talking about glucose control. I'm just talking about glucose control. &gt;&gt; There's a lot to unpack there. Um so we &gt;&gt; There's a lot to unpack there. Um so we &gt;&gt; There's a lot to unpack there. Um so we have some studies where we put CGMs on have some studies where we put CGMs on have some studies where we put CGMs on people, smartwatches, we could track people, smartwatches, we could track people, smartwatches, we could track their activity. Uh they did food logging their activity. Uh they did food logging their activity. Uh they did food logging uh and exercise logging as well. Tracked uh and exercise logging as well. Tracked uh and exercise logging as well. Tracked them in incredible detail. And they were them in incredible detail. And they were them in incredible detail. And they were also very well phenotyped for their also very well phenotyped for their also very well phenotyped for their glucose dysregulation and we should glucose dysregulation and we should glucose dysregulation and we should probably talk about that a little bit probably talk about that a little bit probably talk about that a little bit about muscle resistance uh beta cell about muscle resistance uh beta cell about muscle resistance uh beta cell defects things like that. So we were defects things like that. So we were defects things like that. So we were trying to relate what was their what the trying to relate what was their what the trying to relate what was their what the sto gl glucosis regulation sub phenotype sto gl glucosis regulation sub phenotype sto gl glucosis regulation sub phenotype with their lifestyle and not just their with their lifestyle and not just their with their lifestyle and not just their lifestyle what they did but when they lifestyle what they did but when they lifestyle what they did but when they did it. And what we found is that first did it. And what we found is that first did it. And what we found is that first of all some simple things already known of all some simple things already known of all some simple things already known is that uh if you have your bigger meal is that uh if you have your bigger meal is that uh if you have your bigger meal first thing in the morning you generally first thing in the morning you generally first thing in the morning you generally have lower glucose and don't and not have lower glucose and don't and not have lower glucose and don't and not later at night. Some people had their later at night. Some people had their later at night. Some people had their biggest meal or their biggest energy biggest meal or their biggest energy biggest meal or their biggest energy consumption later in the day is dinner, consumption later in the day is dinner, consumption later in the day is dinner, which is awkward socially because that's which is awkward socially because that's which is awkward socially because that's what most of us have our big meal or what most of us have our big meal or what most of us have our big meal or many of us do. Those folks will have many of us do. Those folks will have many of us do. Those folks will have higher glucose and starchy vegetables is higher glucose and starchy vegetables is higher glucose and starchy vegetables is well known. Those folks have higher well known. Those folks have higher well known. Those folks have higher glucose but interesting fruits. People glucose but interesting fruits. People glucose but interesting fruits. People ate a lot of fruits as their major ate a lot of fruits as their major ate a lot of fruits as their major source of carbs had lower. That's source of carbs had lower. That's source of carbs had lower. That's because of the fiber that's in there because of the fiber that's in there because of the fiber that's in there that helps them. Turns out most people that helps them. Turns out most people that helps them. Turns out most people don't get enough sleep and so those who don't get enough sleep and so those who don't get enough sleep and so those who slept longer actually had lower glucose. slept longer actually had lower glucose. slept longer actually had lower glucose. Uh but some of the things we could tease Uh but some of the things we could tease Uh but some of the things we could tease out were when should you exercise? If out were when should you exercise? If out were when should you exercise? If you look at the party line out there you look at the party line out there you look at the party line out there from various studies, well, you should from various studies, well, you should from various studies, well, you should exercise in the afternoon to get your exercise in the afternoon to get your exercise in the afternoon to get your best benefit. But we found that best benefit. But we found that best benefit. But we found that depends on the form of disregulation you depends on the form of disregulation you depends on the form of disregulation you have. If your muscle resistant, you have. If your muscle resistant, you have. If your muscle resistant, you actually get better benefit by actually get better benefit by actually get better benefit by exercising in the morning for glucose exercising in the morning for glucose exercising in the morning for glucose the next day. if you're muscle insulin the next day. if you're muscle insulin the next day. if you're muscle insulin resistant, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; So, to unpack that a little bit, um, so &gt;&gt; So, to unpack that a little bit, um, so &gt;&gt; So, to unpack that a little bit, um, so you probably know that, you know, we you probably know that, you know, we you probably know that, you know, we you eat something, you get glucose if it's eat something, you get glucose if it's eat something, you get glucose if it's sugary, and your insulin obviously, you sugary, and your insulin obviously, you sugary, and your insulin obviously, you know, helps control that, stimulate your know, helps control that, stimulate your know, helps control that, stimulate your cells to take that up. And if you're cells to take that up. And if you're cells to take that up. And if you're insulin resistant, especially muscle, insulin resistant, especially muscle, insulin resistant, especially muscle, muscle is a major consumer of glucose, muscle is a major consumer of glucose, muscle is a major consumer of glucose, means you're not taking up your glucose, means you're not taking up your glucose, means you're not taking up your glucose, right? So you're insulin resistant and right? So you're insulin resistant and right? So you're insulin resistant and you're don't take up glucose and you you're don't take up glucose and you you're don't take up glucose and you wind up with high glucose spikes. But wind up with high glucose spikes. But wind up with high glucose spikes. But there are other forms of diabetes. So to there are other forms of diabetes. So to there are other forms of diabetes. So to break this down or glucose break this down or glucose break this down or glucose dysregulation, there are people who dysregulation, there are people who dysregulation, there are people who don't make insulin early in life that don't make insulin early in life that don't make insulin early in life that would be called type one. Uh you can would be called type one. Uh you can would be called type one. Uh you can still become uh insulin uh deficient in still become uh insulin uh deficient in still become uh insulin uh deficient in making insulin later in life for type making insulin later in life for type making insulin later in life for type two. But um you can also have what are two. But um you can also have what are two. But um you can also have what are called beta cell defects. So insulin's called beta cell defects. So insulin's called beta cell defects. So insulin's produced by your pancreas, your beta produced by your pancreas, your beta produced by your pancreas, your beta cells. And I myself in type two diabetic cells. And I myself in type two diabetic cells. And I myself in type two diabetic I have a beta cell defect. Took me a I have a beta cell defect. Took me a I have a beta cell defect. Took me a while to figure that out. Meaning I make while to figure that out. Meaning I make while to figure that out. Meaning I make insulin fine. My cells respond but I insulin fine. My cells respond but I insulin fine. My cells respond but I don't release it from the pancreas. Uh don't release it from the pancreas. Uh don't release it from the pancreas. Uh and then there's things called hpatic and then there's things called hpatic and then there's things called hpatic insul in insulin resistance. So your insul in insulin resistance. So your insul in insulin resistance. So your liver is insulin resistant in other liver is insulin resistant in other liver is insulin resistant in other forms as well. Uh fat insulin resistance forms as well. Uh fat insulin resistance forms as well. Uh fat insulin resistance as well. So we've now gotten into as well. So we've now gotten into as well. So we've now gotten into dividing up diabetes. in you know dividing up diabetes. in you know dividing up diabetes. in you know basically classically people will group basically classically people will group basically classically people will group people in type one which is 10% of people in type one which is 10% of people in type one which is 10% of people are type two which is the other people are type two which is the other people are type two which is the other 90% of diabetics. Well it turns out 90% of diabetics. Well it turns out 90% of diabetics. Well it turns out that's a really broad category that can that's a really broad category that can that's a really broad category that can easily be subdivided into what we call easily be subdivided into what we call easily be subdivided into what we call subphenotypes these different forms of subphenotypes these different forms of subphenotypes these different forms of glucose dysregulation and we think glucose dysregulation and we think glucose dysregulation and we think that's a big deal because it affects the that's a big deal because it affects the that's a big deal because it affects the drugs you take. So for example, I am a drugs you take. So for example, I am a drugs you take. So for example, I am a beta cell defect and I didn't respond. I beta cell defect and I didn't respond. I beta cell defect and I didn't respond. I um went through exercise, used to be a I um went through exercise, used to be a I um went through exercise, used to be a runner and I shifted to weight training runner and I shifted to weight training runner and I shifted to weight training about uh it'll almost be nine years about uh it'll almost be nine years about uh it'll almost be nine years soon. Uh with the idea of building soon. Uh with the idea of building soon. Uh with the idea of building muscle mass which failed miserably my muscle mass which failed miserably my muscle mass which failed miserably my glucose was gradually going up. So I glucose was gradually going up. So I glucose was gradually going up. So I shifted to weight training. I gained 10 shifted to weight training. I gained 10 shifted to weight training. I gained 10 pounds of muscle mass. I do whole body pounds of muscle mass. I do whole body pounds of muscle mass. I do whole body MRI 20 of them the last eight or nine MRI 20 of them the last eight or nine MRI 20 of them the last eight or nine years. And I basically did gain 10 years. And I basically did gain 10 years. And I basically did gain 10 pounds of muscle mass. That had no pounds of muscle mass. That had no pounds of muscle mass. That had no effect on my uh my glucose control. And effect on my uh my glucose control. And effect on my uh my glucose control. And the reason for that was that I'm not the reason for that was that I'm not the reason for that was that I'm not muscle resistant. I'm a beta cell muscle resistant. I'm a beta cell muscle resistant. I'm a beta cell defect. So I can gain as much muscle as defect. So I can gain as much muscle as defect. So I can gain as much muscle as I want. It's not going to help me I want. It's not going to help me I want. It's not going to help me release uh insulin from my pancreas. So release uh insulin from my pancreas. So release uh insulin from my pancreas. So knowing your sub phenotype is a big knowing your sub phenotype is a big knowing your sub phenotype is a big deal. But then I respond to certain drug deal. But then I respond to certain drug deal. But then I respond to certain drug repinolide that actually promotes that repinolide that actually promotes that repinolide that actually promotes that release. So knowing your sub phenotype release. So knowing your sub phenotype release. So knowing your sub phenotype determines your drugs. But it also turns determines your drugs. But it also turns determines your drugs. But it also turns out this whole lifestyle thing I out this whole lifestyle thing I out this whole lifestyle thing I mentioned earlier is a big deal. And mentioned earlier is a big deal. And mentioned earlier is a big deal. And coming back to some of the food stuff. coming back to some of the food stuff. coming back to some of the food stuff. So we found that if you're um uh So we found that if you're um uh So we found that if you're um uh basically insul insulin resistant, basically insul insulin resistant, basically insul insulin resistant, muscle resistant, you will spike to muscle resistant, you will spike to muscle resistant, you will spike to potatoes and pasta, but not if you're potatoes and pasta, but not if you're potatoes and pasta, but not if you're insulin sensitive. And if you have beta insulin sensitive. And if you have beta insulin sensitive. And if you have beta cell defect, you also spike to potatoes. cell defect, you also spike to potatoes. cell defect, you also spike to potatoes. So you actually you can sub phenotype So you actually you can sub phenotype So you actually you can sub phenotype people according to what their glucosis people according to what their glucosis people according to what their glucosis regulation is and that affects how you regulation is and that affects how you regulation is and that affects how you react to foods and so then the obvious react to foods and so then the obvious react to foods and so then the obvious thing to do is modify your eating thing to do is modify your eating thing to do is modify your eating behavior on those foods so that you can behavior on those foods so that you can behavior on those foods so that you can basically live a healthier life is the basically live a healthier life is the basically live a healthier life is the idea. Um and so how are you going to sub idea. Um and so how are you going to sub idea. Um and so how are you going to sub phenotype? Well the way we do it now is phenotype? Well the way we do it now is phenotype? Well the way we do it now is super expensive. It's, you know, we do super expensive. It's, you know, we do super expensive. It's, you know, we do these gold standard tests, take several these gold standard tests, take several these gold standard tests, take several hours, hundreds, if not thousands of hours, hundreds, if not thousands of hours, hundreds, if not thousands of dollars. Depends how you do it. Uh, we, dollars. Depends how you do it. Uh, we, dollars. Depends how you do it. Uh, we, believe it or not, can do it just from a believe it or not, can do it just from a believe it or not, can do it just from a simple glucose curve. So, you may or not simple glucose curve. So, you may or not simple glucose curve. So, you may or not realize that when you put one of these realize that when you put one of these realize that when you put one of these glucose monitors on you, you and you glucose monitors on you, you and you glucose monitors on you, you and you drink a shot of glucose, you'll have a drink a shot of glucose, you'll have a drink a shot of glucose, you'll have a curve. And that shape is different for curve. And that shape is different for curve. And that shape is different for different people. And that depends on different people. And that depends on different people. And that depends on their sub phenotype. So meaning if your their sub phenotype. So meaning if your their sub phenotype. So meaning if your muscle resistant you have a certain muscle resistant you have a certain muscle resistant you have a certain shape and if you're beta cell it's a shape and if you're beta cell it's a shape and if you're beta cell it's a different shape and if you're a different shape and if you're a different shape and if you're a combination of things and there are combination of things and there are combination of things and there are other factors by the way that play in other factors by the way that play in other factors by the way that play in here like your microbiome so the guts in here like your microbiome so the guts in here like your microbiome so the guts in your the microbes in your gut all play your the microbes in your gut all play your the microbes in your gut all play in this and so they basically affect the in this and so they basically affect the in this and so they basically affect the shape of your curve and now we're not shape of your curve and now we're not shape of your curve and now we're not there yet but we're good for some of there yet but we're good for some of there yet but we're good for some of these like for muscle resistant we can these like for muscle resistant we can these like for muscle resistant we can quite accurately predict whether muscle quite accurately predict whether muscle quite accurately predict whether muscle are resistant just from the shape of are resistant just from the shape of are resistant just from the shape of that glucose curve which you can get now that glucose curve which you can get now that glucose curve which you can get now from an over- the-counter purchase at from an over- the-counter purchase at from an over- the-counter purchase at a drugstore. a drugstore. a drugstore. &gt;&gt; Super interesting. There's, as you &gt;&gt; Super interesting. There's, as you &gt;&gt; Super interesting. There's, as you mentioned, a ton to unpack there. I just mentioned, a ton to unpack there. I just mentioned, a ton to unpack there. I just want to make sure I understand a couple want to make sure I understand a couple want to make sure I understand a couple of the points you made um before we go of the points you made um before we go of the points you made um before we go forward. &gt;&gt; Uh you said the vast number of papers &gt;&gt; Uh you said the vast number of papers &gt;&gt; Uh you said the vast number of papers that have explored ideal exercise timing that have explored ideal exercise timing that have explored ideal exercise timing point to the afternoon as the best time. point to the afternoon as the best time. point to the afternoon as the best time. I've seen those papers also and my I've seen those papers also and my I've seen those papers also and my takeaway from those the kind of gestalt takeaway from those the kind of gestalt takeaway from those the kind of gestalt of those papers in my view is that of those papers in my view is that of those papers in my view is that if you're interested in performance that if you're interested in performance that if you're interested in performance that the afternoon is better because your the afternoon is better because your the afternoon is better because your body's warm body temperature tends to be body's warm body temperature tends to be body's warm body temperature tends to be appropriate for performance whereas appropriate for performance whereas appropriate for performance whereas although some people wake up ready to go although some people wake up ready to go although some people wake up ready to go first thing in the morning most people first thing in the morning most people first thing in the morning most people don't feel as energized first thing in don't feel as energized first thing in don't feel as energized first thing in the morning some do but most don't um the morning some do but most don't um the morning some do but most don't um but if I understand correctly for many but if I understand correctly for many but if I understand correctly for many people in particular People with muscle people in particular People with muscle people in particular People with muscle insulin resistance, insulin resistance, insulin resistance, doing resistance training would be doing resistance training would be doing resistance training would be preferable to doing cardiovascular preferable to doing cardiovascular preferable to doing cardiovascular training for blood glucose regulation. training for blood glucose regulation. training for blood glucose regulation. And doing that resistance training early And doing that resistance training early And doing that resistance training early in the day. It sounded like you were in the day. It sounded like you were in the day. It sounded like you were going to tell us that it sets a kind going to tell us that it sets a kind going to tell us that it sets a kind of a trend toward better glucose of a trend toward better glucose of a trend toward better glucose regulation throughout the day, but I regulation throughout the day, but I regulation throughout the day, but I don't want to uh lead the witness here. don't want to uh lead the witness here. don't want to uh lead the witness here. I want to make sure that that's I want to make sure that that's I want to make sure that that's true before we conclude that. Well, we true before we conclude that. Well, we true before we conclude that. Well, we haven't taken apart for that particular haven't taken apart for that particular haven't taken apart for that particular study the difference between resistance study the difference between resistance study the difference between resistance training and okay, it's more a training and okay, it's more a training and okay, it's more a general activity measurement. general activity measurement. general activity measurement. &gt;&gt; So, people are more active in the &gt;&gt; So, people are more active in the &gt;&gt; So, people are more active in the morning if their muscle resistant will morning if their muscle resistant will morning if their muscle resistant will benefit have better glucose levels the benefit have better glucose levels the benefit have better glucose levels the next day. next day. next day. &gt;&gt; So, we haven't yet done resist but I'm &gt;&gt; So, we haven't yet done resist but I'm &gt;&gt; So, we haven't yet done resist but I'm very interested in this. In fact, we very interested in this. In fact, we very interested in this. In fact, we have a separate study around have a separate study around have a separate study around highintensity training running versus highintensity training running versus highintensity training running versus long distance running. uh and can happy long distance running. uh and can happy long distance running. uh and can happy to talk about that but that's still to talk about that but that's still to talk about that but that's still in progress. in progress. in progress. &gt;&gt; So I wouldn't say we've totally done &gt;&gt; So I wouldn't say we've totally done &gt;&gt; So I wouldn't say we've totally done what you've gotten at but we would like what you've gotten at but we would like what you've gotten at but we would like to dissect the resistance training to dissect the resistance training to dissect the resistance training versus a aerobic or endurance type of versus a aerobic or endurance type of versus a aerobic or endurance type of training. Uh I mean the bottom line is training. Uh I mean the bottom line is training. Uh I mean the bottom line is of course exercising any time is better of course exercising any time is better of course exercising any time is better than not exercising at all. So I think than not exercising at all. So I think than not exercising at all. So I think we'd all agree with that. But we do we'd all agree with that. But we do we'd all agree with that. But we do think you get better glucose benefits if think you get better glucose benefits if think you get better glucose benefits if you are muscle resistant doing in the you are muscle resistant doing in the you are muscle resistant doing in the morning. And I also do believe that morning. And I also do believe that morning. And I also do believe that yeah, building your muscle mass will yeah, building your muscle mass will yeah, building your muscle mass will help uh with actually reducing muscle help uh with actually reducing muscle help uh with actually reducing muscle resistance. &gt;&gt; Thank you for that clarification. Uh you &gt;&gt; Thank you for that clarification. Uh you &gt;&gt; Thank you for that clarification. Uh you mentioned different types of diabetes. mentioned different types of diabetes. mentioned different types of diabetes. So general categories are type 1 So general categories are type 1 So general categories are type 1 diabetes. Uh these people don't make diabetes. Uh these people don't make diabetes. Uh these people don't make insulin. They need to inject insulin or insulin. They need to inject insulin or insulin. They need to inject insulin or deliver insulin through a time or deliver insulin through a time or deliver insulin through a time release mechanism or something of that release mechanism or something of that release mechanism or something of that sort. Type two diabetes I understand to sort. Type two diabetes I understand to sort. Type two diabetes I understand to be insulin insensitivity be insulin insensitivity be insulin insensitivity which um is bad. You want your cells to which um is bad. You want your cells to which um is bad. You want your cells to be sensitive to insulin. So insulin can be sensitive to insulin. So insulin can be sensitive to insulin. So insulin can bring the glucose into those cells so bring the glucose into those cells so bring the glucose into those cells so they can use them. Right? they can use them. Right? they can use them. Right? &gt;&gt; You're now subdividing this type 2 &gt;&gt; You're now subdividing this type 2 &gt;&gt; You're now subdividing this type 2 diabetes, the insulin insensitivity into diabetes, the insulin insensitivity into diabetes, the insulin insensitivity into muscle insulin insensitive as well as muscle insulin insensitive as well as muscle insulin insensitive as well as other tissues being insensitive. What other tissues being insensitive. What other tissues being insensitive. What percentage? &gt;&gt; But it's more than that. Meaning there's &gt;&gt; But it's more than that. Meaning there's &gt;&gt; But it's more than that. Meaning there's a beta cell defect where you don't a beta cell defect where you don't a beta cell defect where you don't release insulin from your pancreas. release insulin from your pancreas. release insulin from your pancreas. That's has nothing to do with insulin That's has nothing to do with insulin That's has nothing to do with insulin resistance. That's more a mechanistic resistance. That's more a mechanistic resistance. That's more a mechanistic thing. Now why that defect exists thing. Now why that defect exists thing. Now why that defect exists isn't so clear. Uh Mike is kind of isn't so clear. Uh Mike is kind of isn't so clear. Uh Mike is kind of interesting. Uh although we still don't interesting. Uh although we still don't interesting. Uh although we still don't fully understand it. But um then there's fully understand it. But um then there's fully understand it. But um then there's also incrretin defects. So incretin are also incrretin defects. So incretin are also incrretin defects. So incretin are these GLPS that everybody's heard about. these GLPS that everybody's heard about. these GLPS that everybody's heard about. Ompic is a mimic of those and Monero and Ompic is a mimic of those and Monero and Ompic is a mimic of those and Monero and things like that. Uh and so there are things like that. Uh and so there are things like that. Uh and so there are people with defects that way. So we're people with defects that way. So we're people with defects that way. So we're all different and we can now subtype all different and we can now subtype all different and we can now subtype that. We can say this person's got that. We can say this person's got that. We can say this person's got mostly an incrretin defect. This one's mostly an incrretin defect. This one's mostly an incrretin defect. This one's muscle resistant. This is a beta cell muscle resistant. This is a beta cell muscle resistant. This is a beta cell defect. Uh and so and some people are defect. Uh and so and some people are defect. Uh and so and some people are combinations of those. It's not pure one combinations of those. It's not pure one combinations of those. It's not pure one or the other. So we think actually the or the other. So we think actually the or the other. So we think actually the subtyping is a big deal because again it subtyping is a big deal because again it subtyping is a big deal because again it determines your lifestyle choices you determines your lifestyle choices you determines your lifestyle choices you might make to better control your might make to better control your might make to better control your glucose and of course drug responses as glucose and of course drug responses as glucose and of course drug responses as well. So we think that's important. well. So we think that's important. well. So we think that's important. We know that many people in the We know that many people in the We know that many people in the United States and elsewhere sadly are United States and elsewhere sadly are United States and elsewhere sadly are overweight or just clinically overweight or just clinically overweight or just clinically overweight. And I think it's about 30% overweight. And I think it's about 30% overweight. And I think it's about 30% of people in the United States are of people in the United States are of people in the United States are clinically obese. clinically obese. clinically obese. when you talk about type two diabetes when you talk about type two diabetes when you talk about type two diabetes and these different um subphenotypes as and these different um subphenotypes as and these different um subphenotypes as you're referring to them, um you're referring to them, um you're referring to them, um &gt;&gt; what percentage of people in the United &gt;&gt; what percentage of people in the United &gt;&gt; what percentage of people in the United States do you think are type 2 diabetic States do you think are type 2 diabetic States do you think are type 2 diabetic that have some sort of either insulin um that have some sort of either insulin um that have some sort of either insulin um insensitivity and that's the reason insensitivity and that's the reason insensitivity and that's the reason versus, you know, they're making plenty versus, you know, they're making plenty versus, you know, they're making plenty of insulin but they can't release it. I of insulin but they can't release it. I of insulin but they can't release it. I mean, what sorts of numbers are we mean, what sorts of numbers are we mean, what sorts of numbers are we talking about here? Because I think for talking about here? Because I think for talking about here? Because I think for listeners, they're probably thinking listeners, they're probably thinking listeners, they're probably thinking like, okay, like I as long as I don't like, okay, like I as long as I don't like, okay, like I as long as I don't eat too much sugar, I feel fine. Does eat too much sugar, I feel fine. Does eat too much sugar, I feel fine. Does that mean that they don't have type two that mean that they don't have type two that mean that they don't have type two diabetes? People who um perhaps are of a diabetes? People who um perhaps are of a diabetes? People who um perhaps are of a healthy weight, does that mean they healthy weight, does that mean they healthy weight, does that mean they don't have type2 diabetes or any of don't have type2 diabetes or any of don't have type2 diabetes or any of these insulin management problems? It these insulin management problems? It these insulin management problems? It sounds like we don't know the real sounds like we don't know the real sounds like we don't know the real numbers, but if you were to guesstimate numbers, but if you were to guesstimate numbers, but if you were to guesstimate what the percentages are of people out what the percentages are of people out what the percentages are of people out there who have some issue with insulin there who have some issue with insulin there who have some issue with insulin management at a physiological level, management at a physiological level, management at a physiological level, &gt;&gt; uh well, if you include beta cell &gt;&gt; uh well, if you include beta cell &gt;&gt; uh well, if you include beta cell defects as part of insulin management, defects as part of insulin management, defects as part of insulin management, then the number is probably very high. then the number is probably very high. then the number is probably very high. &gt;&gt; But I honestly don't know the answer. I &gt;&gt; But I honestly don't know the answer. I &gt;&gt; But I honestly don't know the answer. I don't think we fully know the answer don't think we fully know the answer don't think we fully know the answer because people haven't done the because people haven't done the because people haven't done the subphenotyping like I've described. We subphenotyping like I've described. We subphenotyping like I've described. We don't know how many people have don't know how many people have don't know how many people have incrretin defects. we are getting there incrretin defects. we are getting there incrretin defects. we are getting there with insulin resistance and such, but I with insulin resistance and such, but I with insulin resistance and such, but I don't think we're fully there. But I don't think we're fully there. But I don't think we're fully there. But I want to correct something that you said. want to correct something that you said. want to correct something that you said. I mean, it's very much the case when you I mean, it's very much the case when you I mean, it's very much the case when you see someone who's thin, you can't assume see someone who's thin, you can't assume see someone who's thin, you can't assume they're not diabetic. This is very they're not diabetic. This is very they're not diabetic. This is very common, especially in South Asians to common, especially in South Asians to common, especially in South Asians to see then diabetics. Uh, and I'm a good see then diabetics. Uh, and I'm a good see then diabetics. Uh, and I'm a good example. No one would call me overweight example. No one would call me overweight example. No one would call me overweight by any definition, you know, I'm a by any definition, you know, I'm a by any definition, you know, I'm a diabetic and I have a beta cell defect. diabetic and I have a beta cell defect. diabetic and I have a beta cell defect. Uh, and I used to think a lot of people Uh, and I used to think a lot of people Uh, and I used to think a lot of people who are thin diabetics probably have who are thin diabetics probably have who are thin diabetics probably have beta cell defects, but it's not that beta cell defects, but it's not that beta cell defects, but it's not that simple. It's some do and some don't. simple. It's some do and some don't. simple. It's some do and some don't. Some are some are insulin resistant. And Some are some are insulin resistant. And Some are some are insulin resistant. And so, um, and then there are other people, so, um, and then there are other people, so, um, and then there are other people, believe it or not, who are very obese by believe it or not, who are very obese by believe it or not, who are very obese by any clinical measure, what have you. any clinical measure, what have you. any clinical measure, what have you. They have very good glucose control. So, They have very good glucose control. So, They have very good glucose control. So, there are a lot of things we don't fully there are a lot of things we don't fully there are a lot of things we don't fully understand, and a lot of it probably understand, and a lot of it probably understand, and a lot of it probably does. It fits in this idea that this is does. It fits in this idea that this is does. It fits in this idea that this is not a simple process. Uh we have many not a simple process. Uh we have many not a simple process. Uh we have many organ systems involved in glucose organ systems involved in glucose organ systems involved in glucose control. Your liver, your pancreas, your control. Your liver, your pancreas, your control. Your liver, your pancreas, your muscle as we mentioned, but even your muscle as we mentioned, but even your muscle as we mentioned, but even your brain is a major glucose consumer. Uh brain is a major glucose consumer. Uh brain is a major glucose consumer. Uh and so we have all these different organ and so we have all these different organ and so we have all these different organ systems. Then on top of that, we have systems. Then on top of that, we have systems. Then on top of that, we have all these different biochemical pathways all these different biochemical pathways all these different biochemical pathways that are engaged as well. We mentioned that are engaged as well. We mentioned that are engaged as well. We mentioned the insulin one, but there's incrretin the insulin one, but there's incrretin the insulin one, but there's incrretin uh which are these GLP things that uh which are these GLP things that uh which are these GLP things that promote insulin release, but they promote insulin release, but they promote insulin release, but they probably have other effects as well. I probably have other effects as well. I probably have other effects as well. I don't fully understand. I don't think don't fully understand. I don't think don't fully understand. I don't think everyone does all the effects of everyone does all the effects of everyone does all the effects of incrretins. They're these the receptors incrretins. They're these the receptors incrretins. They're these the receptors are all over the place. And in fact, are all over the place. And in fact, are all over the place. And in fact, some of these drugs you may have heard some of these drugs you may have heard some of these drugs you may have heard are actually now being touted as maybe are actually now being touted as maybe are actually now being touted as maybe anti- longevity drugs because they seem anti- longevity drugs because they seem anti- longevity drugs because they seem to improve cognition and stuff. Now, to improve cognition and stuff. Now, to improve cognition and stuff. Now, whether that's tied to weight and things whether that's tied to weight and things whether that's tied to weight and things like that is less clear like that is less clear like that is less clear &gt;&gt; as anti- longevity drugs or as longevity &gt;&gt; as anti- longevity drugs or as longevity &gt;&gt; as anti- longevity drugs or as longevity drugs. &gt;&gt; As longevity drugs. Sorry, thank you for &gt;&gt; As longevity drugs. Sorry, thank you for &gt;&gt; As longevity drugs. Sorry, thank you for that correction. Yeah. that correction. Yeah. that correction. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh actually just for fun, let's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh actually just for fun, let's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh actually just for fun, let's explore for a moment some of the things explore for a moment some of the things explore for a moment some of the things that we've heard these GLP-1 drugs uh that we've heard these GLP-1 drugs uh that we've heard these GLP-1 drugs uh are effective for. are effective for. are effective for. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh certainly for um diabetics to better &gt;&gt; Uh certainly for um diabetics to better &gt;&gt; Uh certainly for um diabetics to better type two diabetics to better control type two diabetics to better control type two diabetics to better control their uh blood glucose. their uh blood glucose. their uh blood glucose. &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I can intersect there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I can intersect there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I can intersect there. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; I am a type two diabetic and they work &gt;&gt; I am a type two diabetic and they work &gt;&gt; I am a type two diabetic and they work great for me. I my hemoglobin A1C got to great for me. I my hemoglobin A1C got to great for me. I my hemoglobin A1C got to 84 which you know it's not the highest 84 which you know it's not the highest 84 which you know it's not the highest but it's pretty high. And I went on the but it's pretty high. And I went on the but it's pretty high. And I went on the JLPs and I went down to 5'7 JLPs and I went down to 5'7 JLPs and I went down to 5'7 &gt;&gt; just like that &gt;&gt; just like that &gt;&gt; just like that &gt;&gt; pretty fast &gt;&gt; pretty fast &gt;&gt; pretty fast &gt;&gt; independent of weight loss. &gt;&gt; independent of weight loss. &gt;&gt; independent of weight loss. &gt;&gt; No, it c well initially yes it's a &gt;&gt; No, it c well initially yes it's a &gt;&gt; No, it c well initially yes it's a little complicated. I went on a lower little complicated. I went on a lower little complicated. I went on a lower dose thing called um fa and that one dose thing called um fa and that one dose thing called um fa and that one dropped me down to about the 64 65 level dropped me down to about the 64 65 level dropped me down to about the 64 65 level and I didn't lose too much weight. I did and I didn't lose too much weight. I did and I didn't lose too much weight. I did lose some. Uh and then I went on Monero lose some. Uh and then I went on Monero lose some. Uh and then I went on Monero because I had some nausea effects that because I had some nausea effects that because I had some nausea effects that is a common side effect. They were is a common side effect. They were is a common side effect. They were modest, but they were there. And I went modest, but they were there. And I went modest, but they were there. And I went and so I shift to Monero, which is a and so I shift to Monero, which is a and so I shift to Monero, which is a more potent version. And that dropped me more potent version. And that dropped me more potent version. And that dropped me down to 57. And I did lose weight. I down to 57. And I did lose weight. I down to 57. And I did lose weight. I went from 144 to what I am now, 128, went from 144 to what I am now, 128, went from 144 to what I am now, 128, which I didn't like to be honest. And it which I didn't like to be honest. And it which I didn't like to be honest. And it but I can tell you my I mentioned I it but I can tell you my I mentioned I it but I can tell you my I mentioned I do whole body MRIs. I've done 20 uh as do whole body MRIs. I've done 20 uh as do whole body MRIs. I've done 20 uh as over the last almost nine years. And I over the last almost nine years. And I over the last almost nine years. And I could just see my fat evaporated once I could just see my fat evaporated once I could just see my fat evaporated once I went on these. I I'm the coldest guy in went on these. I I'm the coldest guy in went on these. I I'm the coldest guy in the room now. Uh, the room now. Uh, the room now. Uh, &gt;&gt; but you maintain muscle mass because you &gt;&gt; but you maintain muscle mass because you &gt;&gt; but you maintain muscle mass because you do resistance training do resistance training do resistance training &gt;&gt; mostly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; mostly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; mostly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; How many days per week are you doing it? &gt;&gt; How many days per week are you doing it? &gt;&gt; How many days per week are you doing it? &gt;&gt; I do it every day. So, but I have light &gt;&gt; I do it every day. So, but I have light &gt;&gt; I do it every day. So, but I have light days because you know you can't strain days because you know you can't strain days because you know you can't strain yourself hard every day. That's a yourself hard every day. That's a yourself hard every day. That's a problem. So, I have light days with more problem. So, I have light days with more problem. So, I have light days with more reps and then heavier days for more of reps and then heavier days for more of reps and then heavier days for more of the strength stuff. And then I have a the strength stuff. And then I have a the strength stuff. And then I have a specialty day where I do like snatches specialty day where I do like snatches specialty day where I do like snatches and things to build my core, this sort and things to build my core, this sort and things to build my core, this sort of thing. Uh, and so, uh, combination of thing. Uh, and so, uh, combination of thing. Uh, and so, uh, combination of those things. And so I do it every of those things. And so I do it every of those things. And so I do it every day and the goal was to keep my muscle day and the goal was to keep my muscle day and the goal was to keep my muscle mass up and I mostly did it because I do mass up and I mostly did it because I do mass up and I mostly did it because I do get measured a lot although it plummeted get measured a lot although it plummeted get measured a lot although it plummeted when I got in a bike accident and hurt when I got in a bike accident and hurt when I got in a bike accident and hurt my shoulder. Uh and then certain my shoulder. Uh and then certain my shoulder. Uh and then certain exercise couldn't do and so those things exercise couldn't do and so those things exercise couldn't do and so those things as you might imagine diminished. So I as you might imagine diminished. So I as you might imagine diminished. So I did lose some muscle as a consequence of did lose some muscle as a consequence of did lose some muscle as a consequence of that. I have mostly built my strength that. I have mostly built my strength that. I have mostly built my strength back up not entirely back to where it back up not entirely back to where it back up not entirely back to where it was. So it's still there but yeah it was. So it's still there but yeah it was. So it's still there but yeah it it's not 100%. And then there's a it's not 100%. And then there's a it's not 100%. And then there's a question of how much strength versus question of how much strength versus question of how much strength versus muscle mass is important. I don't have muscle mass is important. I don't have muscle mass is important. I don't have maybe you know the answer to that. I maybe you know the answer to that. I maybe you know the answer to that. I don't know. Uh but anyway, I do try to don't know. Uh but anyway, I do try to don't know. Uh but anyway, I do try to keep it up. It's down a bit uh in terms keep it up. It's down a bit uh in terms keep it up. It's down a bit uh in terms of muscle mass and a touch in of muscle mass and a touch in of muscle mass and a touch in strength as well. I do my again my strength as well. I do my again my strength as well. I do my again my hemoglobin A1C isn't too bad, but I hemoglobin A1C isn't too bad, but I hemoglobin A1C isn't too bad, but I don't like losing that much. I'll be don't like losing that much. I'll be don't like losing that much. I'll be honest with you. I thought I looked a honest with you. I thought I looked a honest with you. I thought I looked a little gaunt. So I actually am now little gaunt. So I actually am now little gaunt. So I actually am now backing off on the monero. I don't do it backing off on the monero. I don't do it backing off on the monero. I don't do it every week like you're supposed to. I'm every week like you're supposed to. I'm every week like you're supposed to. I'm on the lowest though. So I'm a great on the lowest though. So I'm a great on the lowest though. So I'm a great responder there. And by the way, when responder there. And by the way, when responder there. And by the way, when you get in these drug response, it turns you get in these drug response, it turns you get in these drug response, it turns out a metformin non-responder. I did try out a metformin non-responder. I did try out a metformin non-responder. I did try that early on. that early on. that early on. &gt;&gt; Oh, this is interesting. So just to &gt;&gt; Oh, this is interesting. So just to &gt;&gt; Oh, this is interesting. So just to remind people, metformin and then the remind people, metformin and then the remind people, metformin and then the poor man's version of it is bourberine, poor man's version of it is bourberine, poor man's version of it is bourberine, which is sold as a supplement. They which is sold as a supplement. They which is sold as a supplement. They basically do the same thing. They lower basically do the same thing. They lower basically do the same thing. They lower blood glucose. In fact, I will tell uh blood glucose. In fact, I will tell uh blood glucose. In fact, I will tell uh anyone that decides to take metformin or anyone that decides to take metformin or anyone that decides to take metformin or bourberine that if you don't consume enough starchy that if you don't consume enough starchy that if you don't consume enough starchy carbohydrates with it, it can give you a carbohydrates with it, it can give you a carbohydrates with it, it can give you a brutal headache because you become brutal headache because you become brutal headache because you become hypoglycemic. Oh, hypoglycemic. Oh, hypoglycemic. Oh, &gt;&gt; I didn't know that. &gt;&gt; I didn't know that. &gt;&gt; I didn't know that. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's really rough. Years ago, I &gt;&gt; Oh, it's really rough. Years ago, I &gt;&gt; Oh, it's really rough. Years ago, I used to uh take a little bit of used to uh take a little bit of used to uh take a little bit of bourberine. Um I used to do these uh bourberine. Um I used to do these uh bourberine. Um I used to do these uh cheat days. It cheat days. It cheat days. It &gt;&gt; was many years ago. I would eat really &gt;&gt; was many years ago. I would eat really &gt;&gt; was many years ago. I would eat really clean all week and then I would like a clean all week and then I would like a clean all week and then I would like a Saturday, I would just go for it. like Saturday, I would just go for it. like Saturday, I would just go for it. like anything you wanted. Um, and anything you wanted. Um, and anything you wanted. Um, and I felt lousy. You'd have these energy, I felt lousy. You'd have these energy, I felt lousy. You'd have these energy, you know, peaks and valleys and then you know, peaks and valleys and then you know, peaks and valleys and then you just felt like by the end of the day just felt like by the end of the day just felt like by the end of the day you're just like, I'm done with food for you're just like, I'm done with food for you're just like, I'm done with food for the next 10 years. And of course, you the next 10 years. And of course, you the next 10 years. And of course, you fast the next day, you feel fine and you fast the next day, you feel fine and you fast the next day, you feel fine and you go right back to it. But it wasn't go right back to it. But it wasn't go right back to it. But it wasn't healthy. But taking bourberine, it was healthy. But taking bourberine, it was healthy. But taking bourberine, it was remarkable because it would allow me and remarkable because it would allow me and remarkable because it would allow me and other people that recommended it to me other people that recommended it to me other people that recommended it to me that you could just eat like an entire that you could just eat like an entire that you could just eat like an entire box of donuts and feel fine because it box of donuts and feel fine because it box of donuts and feel fine because it would blunt your blood glucose response. would blunt your blood glucose response. would blunt your blood glucose response. However, if you don't have enough However, if you don't have enough However, if you don't have enough glucose in your system, you kind of you glucose in your system, you kind of you glucose in your system, you kind of you become hypoglycemic and you get become hypoglycemic and you get become hypoglycemic and you get you get these brutal headaches. Um, so you get these brutal headaches. Um, so you get these brutal headaches. Um, so anyway, that's a little anyway, that's a little anyway, that's a little &gt;&gt; and this is becoming a big deal now, &gt;&gt; and this is becoming a big deal now, &gt;&gt; and this is becoming a big deal now, right? Hypoglycemia is now being right? Hypoglycemia is now being right? Hypoglycemia is now being recognized as a big concern actually. recognized as a big concern actually. recognized as a big concern actually. So, and people are picking up a lot of So, and people are picking up a lot of So, and people are picking up a lot of this with the CGMs. this with the CGMs. this with the CGMs. &gt;&gt; Interesting. And this is because people &gt;&gt; Interesting. And this is because people &gt;&gt; Interesting. And this is because people are taking Monaro and taking other are taking Monaro and taking other are taking Monaro and taking other things that are dropping their blood things that are dropping their blood things that are dropping their blood glucose. &gt;&gt; Yeah. just it's probably been out there &gt;&gt; Yeah. just it's probably been out there &gt;&gt; Yeah. just it's probably been out there more than people realize in the first more than people realize in the first more than people realize in the first place that and now with the CGMs people place that and now with the CGMs people place that and now with the CGMs people realize well if you we talked about realize well if you we talked about realize well if you we talked about these glucose spikes well it's very these glucose spikes well it's very these glucose spikes well it's very common if you get a really giant spike common if you get a really giant spike common if you get a really giant spike you make a lot of insulin you make a lot of insulin you make a lot of insulin &gt;&gt; so the consequences then you come down &gt;&gt; so the consequences then you come down &gt;&gt; so the consequences then you come down on the other side and you actually get on the other side and you actually get on the other side and you actually get too low glucose from those spikes so too low glucose from those spikes so too low glucose from those spikes so people are recognizing that and that can people are recognizing that and that can people are recognizing that and that can people are now concerned about that people are now concerned about that people are now concerned about that certainly leads to fatigue certainly leads to fatigue certainly leads to fatigue &gt;&gt; yeah glucose troughs are definitely bad &gt;&gt; yeah glucose troughs are definitely bad &gt;&gt; yeah glucose troughs are definitely bad I don't do any sort of cheat day I don't do any sort of cheat day I don't do any sort of cheat day anymore. I actually just a few years anymore. I actually just a few years anymore. I actually just a few years ago I just quit eating bad food. ago I just quit eating bad food. ago I just quit eating bad food. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I don't eat non &gt;&gt; I don't eat non &gt;&gt; I don't eat non or I aim for, you know, 90% of my food or I aim for, you know, 90% of my food or I aim for, you know, 90% of my food intake to come from, you know, whole intake to come from, you know, whole intake to come from, you know, whole unprocessed foods and then occasionally unprocessed foods and then occasionally unprocessed foods and then occasionally a slice of pizza or a bowl of ice cream a slice of pizza or a bowl of ice cream a slice of pizza or a bowl of ice cream or something. No big deal, right? Um or something. No big deal, right? Um or something. No big deal, right? Um especially if you're exercising especially if you're exercising especially if you're exercising regularly. But so to go back to um regularly. But so to go back to um regularly. But so to go back to um &gt;&gt; these uh these drugs, these GLP1 &gt;&gt; these uh these drugs, these GLP1 &gt;&gt; these uh these drugs, these GLP1 agonists was basically what they are. agonists was basically what they are. agonists was basically what they are. And we had a guest on here, Zachary And we had a guest on here, Zachary And we had a guest on here, Zachary Knight, who was at UCSF, Howard Hughes Knight, who was at UCSF, Howard Hughes Knight, who was at UCSF, Howard Hughes investigator, who um kind of shocked me investigator, who um kind of shocked me investigator, who um kind of shocked me by telling me that these drugs all by telling me that these drugs all by telling me that these drugs all increase levels of GLP-1 in the blood increase levels of GLP-1 in the blood increase levels of GLP-1 in the blood and brain by about thousandfold. and brain by about thousandfold. and brain by about thousandfold. &gt;&gt; That any less doesn't really have an &gt;&gt; That any less doesn't really have an &gt;&gt; That any less doesn't really have an effect on appetite, doesn't have an effect on appetite, doesn't have an effect on appetite, doesn't have an effect on the various things they're effect on the various things they're effect on the various things they're designed to uh to do. Um so these are designed to uh to do. Um so these are designed to uh to do. Um so these are massive supra physiological increases in massive supra physiological increases in massive supra physiological increases in GLP-1 that people are achieving with GLP-1 that people are achieving with GLP-1 that people are achieving with these drugs. I know nowadays some people these drugs. I know nowadays some people these drugs. I know nowadays some people are starting to get them from are starting to get them from are starting to get them from compoundingarmacies and micro doing them compoundingarmacies and micro doing them compoundingarmacies and micro doing them to great effect actually. to great effect actually. to great effect actually. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; The big pharma companies don't like this &gt;&gt; The big pharma companies don't like this &gt;&gt; The big pharma companies don't like this because it's sold at a fraction of the because it's sold at a fraction of the because it's sold at a fraction of the price and you can get away with very low price and you can get away with very low price and you can get away with very low doses. &gt;&gt; This is what I want to do by the way. &gt;&gt; This is what I want to do by the way. &gt;&gt; This is what I want to do by the way. &gt;&gt; Yeah. no nausea and often times they're &gt;&gt; Yeah. no nausea and often times they're &gt;&gt; Yeah. no nausea and often times they're combined with um combined with um combined with um &gt;&gt; some other things that uh off the top of &gt;&gt; some other things that uh off the top of &gt;&gt; some other things that uh off the top of my head I can't remember but oh right my head I can't remember but oh right my head I can't remember but oh right some of these more um experimental some of these more um experimental some of these more um experimental peptides like SS31 which are designed to peptides like SS31 which are designed to peptides like SS31 which are designed to improve mitochondria and people are improve mitochondria and people are improve mitochondria and people are getting really spectacular effects from getting really spectacular effects from getting really spectacular effects from the micro doing of compounded um uh the micro doing of compounded um uh the micro doing of compounded um uh compound pharmacy uh GLP-1 agonist but compound pharmacy uh GLP-1 agonist but compound pharmacy uh GLP-1 agonist but even those are probably boosting GLP-1 even those are probably boosting GLP-1 even those are probably boosting GLP-1 several hundredfold so none of this is several hundredfold so none of this is several hundredfold so none of this is like natural like natural like natural &gt;&gt; uh for the body And yet um there are &gt;&gt; uh for the body And yet um there are &gt;&gt; uh for the body And yet um there are other positive effects like I've heard other positive effects like I've heard other positive effects like I've heard of reduced craving of alcohol. of reduced craving of alcohol. of reduced craving of alcohol. &gt;&gt; What are some others that you've heard &gt;&gt; What are some others that you've heard &gt;&gt; What are some others that you've heard of? &gt;&gt; Cognition is a big one and it's &gt;&gt; Cognition is a big one and it's &gt;&gt; Cognition is a big one and it's certainly something people worry about a certainly something people worry about a certainly something people worry about a lot as they get older. It's almost lot as they get older. It's almost lot as they get older. It's almost becoming the number one thing people becoming the number one thing people becoming the number one thing people worry about as they get older. Getting worry about as they get older. Getting worry about as they get older. Getting demention uh related conditions. So and demention uh related conditions. So and demention uh related conditions. So and there's you know we'd like to see more there's you know we'd like to see more there's you know we'd like to see more studies out there but there's some studies out there but there's some studies out there but there's some evidence that it may improve cognition. evidence that it may improve cognition. evidence that it may improve cognition. Now how much of that is intertwined with Now how much of that is intertwined with Now how much of that is intertwined with weight loss and things like that I don't weight loss and things like that I don't weight loss and things like that I don't think has been totally deconvoluted. So think has been totally deconvoluted. So think has been totally deconvoluted. So I think we need to sort all that out but I think we need to sort all that out but I think we need to sort all that out but um yeah but people are now you know you um yeah but people are now you know you um yeah but people are now you know you may know that people used to talk about may know that people used to talk about may know that people used to talk about metformin this diabetes drug as metformin this diabetes drug as metformin this diabetes drug as potentially the longevity drug that this potentially the longevity drug that this potentially the longevity drug that this may be the way to live a lot longer may be the way to live a lot longer may be the way to live a lot longer healthier. Um and the side effects are healthier. Um and the side effects are healthier. Um and the side effects are not high as far as we know if at all not high as far as we know if at all not high as far as we know if at all for most people. uh and now a lot of for most people. uh and now a lot of for most people. uh and now a lot of people are very interested in these JLPs people are very interested in these JLPs people are very interested in these JLPs as possible longevity drugs and there as possible longevity drugs and there as possible longevity drugs and there are trials underway to look at this sort are trials underway to look at this sort are trials underway to look at this sort of stuff. So we'll see you know of stuff. So we'll see you know of stuff. So we'll see you know what ways they improve people. I will what ways they improve people. I will what ways they improve people. I will say as long as we're on this topic, um say as long as we're on this topic, um say as long as we're on this topic, um you are a perfect example of a very you are a perfect example of a very you are a perfect example of a very diligent patient, meaning you're taking diligent patient, meaning you're taking diligent patient, meaning you're taking these GLP1 drugs. You're, as you these GLP1 drugs. You're, as you these GLP1 drugs. You're, as you mentioned, aiming for taking lower mentioned, aiming for taking lower mentioned, aiming for taking lower dosages, maybe even quote unquote micro dosages, maybe even quote unquote micro dosages, maybe even quote unquote micro doing, &gt;&gt; but you're also resistance training &gt;&gt; but you're also resistance training &gt;&gt; but you're also resistance training daily, alternating heavy and light days. daily, alternating heavy and light days. daily, alternating heavy and light days. You do your exercise snacks. Uh you You do your exercise snacks. Uh you You do your exercise snacks. Uh you know, you're getting brisk walks you know, you're getting brisk walks you know, you're getting brisk walks after you eat. I mean, I think it's after you eat. I mean, I think it's after you eat. I mean, I think it's important to point out that um you're important to point out that um you're important to point out that um you're doing all the things that help maintain doing all the things that help maintain doing all the things that help maintain muscle mass, cognition, etc. Uh while muscle mass, cognition, etc. Uh while muscle mass, cognition, etc. Uh while taking these GLP1s, many people won't taking these GLP1s, many people won't taking these GLP1s, many people won't &gt;&gt; or just unless they're highly motivated &gt;&gt; or just unless they're highly motivated &gt;&gt; or just unless they're highly motivated to um they just they want a drug that's to um they just they want a drug that's to um they just they want a drug that's going to melt the fat away and they are going to melt the fat away and they are going to melt the fat away and they are unwilling or uninterested to do the unwilling or uninterested to do the unwilling or uninterested to do the exercise piece. exercise piece. exercise piece. What if any data from your genomics uh What if any data from your genomics uh What if any data from your genomics uh data and these large scale studies that data and these large scale studies that data and these large scale studies that you're doing point to the fact that the you're doing point to the fact that the you're doing point to the fact that the combination of augmenting GLP1 with combination of augmenting GLP1 with combination of augmenting GLP1 with these drugs and exercise is these drugs and exercise is these drugs and exercise is beneficial? Is it all just about beneficial? Is it all just about beneficial? Is it all just about maintaining muscle mass? maintaining muscle mass? maintaining muscle mass? &gt;&gt; Uh good question. I don't know, but it's &gt;&gt; Uh good question. I don't know, but it's &gt;&gt; Uh good question. I don't know, but it's pretty clear that people do strength pretty clear that people do strength pretty clear that people do strength training. Again, larger studies would be training. Again, larger studies would be training. Again, larger studies would be nice, but it's pretty clear they can nice, but it's pretty clear they can nice, but it's pretty clear they can reduce their muscle mass loss. That reduce their muscle mass loss. That reduce their muscle mass loss. That that's clear. And it's definitely been that's clear. And it's definitely been that's clear. And it's definitely been the case for me. I mentioned my bike the case for me. I mentioned my bike the case for me. I mentioned my bike accident. I went from pretty good about accident. I went from pretty good about accident. I went from pretty good about maintaining muscle mass and I did lose maintaining muscle mass and I did lose maintaining muscle mass and I did lose some when I lost some of that. Um, so I some when I lost some of that. Um, so I some when I lost some of that. Um, so I can tell you personally had an effect. can tell you personally had an effect. can tell you personally had an effect. &gt;&gt; Don't cycle. I tell my friends we I know &gt;&gt; Don't cycle. I tell my friends we I know &gt;&gt; Don't cycle. I tell my friends we I know so many people have been on a bicycle. so many people have been on a bicycle. so many people have been on a bicycle. You're traveling next to these 3,000 lb You're traveling next to these 3,000 lb You're traveling next to these 3,000 lb uh vehicles moving much faster than you. uh vehicles moving much faster than you. uh vehicles moving much faster than you. People are texting. I say this out of People are texting. I say this out of People are texting. I say this out of love uh for the audience and for and for love uh for the audience and for and for love uh for the audience and for and for you even though we just met. uh we're you even though we just met. uh we're you even though we just met. uh we're colleagues at Stanford um all these colleagues at Stanford um all these colleagues at Stanford um all these years and I have to say everyone I years and I have to say everyone I years and I have to say everyone I know &gt;&gt; who cycles regularly gets hit by a car &gt;&gt; who cycles regularly gets hit by a car &gt;&gt; who cycles regularly gets hit by a car eventually. I know three Stanford eventually. I know three Stanford eventually. I know three Stanford faculty that are dead. faculty that are dead. faculty that are dead. &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; right. But then again, I lived in the &gt;&gt; right. But then again, I lived in the &gt;&gt; right. But then again, I lived in the area for a long time area for a long time area for a long time &gt;&gt; back on Woodside Road, you know, cars &gt;&gt; back on Woodside Road, you know, cars &gt;&gt; back on Woodside Road, you know, cars just taken out or had to dodge a just taken out or had to dodge a just taken out or had to dodge a car and um ran to a tree. So dead, car and um ran to a tree. So dead, car and um ran to a tree. So dead, brain damage, injured. What do I have to brain damage, injured. What do I have to brain damage, injured. What do I have to do to convince you to run instead of do to convince you to run instead of do to convince you to run instead of cycling? &gt;&gt; Well, I do have a theory that you're, &gt;&gt; Well, I do have a theory that you're, &gt;&gt; Well, I do have a theory that you're, you know, your cycling versus your you know, your cycling versus your you know, your cycling versus your health. There's an inverse relationship health. There's an inverse relationship health. There's an inverse relationship or it's a consonant, I should say. or it's a consonant, I should say. or it's a consonant, I should say. Meaning, uh, I'll probably get killed by Meaning, uh, I'll probably get killed by Meaning, uh, I'll probably get killed by a car possibly someday, but I'll say a car possibly someday, but I'll say a car possibly someday, but I'll say healthy in the meantime because it is my healthy in the meantime because it is my healthy in the meantime because it is my form of aerobic exercise. form of aerobic exercise. form of aerobic exercise. &gt;&gt; We need you around, Snider. But I say &gt;&gt; We need you around, Snider. But I say &gt;&gt; We need you around, Snider. But I say this, I don't know why anyone would this, I don't know why anyone would this, I don't know why anyone would do this instead. don't go up those would do this instead. don't go up those would do this instead. don't go up those but I don't go up those mountain things but I don't go up those mountain things but I don't go up those mountain things where there's no even bike paths that where there's no even bike paths that where there's no even bike paths that they have in they have in they have in &gt;&gt; cycling is the cars I work &gt;&gt; cycling is the cars I work &gt;&gt; cycling is the cars I work &gt;&gt; yeah correct but there's no room in some &gt;&gt; yeah correct but there's no room in some &gt;&gt; yeah correct but there's no room in some of those places to go so I mostly I mean of those places to go so I mostly I mean of those places to go so I mostly I mean I do it to go to lab and back and I do I do it to go to lab and back and I do I do it to go to lab and back and I do it it's also a form of mental release it it's also a form of mental release it it's also a form of mental release for me at the end of I do I love what I for me at the end of I do I love what I for me at the end of I do I love what I do but I do work long hours and I it's do but I do work long hours and I it's do but I do work long hours and I it's just a great release to get that bike just a great release to get that bike just a great release to get that bike ride home at the end of the day. ride home at the end of the day. ride home at the end of the day. &gt;&gt; Do you wear a helmet? Uh, of course. &gt;&gt; Do you wear a helmet? Uh, of course. &gt;&gt; Do you wear a helmet? Uh, of course. Yeah. And that's turned out to be pretty Yeah. And that's turned out to be pretty Yeah. And that's turned out to be pretty critical when I've had my I've had more critical when I've had my I've had more critical when I've had my I've had more than one accident. I hate to say. Uh, than one accident. I hate to say. Uh, than one accident. I hate to say. Uh, but um, but never no car has run into but um, but never no car has run into but um, but never no car has run into me. I'm thankful for, but I hit a rock me. I'm thankful for, but I hit a rock me. I'm thankful for, but I hit a rock and got knocked out once. So I or and got knocked out once. So I or and got knocked out once. So I or something like that. I don't know. I something like that. I don't know. I something like that. I don't know. I woke up briefly in a in a ambulance and woke up briefly in a in a ambulance and woke up briefly in a in a ambulance and then more telling you Stamper then more telling you Stamper then more telling you Stamper professors. This is the way Stamper professors. This is the way Stamper professors. This is the way Stamper professors get taken out. professors get taken out. professors get taken out. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, but I'll be I'll say healthy &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, but I'll be I'll say healthy &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, but I'll be I'll say healthy in the meantime. And and I like to think in the meantime. And and I like to think in the meantime. And and I like to think I'm pretty healthy now. Uh minus my I'm pretty healthy now. Uh minus my I'm pretty healthy now. Uh minus my diabetes. And diabetes. And diabetes. And &gt;&gt; you seem very robust. I mean I hope &gt;&gt; you seem very robust. I mean I hope &gt;&gt; you seem very robust. I mean I hope you don't mind uh me sharing that you don't mind uh me sharing that you don't mind uh me sharing that you are uh about to hit 70 soon and you are uh about to hit 70 soon and you are uh about to hit 70 soon and you are clearly cognitively uh whips smart and clearly cognitively uh whips smart and clearly cognitively uh whips smart and um and fast and physically you seem very um and fast and physically you seem very um and fast and physically you seem very robust. And um you mentioned getting robust. And um you mentioned getting robust. And um you mentioned getting these M whole body MRIs and the fat just these M whole body MRIs and the fat just these M whole body MRIs and the fat just kind of disappearing as you were doing kind of disappearing as you were doing kind of disappearing as you were doing these GLP1 agonists and weight training. these GLP1 agonists and weight training. these GLP1 agonists and weight training. I want to make sure I continue to, you I want to make sure I continue to, you I want to make sure I continue to, you know, hammer on. know, hammer on. know, hammer on. &gt;&gt; I'm big on the weight train. I'm glad &gt;&gt; I'm big on the weight train. I'm glad &gt;&gt; I'm big on the weight train. I'm glad you're doing that because I think it's you're doing that because I think it's you're doing that because I think it's huge. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's not just about taking a &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's not just about taking a &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's not just about taking a drug. Um, and you can do a lot with just drug. Um, and you can do a lot with just drug. Um, and you can do a lot with just lifestyle. And we'll talk more about lifestyle. And we'll talk more about lifestyle. And we'll talk more about that. But I have a question about um that. But I have a question about um that. But I have a question about um subcutaneous versus visceral fat. subcutaneous versus visceral fat. subcutaneous versus visceral fat. &gt;&gt; You know, we hear that &gt;&gt; You know, we hear that &gt;&gt; You know, we hear that &gt;&gt; fat around the viscera around our organs &gt;&gt; fat around the viscera around our organs &gt;&gt; fat around the viscera around our organs is the one to really worry about. Um, is the one to really worry about. Um, is the one to really worry about. Um, and anytime I hear something like that, and anytime I hear something like that, and anytime I hear something like that, I think, okay, that sounds like a reason I think, okay, that sounds like a reason I think, okay, that sounds like a reason to not lose fat elsewhere. But, you to not lose fat elsewhere. But, you to not lose fat elsewhere. But, you know, what do we know about the know, what do we know about the know, what do we know about the health risks of intraisceral fat versus health risks of intraisceral fat versus health risks of intraisceral fat versus subcutaneous fat? subcutaneous fat? subcutaneous fat? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not an expert here, but it &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not an expert here, but it &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not an expert here, but it does seem pretty clear that obviously does seem pretty clear that obviously does seem pretty clear that obviously fat around your organs isn't good. Fatty fat around your organs isn't good. Fatty fat around your organs isn't good. Fatty liver being a good example. And by the liver being a good example. And by the liver being a good example. And by the way, when I went on GLPs, my I had a way, when I went on GLPs, my I had a way, when I went on GLPs, my I had a little bit of fatty liver just little bit of fatty liver just little bit of fatty liver just disappeared. So I think a lot of people disappeared. So I think a lot of people disappeared. So I think a lot of people are thinking this way that your pancreas are thinking this way that your pancreas are thinking this way that your pancreas is and beta cells in particular are very is and beta cells in particular are very is and beta cells in particular are very subject to stress and fat does put subject to stress and fat does put subject to stress and fat does put stress on your organs. No question. And stress on your organs. No question. And stress on your organs. No question. And so it may be one of the reasons you know so it may be one of the reasons you know so it may be one of the reasons you know your pancreas, your beta cells in your pancreas, your beta cells in your pancreas, your beta cells in particular is very sensitive to fat is particular is very sensitive to fat is particular is very sensitive to fat is because it does cause stress. We know because it does cause stress. We know because it does cause stress. We know fat's very associated with inflammation. fat's very associated with inflammation. fat's very associated with inflammation. So obesity a good example. more obese So obesity a good example. more obese So obesity a good example. more obese you are higher BMI again not perfect you are higher BMI again not perfect you are higher BMI again not perfect correlation but higher inflammation and correlation but higher inflammation and correlation but higher inflammation and so all that does tie together and so all that does tie together and so all that does tie together and your immune system is tied in this in your immune system is tied in this in your immune system is tied in this in ways I would say we don't fully ways I would say we don't fully ways I would say we don't fully understand but uh in general the party understand but uh in general the party understand but uh in general the party line is that visceral fat is worse and I line is that visceral fat is worse and I line is that visceral fat is worse and I think it's because of putting stress on think it's because of putting stress on think it's because of putting stress on your organ systems uh yeah say versus your organ systems uh yeah say versus your organ systems uh yeah say versus subcutaneous &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors David. acknowledge one of our sponsors David. acknowledge one of our sponsors David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its calories come from protein. This is 50% calories come from protein. This is 50% calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein higher than the next closest protein bar. David protein bars also taste bar. David protein bars also taste bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip favorite bar is the chocolate chip favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough, but then again, I also cookie dough, but then again, I also cookie dough, but then again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter like the new chocolate peanut butter like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavor and the chocolate brownie flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavored. Basically, I like all the flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly flavors a lot. They're all incredibly flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest delicious. In fact, the toughest delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat challenge is knowing which ones to eat challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times per on which days and how many times per on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, but day. I limit myself to two per day, but day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm I absolutely love them. With David, I'm I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the able to get 28 grams of protein in the able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it easy calories of a snack, which makes it easy calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of one gram of to hit my protein goals of one gram of to hit my protein goals of one gram of protein per pound of body weight per protein per pound of body weight per protein per pound of body weight per day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given They're incredibly delicious and given that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, that they have 28 grams of protein, they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having they're really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to David, you can go to David, you can go to davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Again, that's davidproin.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by EightLe. 8 makes smart mattress covers EightLe. 8 makes smart mattress covers EightLe. 8 makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleeptracking with cooling, heating, and sleeptracking with cooling, heating, and sleeptracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure capacity. One of the best ways to ensure capacity. One of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to make sure a great night's sleep is to make sure a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping that the temperature of your sleeping that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's environment is correct. And that's environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply because in order to fall and stay deeply because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually asleep, your body temperature actually asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and order to wake up feeling refreshed and order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature energized, your body temperature energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the 3°. Eight automatically regulates the 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the temperature of your bed throughout the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. night according to your unique needs. night according to your unique needs. Eight has just launched their latest Eight has just launched their latest Eight has just launched their latest model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has model, the Pod 5. And the Pod 5 has several new important features. One of several new important features. One of several new important features. One of these new features is called Autopilot. these new features is called Autopilot. these new features is called Autopilot. Autopilot is an AI engine that learns Autopilot is an AI engine that learns Autopilot is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns to adjust the your sleep patterns to adjust the your sleep patterns to adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It also across different sleep stages. It also across different sleep stages. It also elevates your head if you're snoring, elevates your head if you're snoring, elevates your head if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize and it makes other shifts to optimize and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also your sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also your sleep. The bass on the Pod 5 also has an integrated speaker that syncs to has an integrated speaker that syncs to has an integrated speaker that syncs to the EightLe app and can play audio to the EightLe app and can play audio to the EightLe app and can play audio to support relaxation and recovery. The support relaxation and recovery. The support relaxation and recovery. The audio catalog includes several NSDR, audio catalog includes several NSDR, audio catalog includes several NSDR, non-sleep deep rest scripts that I non-sleep deep rest scripts that I non-sleep deep rest scripts that I worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If worked on with Eight Sleep to record. If you're not familiar, NSDR involves you're not familiar, NSDR involves you're not familiar, NSDR involves listening to an audio script that walks listening to an audio script that walks listening to an audio script that walks you through a deep body relaxation you through a deep body relaxation you through a deep body relaxation combined with some very simple breathing combined with some very simple breathing combined with some very simple breathing exercises. It's an extremely powerful exercises. It's an extremely powerful exercises. It's an extremely powerful tool that anyone can benefit from the tool that anyone can benefit from the tool that anyone can benefit from the first time and every time. If you'd like first time and every time. If you'd like first time and every time. If you'd like to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5.8LE to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5.8LE to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5.8LE ships to many countries worldwide, ships to many countries worldwide, ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. I'd like to talk a little bit about meal I'd like to talk a little bit about meal I'd like to talk a little bit about meal timing and sleep. I do my best to eat my timing and sleep. I do my best to eat my timing and sleep. I do my best to eat my last bite of food at least a couple of last bite of food at least a couple of last bite of food at least a couple of hours before I go to sleep. Doesn't hours before I go to sleep. Doesn't hours before I go to sleep. Doesn't always happen. What do we know about how always happen. What do we know about how always happen. What do we know about how evening and nighttime meals impact sleep evening and nighttime meals impact sleep evening and nighttime meals impact sleep and next day glucose levels and next day glucose levels and next day glucose levels and regulation? Well, the party line is that regulation? Well, the party line is that regulation? Well, the party line is that you should not eat three hours before you should not eat three hours before you should not eat three hours before sleeping. Uh, and I believe that and sleeping. Uh, and I believe that and sleeping. Uh, and I believe that and that's true from the studies we've run that's true from the studies we've run that's true from the studies we've run that people who do have a gap and that people who do have a gap and that people who do have a gap and actually people who walk after dinner actually people who walk after dinner actually people who walk after dinner have lower glucose the next day. And if have lower glucose the next day. And if have lower glucose the next day. And if you go into the evening with a high you go into the evening with a high you go into the evening with a high glucose spike in general that correlates glucose spike in general that correlates glucose spike in general that correlates with poor sleep. So, um, I think it's with poor sleep. So, um, I think it's with poor sleep. So, um, I think it's more complicated than that. I think the more complicated than that. I think the more complicated than that. I think the again the party line will be well your again the party line will be well your again the party line will be well your glucose is kind of high at night and glucose is kind of high at night and glucose is kind of high at night and gradually goes down during the day and gradually goes down during the day and gradually goes down during the day and spike in the morning. You get a cortisol spike in the morning. You get a cortisol spike in the morning. You get a cortisol spike as you probably know when you wake spike as you probably know when you wake spike as you probably know when you wake up and that's normal and that's healthy up and that's normal and that's healthy up and that's normal and that's healthy helps energize you for the day and helps energize you for the day and helps energize you for the day and cortisol and glucose are related. Uh but cortisol and glucose are related. Uh but cortisol and glucose are related. Uh but when you actually look at people's when you actually look at people's when you actually look at people's glucose patterns it's much more glucose patterns it's much more glucose patterns it's much more complicated than that. And I think a lot complicated than that. And I think a lot complicated than that. And I think a lot of that has to do with what their sub of that has to do with what their sub of that has to do with what their sub phenotype is what we don't fully phenotype is what we don't fully phenotype is what we don't fully understand. So we're trying to sort this understand. So we're trying to sort this understand. So we're trying to sort this out and what you did the day and out and what you did the day and out and what you did the day and especially the evening before eating especially the evening before eating especially the evening before eating that big piece of pizza then go falling that big piece of pizza then go falling that big piece of pizza then go falling right asleep probably is not a great right asleep probably is not a great right asleep probably is not a great thing for you. You will go to bed with a thing for you. You will go to bed with a thing for you. You will go to bed with a high glucose spike for many people high glucose spike for many people high glucose spike for many people again unless you have perfect glucose again unless you have perfect glucose again unless you have perfect glucose control. So you know I think getting control. So you know I think getting control. So you know I think getting your glucose under control it is a bit your glucose under control it is a bit your glucose under control it is a bit of a problem for me. We tend to eat late of a problem for me. We tend to eat late of a problem for me. We tend to eat late in my household just because both my in my household just because both my in my household just because both my wife and I work kind of late. Uh, and so wife and I work kind of late. Uh, and so wife and I work kind of late. Uh, and so we tend to eat a little bit later, but I we tend to eat a little bit later, but I we tend to eat a little bit later, but I definitely do better if I can try and definitely do better if I can try and definitely do better if I can try and eat earlier. And then I definitely don't eat earlier. And then I definitely don't eat earlier. And then I definitely don't snack before bedtime, that sort of snack before bedtime, that sort of snack before bedtime, that sort of thing. And these days I try not to make thing. And these days I try not to make thing. And these days I try not to make my biggest meal my dinner. Uh, which my biggest meal my dinner. Uh, which my biggest meal my dinner. Uh, which again can lead you into sleep with that. again can lead you into sleep with that. again can lead you into sleep with that. And we always take a walk. We have dogs And we always take a walk. We have dogs And we always take a walk. We have dogs and walk our dog after dinner. It's and walk our dog after dinner. It's and walk our dog after dinner. It's become a routine. you mentioned earlier become a routine. you mentioned earlier become a routine. you mentioned earlier about behavior and I think the key for about behavior and I think the key for about behavior and I think the key for good behavior is to get into these good behavior is to get into these good behavior is to get into these routines uh where you can just get into that and uh where you can just get into that and uh where you can just get into that and I think it really makes a difference. So I think it really makes a difference. So I think it really makes a difference. So um yeah always and as I'm sure you know um yeah always and as I'm sure you know um yeah always and as I'm sure you know going to bed people we had found that in going to bed people we had found that in going to bed people we had found that in some of our studies as well going to bed some of our studies as well going to bed some of our studies as well going to bed the exact same time those folks have the exact same time those folks have the exact same time those folks have lower glucose than those who have highly lower glucose than those who have highly lower glucose than those who have highly variable sleep timing. Now, that's not variable sleep timing. Now, that's not variable sleep timing. Now, that's not so great for me because I travel a fair so great for me because I travel a fair so great for me because I travel a fair amount like but I try when I'm not amount like but I try when I'm not amount like but I try when I'm not traveling to keep constant hours. At traveling to keep constant hours. At traveling to keep constant hours. At least that part I'm okay at. But least that part I'm okay at. But least that part I'm okay at. But yeah, &gt;&gt; I think we forget sometimes the number &gt;&gt; I think we forget sometimes the number &gt;&gt; I think we forget sometimes the number of interesting things that happen in of interesting things that happen in of interesting things that happen in sleep. And one of the most interesting sleep. And one of the most interesting sleep. And one of the most interesting papers to me anyway in the last few papers to me anyway in the last few papers to me anyway in the last few years was a paper that I saw where they years was a paper that I saw where they years was a paper that I saw where they essentially had people breathe into a essentially had people breathe into a essentially had people breathe into a tube while they were sleeping. tube while they were sleeping. tube while they were sleeping. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; And evaluated the different types of &gt;&gt; And evaluated the different types of &gt;&gt; And evaluated the different types of metabolism that were occurring during metabolism that were occurring during metabolism that were occurring during sleep. And it turns out that as we go sleep. And it turns out that as we go sleep. And it turns out that as we go from light sleep to deep sleep and then from light sleep to deep sleep and then from light sleep to deep sleep and then more rapid eye movement sleep as the more rapid eye movement sleep as the more rapid eye movement sleep as the night progresses, the brain and body night progresses, the brain and body night progresses, the brain and body transition through essentially every transition through essentially every transition through essentially every form of metabolism. Glucose metabolism, form of metabolism. Glucose metabolism, form of metabolism. Glucose metabolism, ketogenic metabolism, a mixture of the ketogenic metabolism, a mixture of the ketogenic metabolism, a mixture of the two. And it seems like sleep is this um two. And it seems like sleep is this um two. And it seems like sleep is this um we don't know if it's a like a test run we don't know if it's a like a test run we don't know if it's a like a test run or if it's a reboot or we don't know or if it's a reboot or we don't know or if it's a reboot or we don't know what to call it, right? But it's just what to call it, right? But it's just what to call it, right? But it's just very clear that during sleep there's a very clear that during sleep there's a very clear that during sleep there's a lot of metabolism happening. So, when lot of metabolism happening. So, when lot of metabolism happening. So, when you tell me that getting to bed at you tell me that getting to bed at you tell me that getting to bed at roughly the same time or the same time roughly the same time or the same time roughly the same time or the same time every night improves blood glucose every night improves blood glucose every night improves blood glucose regulation, my first thought is, "Oh, regulation, my first thought is, "Oh, regulation, my first thought is, "Oh, well, that makes sense because if you go well, that makes sense because if you go well, that makes sense because if you go to bed at the same time, then you're to bed at the same time, then you're to bed at the same time, then you're eating at roughly the same time. You're eating at roughly the same time. You're eating at roughly the same time. You're exercising at roughly the same time." exercising at roughly the same time." exercising at roughly the same time." But it could also be the case that in But it could also be the case that in But it could also be the case that in sleep, we're getting a tuning up of sleep, we're getting a tuning up of sleep, we're getting a tuning up of the of the metabolic processes for the of the metabolic processes for the of the metabolic processes for the brain and body. Is there any brain and body. Is there any brain and body. Is there any evidence that supports that? evidence that supports that? evidence that supports that? &gt;&gt; Yeah, again, I don't know from the &gt;&gt; Yeah, again, I don't know from the &gt;&gt; Yeah, again, I don't know from the metabolism standpoint. I like to say metabolism standpoint. I like to say metabolism standpoint. I like to say the things we do the most we understand the things we do the most we understand the things we do the most we understand the least. Nutrition, right? How does the least. Nutrition, right? How does the least. Nutrition, right? How does exactly does that work on all your exactly does that work on all your exactly does that work on all your different organs? Sleep, you know, I do different organs? Sleep, you know, I do different organs? Sleep, you know, I do like the idea of sleep. You may know like the idea of sleep. You may know like the idea of sleep. You may know your, you would know this better than your, you would know this better than your, you would know this better than me, but your spinal fluid and such, you me, but your spinal fluid and such, you me, but your spinal fluid and such, you know, expands and contracts. The idea of know, expands and contracts. The idea of know, expands and contracts. The idea of emptying out the garbage, so to speak. emptying out the garbage, so to speak. emptying out the garbage, so to speak. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Literally rinses out your system. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Literally rinses out your system. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Literally rinses out your system. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I like that concept. I think &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I like that concept. I think &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I like that concept. I think uh and you know to what extent that uh and you know to what extent that uh and you know to what extent that is beneficial I'm sure it is. I don't is beneficial I'm sure it is. I don't is beneficial I'm sure it is. I don't know and all the other facts but even know and all the other facts but even know and all the other facts but even people argue what's better for you REM people argue what's better for you REM people argue what's better for you REM versus deep sleep. Even some of that is versus deep sleep. Even some of that is versus deep sleep. Even some of that is debated by experts in the field. Again debated by experts in the field. Again debated by experts in the field. Again I'm not a sleep expert. Um I have a I'm not a sleep expert. Um I have a I'm not a sleep expert. Um I have a tendency to move into fields I know tendency to move into fields I know tendency to move into fields I know nothing about. So because I'm so naive I nothing about. So because I'm so naive I nothing about. So because I'm so naive I hope to learn something. Uh especially hope to learn something. Uh especially hope to learn something. Uh especially these areas that aren't so well these areas that aren't so well these areas that aren't so well understood. So, it's an area we're going understood. So, it's an area we're going understood. So, it's an area we're going to be studying a lot more around the to be studying a lot more around the to be studying a lot more around the glucose control, but there's no question glucose control, but there's no question glucose control, but there's no question if you look at some people, they're if you look at some people, they're if you look at some people, they're spiking really bizarrely and I have spiking really bizarrely and I have spiking really bizarrely and I have mixed days myself. I'm trying to sort mixed days myself. I'm trying to sort mixed days myself. I'm trying to sort that out. Some where I do hit the party that out. Some where I do hit the party that out. Some where I do hit the party line, higher glucose gradually go down line, higher glucose gradually go down line, higher glucose gradually go down by the morning, but then I have nights by the morning, but then I have nights by the morning, but then I have nights where I'm quite irregular and I want to where I'm quite irregular and I want to where I'm quite irregular and I want to correlate that with what's going on. And correlate that with what's going on. And correlate that with what's going on. And it's not just me, it's true of a lot of it's not just me, it's true of a lot of it's not just me, it's true of a lot of people. And I don't think that's sorted people. And I don't think that's sorted people. And I don't think that's sorted out in my mind. And I think metabolism out in my mind. And I think metabolism out in my mind. And I think metabolism in general uh at some point we can talk in general uh at some point we can talk in general uh at some point we can talk about the micro sampling stuff but we about the micro sampling stuff but we about the micro sampling stuff but we found that we had 32 people drink this found that we had 32 people drink this found that we had 32 people drink this insure shake while they were fasted and insure shake while they were fasted and insure shake while they were fasted and they all reacted very differently to it. they all reacted very differently to it. they all reacted very differently to it. This is during the day now not This is during the day now not This is during the day now not sleep. And um for some people it was sleep. And um for some people it was sleep. And um for some people it was pro-inflammatory for others pro-inflammatory for others pro-inflammatory for others anti-inflammatory. &gt;&gt; So interesting. &gt;&gt; So interesting. &gt;&gt; So interesting. &gt;&gt; I assume a lot of this got set early in &gt;&gt; I assume a lot of this got set early in &gt;&gt; I assume a lot of this got set early in life because your whole microbiome. So life because your whole microbiome. So life because your whole microbiome. So backing up a little bit just so people backing up a little bit just so people backing up a little bit just so people realize that you know you have a lot of realize that you know you have a lot of realize that you know you have a lot of microbes you have in fact more microbes you have in fact more microbes you have in fact more microbes in you than our human cells and they're in you than our human cells and they're in you than our human cells and they're are critical for digesting your food and are critical for digesting your food and are critical for digesting your food and all this and they're they heavily all this and they're they heavily all this and they're they heavily interact with your immune system. 70% of interact with your immune system. 70% of interact with your immune system. 70% of your immune cells are in your gut. So your immune cells are in your gut. So your immune cells are in your gut. So you have this whole interplay between you have this whole interplay between you have this whole interplay between your immune system and your gut and your immune system and your gut and your immune system and your gut and obviously then the food you eat which uh obviously then the food you eat which uh obviously then the food you eat which uh it goes through your small intestine it goes through your small intestine it goes through your small intestine first and the small molecules like first and the small molecules like first and the small molecules like glucose get absorbed but then all the glucose get absorbed but then all the glucose get absorbed but then all the fibers the big molecules go into your fibers the big molecules go into your fibers the big molecules go into your colon your large intestine your colon your large intestine your colon your large intestine where they basically you know are where they basically you know are where they basically you know are interacting with these immune cells. So interacting with these immune cells. So interacting with these immune cells. So I think a lot and a lot of that gets I think a lot and a lot of that gets I think a lot and a lot of that gets probably set early in life. In fact, probably set early in life. In fact, probably set early in life. In fact, people have shown your microbiome gets people have shown your microbiome gets people have shown your microbiome gets set in your first three years of life. set in your first three years of life. set in your first three years of life. So I think that interplay all gets So I think that interplay all gets So I think that interplay all gets established and then you are established and then you are established and then you are reacting to some of that your food later reacting to some of that your food later reacting to some of that your food later in life. That's at least the posture. in life. That's at least the posture. in life. That's at least the posture. Not that you can't modify it. In fact, Not that you can't modify it. In fact, Not that you can't modify it. In fact, you know, switching from carnivore to you know, switching from carnivore to you know, switching from carnivore to veggie diets and or Mediterranean type veggie diets and or Mediterranean type veggie diets and or Mediterranean type diets which are sort of healthier like diets which are sort of healthier like diets which are sort of healthier like fish heavy uh um veggie diets I think fish heavy uh um veggie diets I think fish heavy uh um veggie diets I think are helpful for people. Um, but I do are helpful for people. Um, but I do are helpful for people. Um, but I do think some of this gets set early and I think some of this gets set early and I think some of this gets set early and I think getting that set right. I think getting that set right. I think getting that set right. I think we probably need to as a society get we probably need to as a society get we probably need to as a society get that all set a lot earlier probably now that all set a lot earlier probably now that all set a lot earlier probably now too. And and it's estimated some work too. And and it's estimated some work too. And and it's estimated some work from Justin Sonenberg that um uh you from Justin Sonenberg that um uh you from Justin Sonenberg that um uh you know native populations these Aboriginal know native populations these Aboriginal know native populations these Aboriginal they have three times the number of they have three times the number of they have three times the number of microbes that say people in the US. So, microbes that say people in the US. So, microbes that say people in the US. So, we just don't have the same community we just don't have the same community we just don't have the same community that is probably handling diverse foods that is probably handling diverse foods that is probably handling diverse foods and probably making essential and probably making essential and probably making essential ingredients for our health that we're ingredients for our health that we're ingredients for our health that we're now missing. So, we probably need to now missing. So, we probably need to now missing. So, we probably need to restore that in some fashion. Otherwise, restore that in some fashion. Otherwise, restore that in some fashion. Otherwise, this obesity and diabetes trend is just this obesity and diabetes trend is just this obesity and diabetes trend is just going to continue. going to continue. going to continue. &gt;&gt; I totally agree. I think the gut &gt;&gt; I totally agree. I think the gut &gt;&gt; I totally agree. I think the gut microbiome is without question one of microbiome is without question one of microbiome is without question one of the more fascinating aspects of our the more fascinating aspects of our the more fascinating aspects of our biology and um in no small part because biology and um in no small part because biology and um in no small part because of the way that it interacts with the of the way that it interacts with the of the way that it interacts with the brain by the vagus nerve. You know, brain by the vagus nerve. You know, brain by the vagus nerve. You know, everyone's obsessed these days with the everyone's obsessed these days with the everyone's obsessed these days with the vagus nerve as a calming pathway, but vagus nerve as a calming pathway, but vagus nerve as a calming pathway, but it's a got a bunch of different avenues it's a got a bunch of different avenues it's a got a bunch of different avenues within it. And um and it is the major within it. And um and it is the major within it. And um and it is the major route by which your gut communicates route by which your gut communicates route by which your gut communicates with your brain, with your brain, with your brain, &gt;&gt; right? And um I do want to um just say &gt;&gt; right? And um I do want to um just say &gt;&gt; right? And um I do want to um just say one thing in fairness to uh an one thing in fairness to uh an one thing in fairness to uh an observation. Um I completely agree with observation. Um I completely agree with observation. Um I completely agree with you that many people who've been eating you that many people who've been eating you that many people who've been eating certainly standard American diet, sad to certainly standard American diet, sad to certainly standard American diet, sad to think that anyone still does that think that anyone still does that think that anyone still does that anymore because it's such a terrible anymore because it's such a terrible anymore because it's such a terrible diet. I think everyone agrees on that. A diet. I think everyone agrees on that. A diet. I think everyone agrees on that. A lot of processed foods. But um you lot of processed foods. But um you lot of processed foods. But um you mentioned uh switching uh carnivore for mentioned uh switching uh carnivore for mentioned uh switching uh carnivore for u more Mediterranean or plant-based. I u more Mediterranean or plant-based. I u more Mediterranean or plant-based. I have seen that uh work for many people. have seen that uh work for many people. have seen that uh work for many people. I will just also mention in fairness I will just also mention in fairness I will just also mention in fairness there and this relates to the gut there and this relates to the gut there and this relates to the gut microbiome there do seem to be some microbiome there do seem to be some microbiome there do seem to be some people who despite their best effort to people who despite their best effort to people who despite their best effort to eat fiber, fruits, vegetables, fish, eat fiber, fruits, vegetables, fish, eat fiber, fruits, vegetables, fish, so-called Mediterranean diet that for so-called Mediterranean diet that for so-called Mediterranean diet that for whatever reason um they have persistent whatever reason um they have persistent whatever reason um they have persistent autoimmune issues. And I have observed autoimmune issues. And I have observed autoimmune issues. And I have observed over and over again that if they switch over and over again that if they switch over and over again that if they switch to an elimination diet that's largely to an elimination diet that's largely to an elimination diet that's largely just meat, believe it or not, and just meat, believe it or not, and just meat, believe it or not, and nothing else, they seem to resolve those nothing else, they seem to resolve those nothing else, they seem to resolve those autoimmune issues. Now, I personally autoimmune issues. Now, I personally autoimmune issues. Now, I personally don't follow that diet. I don't think don't follow that diet. I don't think don't follow that diet. I don't think it's the mo the healthiest diet out it's the mo the healthiest diet out it's the mo the healthiest diet out there. It's very hard to uh to stick to. there. It's very hard to uh to stick to. there. It's very hard to uh to stick to. But in my mind, it seems like the data But in my mind, it seems like the data But in my mind, it seems like the data are pointing to the idea that there are pointing to the idea that there are pointing to the idea that there are diverse microbiomes out there set up diverse microbiomes out there set up diverse microbiomes out there set up early in life. And probably genetics early in life. And probably genetics early in life. And probably genetics play a role also. your professor of play a role also. your professor of play a role also. your professor of genetics. So hopefully that's not too uh genetics. So hopefully that's not too uh genetics. So hopefully that's not too uh too heretical an idea. uh too heretical an idea. uh too heretical an idea. &gt;&gt; By the way, some of this has been broken &gt;&gt; By the way, some of this has been broken &gt;&gt; By the way, some of this has been broken down of say how much is your down of say how much is your down of say how much is your microbiome for general glucose levels microbiome for general glucose levels microbiome for general glucose levels versus genetics. And I think for the versus genetics. And I think for the versus genetics. And I think for the general uh um microbiome, it's about general uh um microbiome, it's about general uh um microbiome, it's about 20ome 20 to 30%, depends on the cohort 20ome 20 to 30%, depends on the cohort 20ome 20 to 30%, depends on the cohort that was studied. This some work from that was studied. This some work from that was studied. This some work from the Weissman. Uh and then for from the Weissman. Uh and then for from the Weissman. Uh and then for genetics, it may be about 20% as well. genetics, it may be about 20% as well. genetics, it may be about 20% as well. So, so 20% of your microbiome is So, so 20% of your microbiome is So, so 20% of your microbiome is determined by your genetics. determined by your genetics. determined by your genetics. &gt;&gt; Uh, no, the other way around. Sorry. Of &gt;&gt; Uh, no, the other way around. Sorry. Of &gt;&gt; Uh, no, the other way around. Sorry. Of your glucose levels, your glucose levels, your glucose levels, &gt;&gt; 20% 20 to 30% is determined by your &gt;&gt; 20% 20 to 30% is determined by your &gt;&gt; 20% 20 to 30% is determined by your microbiome and about 20% by your microbiome and about 20% by your microbiome and about 20% by your genetics &gt;&gt; and the rest by lifestyle. &gt;&gt; and the rest by lifestyle. &gt;&gt; and the rest by lifestyle. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; That's a useful set of metrics. Yeah. I &gt;&gt; That's a useful set of metrics. Yeah. I &gt;&gt; That's a useful set of metrics. Yeah. I mean, I just have to believe based on mean, I just have to believe based on mean, I just have to believe based on the observation of people who are really the observation of people who are really the observation of people who are really careful, really care about their health, careful, really care about their health, careful, really care about their health, they're not doing standard American diet they're not doing standard American diet they're not doing standard American diet and they've tried vegan, they've tried and they've tried vegan, they've tried and they've tried vegan, they've tried vegetarian, they've tried omnivore vegetarian, they've tried omnivore vegetarian, they've tried omnivore without many processed foods and then without many processed foods and then without many processed foods and then they try ketogenic diet and they feel they try ketogenic diet and they feel they try ketogenic diet and they feel better and then they go full just meat better and then they go full just meat better and then they go full just meat and their issues disappear. and their issues disappear. and their issues disappear. &gt;&gt; And you kind of have to acknowledge &gt;&gt; And you kind of have to acknowledge &gt;&gt; And you kind of have to acknowledge that. I'm not saying you have to, but that. I'm not saying you have to, but that. I'm not saying you have to, but I'm going to acknowledge it. I will also I'm going to acknowledge it. I will also I'm going to acknowledge it. I will also say that most people seem to do well on say that most people seem to do well on say that most people seem to do well on an omnivorous diet. I think 90% of an omnivorous diet. I think 90% of an omnivorous diet. I think 90% of people in the world are probably people in the world are probably people in the world are probably omnivores. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um and I find it so interesting that &gt;&gt; Um and I find it so interesting that &gt;&gt; Um and I find it so interesting that &gt;&gt; as we support the gut microbiome, our &gt;&gt; as we support the gut microbiome, our &gt;&gt; as we support the gut microbiome, our health generally improves. That just health generally improves. That just health generally improves. That just seems to be the case. I'd like to talk seems to be the case. I'd like to talk seems to be the case. I'd like to talk for a moment about fiber. for a moment about fiber. for a moment about fiber. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Because I think there's general &gt;&gt; Because I think there's general &gt;&gt; Because I think there's general agreement in the medical community that agreement in the medical community that agreement in the medical community that fiber is important. um reduces risk of fiber is important. um reduces risk of fiber is important. um reduces risk of cancer, improves digestion, adds bulk to cancer, improves digestion, adds bulk to cancer, improves digestion, adds bulk to food, reduces inflammation, just on and food, reduces inflammation, just on and food, reduces inflammation, just on and on and on. But then again, our colleague on and on. But then again, our colleague on and on. But then again, our colleague Justin Sonnenberg um and Christopher Justin Sonnenberg um and Christopher Justin Sonnenberg um and Christopher Gardner, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; both of whom have been on this podcast &gt;&gt; both of whom have been on this podcast &gt;&gt; both of whom have been on this podcast before did this really nice study of before did this really nice study of before did this really nice study of comparing increasing fiber in the diet comparing increasing fiber in the diet comparing increasing fiber in the diet versus increasing intake of low sugar versus increasing intake of low sugar versus increasing intake of low sugar fermented foods. And it's very clear fermented foods. And it's very clear fermented foods. And it's very clear that the increase in low sugar fermented that the increase in low sugar fermented that the increase in low sugar fermented foods supported proliferation of the foods supported proliferation of the foods supported proliferation of the healthy gut microbiota reduced the healthy gut microbiota reduced the healthy gut microbiota reduced the inflammatome whereas increasing fiber allowed some whereas increasing fiber allowed some whereas increasing fiber allowed some people to reduce inflammation other people to reduce inflammation other people to reduce inflammation other people's levels of inflammation went up. people's levels of inflammation went up. people's levels of inflammation went up. And so this brings us to this question And so this brings us to this question And so this brings us to this question of when we talk about fiber as a general of when we talk about fiber as a general of when we talk about fiber as a general category maybe that's too broad. category maybe that's too broad. category maybe that's too broad. &gt;&gt; It is. Could you tell us about the two &gt;&gt; It is. Could you tell us about the two &gt;&gt; It is. Could you tell us about the two major types of fiber? Which foods major types of fiber? Which foods major types of fiber? Which foods tend to deliver one or the other type of tend to deliver one or the other type of tend to deliver one or the other type of fiber? And if indeed there are fiber? And if indeed there are fiber? And if indeed there are differences in which fiber are best for differences in which fiber are best for differences in which fiber are best for different people, different people, different people, &gt;&gt; right? So, uh, as you're alluding to, &gt;&gt; right? So, uh, as you're alluding to, &gt;&gt; right? So, uh, as you're alluding to, fiber is very heterogeneous, very fiber is very heterogeneous, very fiber is very heterogeneous, very different. And we even break it down different. And we even break it down different. And we even break it down further than that. You're probably further than that. You're probably further than that. You're probably thinking of, you know, soluble versus thinking of, you know, soluble versus thinking of, you know, soluble versus insoluble, uh, or resistant starch insoluble, uh, or resistant starch insoluble, uh, or resistant starch versus starch. But I look at fiber as versus starch. But I look at fiber as versus starch. But I look at fiber as like just a giant community of different like just a giant community of different like just a giant community of different substrates if you will. So we have long substrates if you will. So we have long substrates if you will. So we have long chain, short chains, hydrophobic, chain, short chains, hydrophobic, chain, short chains, hydrophobic, hydrophilic, positive, negative. It's hydrophilic, positive, negative. It's hydrophilic, positive, negative. It's like saying all animals are the same. like saying all animals are the same. like saying all animals are the same. Humans are the same as cockroaches, the Humans are the same as cockroaches, the Humans are the same as cockroaches, the same as cats. You can't lump that same as cats. You can't lump that same as cats. You can't lump that broadly. &gt;&gt; You can't. And their effects are very &gt;&gt; You can't. And their effects are very &gt;&gt; You can't. And their effects are very broad. very broad. very broad. &gt;&gt; And so we've started tearing this apart. &gt;&gt; And so we've started tearing this apart. &gt;&gt; And so we've started tearing this apart. I was a chemistry undergrad by training. I was a chemistry undergrad by training. I was a chemistry undergrad by training. So I guess that's where I'm coming at So I guess that's where I'm coming at So I guess that's where I'm coming at this. So we just started and being this. So we just started and being this. So we just started and being somewhat practical too. We started somewhat practical too. We started somewhat practical too. We started putting people on we took two common putting people on we took two common putting people on we took two common fibers arabinosylan and inulin which are fibers arabinosylan and inulin which are fibers arabinosylan and inulin which are these two uh just commonly used razylans these two uh just commonly used razylans these two uh just commonly used razylans and physium hus and it's associated with and physium hus and it's associated with and physium hus and it's associated with mezamucil and inulins and these chory mezamucil and inulins and these chory mezamucil and inulins and these chory pea fiber things. pea fiber things. pea fiber things. &gt;&gt; Could you before we dive into this what &gt;&gt; Could you before we dive into this what &gt;&gt; Could you before we dive into this what are some foods that one type of fibers are some foods that one type of fibers are some foods that one type of fibers is more abundant in versus the other is more abundant in versus the other is more abundant in versus the other type of fiber? Well, Metamucil is a good type of fiber? Well, Metamucil is a good type of fiber? Well, Metamucil is a good example for the um Arabland would be example for the um Arabland would be example for the um Arabland would be in that and Rabyland's kind of in that and Rabyland's kind of in that and Rabyland's kind of interesting as the name sounds to interesting as the name sounds to interesting as the name sounds to chemist has arabinos and uh and it does chemist has arabinos and uh and it does chemist has arabinos and uh and it does have some glucose but has polyphenols in have some glucose but has polyphenols in have some glucose but has polyphenols in it too and I don't know if you probably it too and I don't know if you probably it too and I don't know if you probably have covered this on your show. have covered this on your show. have covered this on your show. &gt;&gt; No, not yet but they're super important. &gt;&gt; No, not yet but they're super important. &gt;&gt; No, not yet but they're super important. They are they're and they're They are they're and they're They are they're and they're being especially in the last I'd say you being especially in the last I'd say you being especially in the last I'd say you know six 10 years being more and more know six 10 years being more and more know six 10 years being more and more appreciated for all their positive appreciated for all their positive appreciated for all their positive effects as antioxidants effects as antioxidants effects as antioxidants anti-inflammatory. &gt;&gt; So uh anyway they're part of a rabbis. &gt;&gt; So uh anyway they're part of a rabbis. &gt;&gt; So uh anyway they're part of a rabbis. This inulin is a glucose polymer but This inulin is a glucose polymer but This inulin is a glucose polymer but they're short chain and long chain that they're short chain and long chain that they're short chain and long chain that has different properties as well too. Uh has different properties as well too. Uh has different properties as well too. Uh that's in various uh um certain fruits that's in various uh um certain fruits that's in various uh um certain fruits and certain uh other things. And when we and certain uh other things. And when we and certain uh other things. And when we went into this, if you read the went into this, if you read the went into this, if you read the literature, you would say, well, there'd literature, you would say, well, there'd literature, you would say, well, there'd be some say um well, inulin lowers your be some say um well, inulin lowers your be some say um well, inulin lowers your glucose and others say no, has no glucose and others say no, has no glucose and others say no, has no effect. And some saying it lowers your effect. And some saying it lowers your effect. And some saying it lowers your cholesterol and others it doesn't. Same cholesterol and others it doesn't. Same cholesterol and others it doesn't. Same with the rabbis island. It was all over with the rabbis island. It was all over with the rabbis island. It was all over the map, although there might have been the map, although there might have been the map, although there might have been more of a consensus about this rabbit more of a consensus about this rabbit more of a consensus about this rabbit island lowering cholesterol. So, we just island lowering cholesterol. So, we just island lowering cholesterol. So, we just did it. We took 18 people. Oh, I know it did it. We took 18 people. Oh, I know it did it. We took 18 people. Oh, I know it doesn't sound like very many, but they doesn't sound like very many, but they doesn't sound like very many, but they did a what's called a crossover study did a what's called a crossover study did a what's called a crossover study where they went on increasing doses where they went on increasing doses where they went on increasing doses where they took either 10 for the first where they took either 10 for the first where they took either 10 for the first 10 grams a day for the first week as a 10 grams a day for the first week as a 10 grams a day for the first week as a supplement, 20 the next week, 30 the supplement, 20 the next week, 30 the supplement, 20 the next week, 30 the next week, and then did a wash out and next week, and then did a wash out and next week, and then did a wash out and then switch to the other one. So, then switch to the other one. So, then switch to the other one. So, they're randomized. They might they're randomized. They might they're randomized. They might do a radical island the first period and do a radical island the first period and do a radical island the first period and then inulin the second, then a mix then inulin the second, then a mix then inulin the second, then a mix fiber, which the party line would say is fiber, which the party line would say is fiber, which the party line would say is supposed to be the best for you. So is supposed to be the best for you. So is supposed to be the best for you. So we put and then we do what we're known we put and then we do what we're known we put and then we do what we're known for these deep measurements these deep for these deep measurements these deep for these deep measurements these deep omic measures many molecules of people's omic measures many molecules of people's omic measures many molecules of people's blood and as well as clinical measures blood and as well as clinical measures blood and as well as clinical measures and so what we discovered is that as a and so what we discovered is that as a and so what we discovered is that as a general rule general rule general rule did reduce cholesterol and actually did reduce cholesterol and actually did reduce cholesterol and actually quite substantially it went down about quite substantially it went down about quite substantially it went down about 25%. &gt;&gt; So this isn't metamucil but what other &gt;&gt; So this isn't metamucil but what other &gt;&gt; So this isn't metamucil but what other um what sorts of foods contain high um what sorts of foods contain high um what sorts of foods contain high amounts of this compound? amounts of this compound? amounts of this compound? &gt;&gt; Most do actually. &gt;&gt; Most do actually. &gt;&gt; Most do actually. &gt;&gt; Okay. Broccoli. &gt;&gt; Okay. Broccoli. &gt;&gt; Okay. Broccoli. &gt;&gt; Yeah, broccoli. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, broccoli. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, broccoli. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Kale, lettuce, cabbage. Okay. So, &gt;&gt; Kale, lettuce, cabbage. Okay. So, &gt;&gt; Kale, lettuce, cabbage. Okay. So, this is like the when we think of fiber, this is like the when we think of fiber, this is like the when we think of fiber, we &gt;&gt; But they have but they have other things &gt;&gt; But they have but they have other things &gt;&gt; But they have but they have other things as well. So, these are generally as well. So, these are generally as well. So, these are generally mixtures like apple fiber will have mixtures like apple fiber will have mixtures like apple fiber will have three major types of fiber. It's back to three major types of fiber. It's back to three major types of fiber. It's back to this heterogeneity of fibers. So, we're this heterogeneity of fibers. So, we're this heterogeneity of fibers. So, we're now getting into others like beta now getting into others like beta now getting into others like beta glucans another fiber. Resistant starch glucans another fiber. Resistant starch glucans another fiber. Resistant starch is yet another one. So, there's a whole is yet another one. So, there's a whole is yet another one. So, there's a whole series of these fibers out there. Yet, series of these fibers out there. Yet, series of these fibers out there. Yet, they're not studied for their individual they're not studied for their individual they're not studied for their individual effects. And it may be the case of effects. And it may be the case of effects. And it may be the case of course the complex mixture is a big deal course the complex mixture is a big deal course the complex mixture is a big deal uh as well meaning getting the right uh as well meaning getting the right uh as well meaning getting the right combination but we're starting with combination but we're starting with combination but we're starting with individual fibers trying to see what individual fibers trying to see what individual fibers trying to see what their effects are and then we will do their effects are and then we will do their effects are and then we will do combination. So we're just finishing up combination. So we're just finishing up combination. So we're just finishing up a study where same thing instead of two a study where same thing instead of two a study where same thing instead of two fibers we added two more betaglucan and fibers we added two more betaglucan and fibers we added two more betaglucan and resistant starch and we're trying to see resistant starch and we're trying to see resistant starch and we're trying to see their effects as supplements. Uh, and their effects as supplements. Uh, and their effects as supplements. Uh, and the idea ultimately is I think people the idea ultimately is I think people the idea ultimately is I think people do supplements. That's why we're doing do supplements. That's why we're doing do supplements. That's why we're doing supplements. Not that I'm a big fan. I'd supplements. Not that I'm a big fan. I'd supplements. Not that I'm a big fan. I'd rather they eat, you know, healthier rather they eat, you know, healthier rather they eat, you know, healthier unprocessed food or both. unprocessed food or both. unprocessed food or both. &gt;&gt; Or both. But yeah, most people don't get &gt;&gt; Or both. But yeah, most people don't get &gt;&gt; Or both. But yeah, most people don't get enough. You probably know that. Um, it's enough. You probably know that. Um, it's enough. You probably know that. Um, it's recommended women have at least 25 grams recommended women have at least 25 grams recommended women have at least 25 grams of fiber a day, men 35. And the number of fiber a day, men 35. And the number of fiber a day, men 35. And the number that people get is something like 12 to that people get is something like 12 to that people get is something like 12 to 15. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; They're off by a factor of two in their &gt;&gt; They're off by a factor of two in their &gt;&gt; They're off by a factor of two in their amount of fiber they consume. So, you amount of fiber they consume. So, you amount of fiber they consume. So, you know, minimally supplements could help know, minimally supplements could help know, minimally supplements could help bring that up. Anyway, uh I mentioned bring that up. Anyway, uh I mentioned bring that up. Anyway, uh I mentioned that Rabos Island as a general rule that Rabos Island as a general rule that Rabos Island as a general rule lowered most people's cholesterol. And lowered most people's cholesterol. And lowered most people's cholesterol. And by the way, neither affected glucose. by the way, neither affected glucose. by the way, neither affected glucose. So, we think other things are important So, we think other things are important So, we think other things are important for that. And um but if you look at for that. And um but if you look at for that. And um but if you look at individuals, we did see some people individuals, we did see some people individuals, we did see some people where rabidosine had zero effect, where rabidosine had zero effect, where rabidosine had zero effect, meaning their cholesterol stayed flat meaning their cholesterol stayed flat meaning their cholesterol stayed flat even when they went to the higher dose even when they went to the higher dose even when they went to the higher dose of 30 grams per day. yet their inulin of 30 grams per day. yet their inulin of 30 grams per day. yet their inulin promoted their decrease promoted their decrease promoted their decrease uh in cholesterol. So what's going uh in cholesterol. So what's going uh in cholesterol. So what's going on? Well, we don't know. But to me, it's on? Well, we don't know. But to me, it's on? Well, we don't know. But to me, it's logical that your microbiome, maybe it's logical that your microbiome, maybe it's logical that your microbiome, maybe it's your maybe it's other parameters are your maybe it's other parameters are your maybe it's other parameters are playing into this. So this is why playing into this. So this is why playing into this. So this is why ultimately what I want to do is just get ultimately what I want to do is just get ultimately what I want to do is just get your microbiome, do a blood draw, and your microbiome, do a blood draw, and your microbiome, do a blood draw, and say, "Aha, here's the foods that will be say, "Aha, here's the foods that will be say, "Aha, here's the foods that will be healthy for you, and here's the ones healthy for you, and here's the ones healthy for you, and here's the ones that won't." I think this is very that won't." I think this is very that won't." I think this is very personalized and complex. It comes back personalized and complex. It comes back personalized and complex. It comes back to what you were saying before. about to what you were saying before. about to what you were saying before. about meats and things having different meats and things having different meats and things having different effects on people and you probably know effects on people and you probably know effects on people and you probably know a lot of people with bipolar now the a lot of people with bipolar now the a lot of people with bipolar now the solution for a lot of people is a solution for a lot of people is a solution for a lot of people is a ketogenic diet right which and it seems ketogenic diet right which and it seems ketogenic diet right which and it seems to really work there's studies out there to really work there's studies out there to really work there's studies out there where it's been very transformative where it's been very transformative where it's been very transformative &gt;&gt; which is remarkable I mean if we really &gt;&gt; which is remarkable I mean if we really &gt;&gt; which is remarkable I mean if we really just take a step back it's like for ever just take a step back it's like for ever just take a step back it's like for ever you know bipolar depression was one of you know bipolar depression was one of you know bipolar depression was one of the most difficult things to treat and the most difficult things to treat and the most difficult things to treat and it turns out the ketogenic diet can be it turns out the ketogenic diet can be it turns out the ketogenic diet can be very effective in some people in some very effective in some people in some very effective in some people in some cases curing people not every person but cases curing people not every person but cases curing people not every person but that's a remarkable breakthrough that's a remarkable breakthrough that's a remarkable breakthrough &gt;&gt; I agree &gt;&gt; I agree &gt;&gt; I agree &gt;&gt; you know and as you said earlier I think &gt;&gt; you know and as you said earlier I think &gt;&gt; you know and as you said earlier I think it's such a key uh thing for people to it's such a key uh thing for people to it's such a key uh thing for people to keep in mind we understand the least keep in mind we understand the least keep in mind we understand the least about the things we do the most so you about the things we do the most so you about the things we do the most so you can imagine for many years people are can imagine for many years people are can imagine for many years people are eating like every everyone eats sooner eating like every everyone eats sooner eating like every everyone eats sooner or later and um some of these people are or later and um some of these people are or later and um some of these people are dealing with serious mental health dealing with serious mental health dealing with serious mental health issues and the foods they were eating issues and the foods they were eating issues and the foods they were eating very well were exacerbating their very well were exacerbating their very well were exacerbating their symptoms. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; it's just wild to think about. But then &gt;&gt; it's just wild to think about. But then &gt;&gt; it's just wild to think about. But then when we talk about and I've heard you when we talk about and I've heard you when we talk about and I've heard you say you know food is medicine. I think say you know food is medicine. I think say you know food is medicine. I think most people don't think of food as most people don't think of food as most people don't think of food as medicine. I think most people think as medicine. I think most people think as medicine. I think most people think as food as something uh they need that they food as something uh they need that they food as something uh they need that they crave that they enjoy uh and that crave that they enjoy uh and that crave that they enjoy uh and that eventually becomes problematic for them. eventually becomes problematic for them. eventually becomes problematic for them. You know I don't think people really You know I don't think people really You know I don't think people really understand the extent to which what they understand the extent to which what they understand the extent to which what they put in their mouth can support them that put in their mouth can support them that put in their mouth can support them that it really can be healthpromoting. it really can be healthpromoting. it really can be healthpromoting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. I think it's because we are so &gt;&gt; Right. I think it's because we are so &gt;&gt; Right. I think it's because we are so calorie oriented like oh you know it's calorie oriented like oh you know it's calorie oriented like oh you know it's all a battle between what you take in all a battle between what you take in all a battle between what you take in versus what you burn. Yeah. versus what you burn. Yeah. versus what you burn. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But you really view food as medicine. &gt;&gt; But you really view food as medicine. &gt;&gt; But you really view food as medicine. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Because I think we are I mean &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Because I think we are I mean &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Because I think we are I mean the way I look at it we're homeostatic the way I look at it we're homeostatic the way I look at it we're homeostatic systems. We're very and complex ones at systems. We're very and complex ones at systems. We're very and complex ones at that right. We have all these organs all that right. We have all these organs all that right. We have all these organs all these biochemical pathways and you know these biochemical pathways and you know these biochemical pathways and you know the one we also understand least is the one we also understand least is the one we also understand least is people's behavior. That came up earlier people's behavior. That came up earlier people's behavior. That came up earlier and I'm sure it will come up again. Uh, and I'm sure it will come up again. Uh, and I'm sure it will come up again. Uh, and you have to tune all this stuff to and you have to tune all this stuff to and you have to tune all this stuff to keep it right. And in general, most keep it right. And in general, most keep it right. And in general, most people do pretty well, but I think we people do pretty well, but I think we people do pretty well, but I think we could, uh, all improve that, I'm sure. could, uh, all improve that, I'm sure. could, uh, all improve that, I'm sure. And that is the goal. It's to keep this, And that is the goal. It's to keep this, And that is the goal. It's to keep this, you know, your car, right? You want, if you know, your car, right? You want, if you know, your car, right? You want, if you want it to run forever, you want to you want it to run forever, you want to you want it to run forever, you want to keep all the systems working right and keep all the systems working right and keep all the systems working right and in balance. You don't let things get off in balance. You don't let things get off in balance. You don't let things get off too far. And I think there's a tendency, too far. And I think there's a tendency, too far. And I think there's a tendency, and I think there's a problem with and I think there's a problem with and I think there's a problem with medicine today. We wait till things are medicine today. We wait till things are medicine today. We wait till things are broken and then try and fix it. And so broken and then try and fix it. And so broken and then try and fix it. And so obviously what you want to do is have obviously what you want to do is have obviously what you want to do is have people as well tuned cars for their people as well tuned cars for their people as well tuned cars for their entire life and then you know pass away entire life and then you know pass away entire life and then you know pass away then that's how it should work. Uh, and then that's how it should work. Uh, and then that's how it should work. Uh, and so I think that's what we want to do, so I think that's what we want to do, so I think that's what we want to do, keep people tuned. And so we probably keep people tuned. And so we probably keep people tuned. And so we probably don't get off to a good start early in don't get off to a good start early in don't get off to a good start early in life when we start people with all these life when we start people with all these life when we start people with all these not so good diets like all the excessive not so good diets like all the excessive not so good diets like all the excessive processed food and sugar and losing our processed food and sugar and losing our processed food and sugar and losing our microbiome diversity. I think we really microbiome diversity. I think we really microbiome diversity. I think we really want to keep our car off and running want to keep our car off and running want to keep our car off and running right from the get-go. It's, you know, right from the get-go. It's, you know, right from the get-go. It's, you know, it's a little bit late for some of us it's a little bit late for some of us it's a little bit late for some of us because we're probably a little bit because we're probably a little bit because we're probably a little bit hardwired. Although I think we can tune hardwired. Although I think we can tune hardwired. Although I think we can tune that. I try to do that as best I can. I that. I try to do that as best I can. I that. I try to do that as best I can. I guess &gt;&gt; seem to be doing a good job. &gt;&gt; seem to be doing a good job. &gt;&gt; seem to be doing a good job. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, anyway, we'll do it the best &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, anyway, we'll do it the best &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, anyway, we'll do it the best we can. So, we can. So, we can. So, &gt;&gt; when I um travel, I will occasionally &gt;&gt; when I um travel, I will occasionally &gt;&gt; when I um travel, I will occasionally take a probiotic in addition to all the take a probiotic in addition to all the take a probiotic in addition to all the other things I'm doing to support my gut other things I'm doing to support my gut other things I'm doing to support my gut microbiome. I do take a supplement to microbiome. I do take a supplement to microbiome. I do take a supplement to support gut microbiome. I also try and support gut microbiome. I also try and support gut microbiome. I also try and eat lots of fruits and vegetables. I eat lots of fruits and vegetables. I eat lots of fruits and vegetables. I will say I'm very intrigued by the these will say I'm very intrigued by the these will say I'm very intrigued by the these fiber data, the different types of fiber data, the different types of fiber data, the different types of fiber data. &gt;&gt; I'm intrigued because I noticed that &gt;&gt; I'm intrigued because I noticed that &gt;&gt; I'm intrigued because I noticed that some vegetable foods just don't agree some vegetable foods just don't agree some vegetable foods just don't agree with me, even if I'm careful to chew with me, even if I'm careful to chew with me, even if I'm careful to chew them properly and do all that. Um, and I them properly and do all that. Um, and I them properly and do all that. Um, and I find that over time I've just oriented find that over time I've just oriented find that over time I've just oriented towards eating the same, you know, six towards eating the same, you know, six towards eating the same, you know, six to eight vegetables. But, um, I'm to eight vegetables. But, um, I'm to eight vegetables. But, um, I'm tempted to do the following experiment. tempted to do the following experiment. tempted to do the following experiment. Tell me if this is a good experiment, Tell me if this is a good experiment, Tell me if this is a good experiment, Snider. Uh, if I'd be, uh, get a shot at Snider. Uh, if I'd be, uh, get a shot at Snider. Uh, if I'd be, uh, get a shot at a sbatical in your lab. Keep eating the a sbatical in your lab. Keep eating the a sbatical in your lab. Keep eating the same thing I'm eating. exercise the same thing I'm eating. exercise the same thing I'm eating. exercise the same, do things that the way I'm same, do things that the way I'm same, do things that the way I'm doing them now, but doing them now, but doing them now, but try a supplement like you said, try a supplement like you said, try a supplement like you said, Metamucil, which is one particular type Metamucil, which is one particular type Metamucil, which is one particular type of fiber, right? of fiber, right? of fiber, right? &gt;&gt; And do the before and after um LDL &gt;&gt; And do the before and after um LDL &gt;&gt; And do the before and after um LDL cholesterol, APOB, blood glucose cholesterol, APOB, blood glucose cholesterol, APOB, blood glucose regulation with a continuous glucose regulation with a continuous glucose regulation with a continuous glucose monitor, then stop, do a wash out, swap monitor, then stop, do a wash out, swap monitor, then stop, do a wash out, swap that out for increasing like inulin that out for increasing like inulin that out for increasing like inulin fiber through some other source. So, in fiber through some other source. So, in fiber through some other source. So, in other words, add in a pure fiber other words, add in a pure fiber other words, add in a pure fiber source, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; on top of an existing diet and see how &gt;&gt; on top of an existing diet and see how &gt;&gt; on top of an existing diet and see how that impacts um bloodmetrics and that impacts um bloodmetrics and that impacts um bloodmetrics and subjective well-being. subjective well-being. subjective well-being. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that would be good. I'd &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that would be good. I'd &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that would be good. I'd love to know your microbiome. And these love to know your microbiome. And these love to know your microbiome. And these are the sorts of things we're trying to are the sorts of things we're trying to are the sorts of things we're trying to sort out now. I don't have an answer, sort out now. I don't have an answer, sort out now. I don't have an answer, but I imagine the microbes you have in but I imagine the microbes you have in but I imagine the microbes you have in you, they have certain hydrolaces that you, they have certain hydrolaces that you, they have certain hydrolaces that break down these fibers, and everybody's break down these fibers, and everybody's break down these fibers, and everybody's microbiome is very, very different. Uh microbiome is very, very different. Uh microbiome is very, very different. Uh so we have communities of microbes so we have communities of microbes so we have communities of microbes and every person's community is and every person's community is and every person's community is different and so they we have these different and so they we have these different and so they we have these enzymes hydrolaces that do break down enzymes hydrolaces that do break down enzymes hydrolaces that do break down these fibers and my guess is that we these fibers and my guess is that we these fibers and my guess is that we already know that yours is going to be already know that yours is going to be already know that yours is going to be different from mine. And so it may be if different from mine. And so it may be if different from mine. And so it may be if you eat a certain fiber you're not as you eat a certain fiber you're not as you eat a certain fiber you're not as prepared to handle it as the next prepared to handle it as the next prepared to handle it as the next person. So this is why we need to person. So this is why we need to person. So this is why we need to collect the right data and it may be at collect the right data and it may be at collect the right data and it may be at the end well you need to add the right the end well you need to add the right the end well you need to add the right probiotic the right microbe to go with probiotic the right microbe to go with probiotic the right microbe to go with that fiber to better get the tuning that fiber to better get the tuning that fiber to better get the tuning you're looking for. you're looking for. you're looking for. &gt;&gt; And in the long run if you probably want &gt;&gt; And in the long run if you probably want &gt;&gt; And in the long run if you probably want permanent you know uh um permanent you know uh um permanent you know uh um incubation of this probiotic into incubation of this probiotic into incubation of this probiotic into your gut you may actually have that a your gut you may actually have that a your gut you may actually have that a community because they're all community because they're all community because they're all interdependent. they get personalized interdependent. they get personalized interdependent. they get personalized again early and so you basically formed again early and so you basically formed again early and so you basically formed your own personal guild and so one your own personal guild and so one your own personal guild and so one problem with probiotics is that they you problem with probiotics is that they you problem with probiotics is that they you know they don't stick that well. uh a know they don't stick that well. uh a know they don't stick that well. uh a lot of them wash out. Although what a lot of them wash out. Although what a lot of them wash out. Although what a prolonged use can help colonize some prolonged use can help colonize some prolonged use can help colonize some of that may be possible. of that may be possible. of that may be possible. &gt;&gt; And they're cumbersome. They're &gt;&gt; And they're cumbersome. They're &gt;&gt; And they're cumbersome. They're expensive. They require refrigeration expensive. They require refrigeration expensive. They require refrigeration most of them. Um most of them. Um most of them. Um &gt;&gt; yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; I personally feel fortunate that I don't &gt;&gt; I personally feel fortunate that I don't &gt;&gt; I personally feel fortunate that I don't have what I would consider chronic gut have what I would consider chronic gut have what I would consider chronic gut issues. I just avoid certain foods. issues. I just avoid certain foods. issues. I just avoid certain foods. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But are you avoiding it because &gt;&gt; Yeah. But are you avoiding it because &gt;&gt; Yeah. But are you avoiding it because you're getting inflammation? You said you're getting inflammation? You said you're getting inflammation? You said some don't agree with you. Is that some don't agree with you. Is that some don't agree with you. Is that because of gas or is that because of because of gas or is that because of because of gas or is that because of &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; inflammation? It's more of an &gt;&gt; inflammation? It's more of an &gt;&gt; inflammation? It's more of an inflammatory response. inflammatory response. inflammatory response. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like it just kind of feel like you don't &gt;&gt; Like it just kind of feel like you don't &gt;&gt; Like it just kind of feel like you don't feel well and you feel kind of like feel well and you feel kind of like feel well and you feel kind of like overtaken by some process, which that's overtaken by some process, which that's overtaken by some process, which that's what I'm like, you know, this is a poor what I'm like, you know, this is a poor what I'm like, you know, this is a poor man's uh I extract to uh you know, um man's uh I extract to uh you know, um man's uh I extract to uh you know, um &gt;&gt; but if you can figure out which fibers &gt;&gt; but if you can figure out which fibers &gt;&gt; but if you can figure out which fibers might be inducing that specifically, might be inducing that specifically, might be inducing that specifically, maybe you can avoid those foods with maybe you can avoid those foods with maybe you can avoid those foods with those fibers. I don't know. And again, those fibers. I don't know. And again, those fibers. I don't know. And again, fiber seems to be very personalized. So fiber seems to be very personalized. So fiber seems to be very personalized. So I think it is something you can try. I think it is something you can try. I think it is something you can try. It's a pretty easy experiment to do. I It's a pretty easy experiment to do. I It's a pretty easy experiment to do. I think most people like the idea of um think most people like the idea of um think most people like the idea of um fibers. Again, we like to do individual fibers. Again, we like to do individual fibers. Again, we like to do individual fibers because ultimately I want to fibers because ultimately I want to fibers because ultimately I want to understand the effect of every fiber and understand the effect of every fiber and understand the effect of every fiber and make combinations that would be make combinations that would be make combinations that would be personalized for people. personalized for people. personalized for people. &gt;&gt; But uh you know, if you were to get &gt;&gt; But uh you know, if you were to get &gt;&gt; But uh you know, if you were to get apple fiber, oatmeal is yes, it's got a apple fiber, oatmeal is yes, it's got a apple fiber, oatmeal is yes, it's got a lot of metamucil and the raisin, but it lot of metamucil and the raisin, but it lot of metamucil and the raisin, but it has other things in there too. has other things in there too. has other things in there too. &gt;&gt; And it's probably true that the &gt;&gt; And it's probably true that the &gt;&gt; And it's probably true that the combinotaurics are important. Uh, and combinotaurics are important. Uh, and combinotaurics are important. Uh, and we'll get there at some point with the we'll get there at some point with the we'll get there at some point with the cominatorics. I mean, I guess I'm a, cominatorics. I mean, I guess I'm a, cominatorics. I mean, I guess I'm a, you know, I am a big data guy. I like you know, I am a big data guy. I like you know, I am a big data guy. I like the idea with 8 billion people on the idea with 8 billion people on the idea with 8 billion people on the planet. If we even got 1% of those uh planet. If we even got 1% of those uh planet. If we even got 1% of those uh doing food logging with sugar monitors doing food logging with sugar monitors doing food logging with sugar monitors and things like that, we'd have a lot of and things like that, we'd have a lot of and things like that, we'd have a lot of the combinatorics all figured out. the combinatorics all figured out. the combinatorics all figured out. &gt;&gt; Well, you've got a hundred people in &gt;&gt; Well, you've got a hundred people in &gt;&gt; Well, you've got a hundred people in your lab. You're running clinical trials your lab. You're running clinical trials your lab. You're running clinical trials all the time, right? Uh, your human all the time, right? Uh, your human all the time, right? Uh, your human subject uh requirements are big. Uh subject uh requirements are big. Uh subject uh requirements are big. Uh I maybe we'll provide a link to uh where I maybe we'll provide a link to uh where I maybe we'll provide a link to uh where people can participate in some of these people can participate in some of these people can participate in some of these studies. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have studies running all the &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have studies running all the &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have studies running all the time. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I because I know a number of &gt;&gt; Yeah, I because I know a number of &gt;&gt; Yeah, I because I know a number of people will be interested to do that and people will be interested to do that and people will be interested to do that and we're going to talk more about sensors we're going to talk more about sensors we're going to talk more about sensors and uh air quality. We've got a bit and uh air quality. We've got a bit and uh air quality. We've got a bit more to cover in each domain, but I more to cover in each domain, but I more to cover in each domain, but I think it's really important uh and thank think it's really important uh and thank think it's really important uh and thank you for breaking up this broad category you for breaking up this broad category you for breaking up this broad category that we've all heard about fiber into that we've all heard about fiber into that we've all heard about fiber into meaningful categories and just even meaningful categories and just even meaningful categories and just even people's understanding that different people's understanding that different people's understanding that different people react differently to different people react differently to different people react differently to different fibers &gt;&gt; uh is really important. And a family &gt;&gt; uh is really important. And a family &gt;&gt; uh is really important. And a family member of mine was told that they needed member of mine was told that they needed member of mine was told that they needed to take Metamucil to get more fiber. Had to take Metamucil to get more fiber. Had to take Metamucil to get more fiber. Had zero impact on their LDL, zero impact on zero impact on their LDL, zero impact on zero impact on their LDL, zero impact on um other important markers. I might um other important markers. I might um other important markers. I might suggest to them that they consider suggest to them that they consider suggest to them that they consider taking a different uh fiber supplement taking a different uh fiber supplement taking a different uh fiber supplement in an effort to control. in an effort to control. in an effort to control. &gt;&gt; Maybe for them inulin will be the trick. &gt;&gt; Maybe for them inulin will be the trick. &gt;&gt; Maybe for them inulin will be the trick. &gt;&gt; Great. I this is the first I'd heard &gt;&gt; Great. I this is the first I'd heard &gt;&gt; Great. I this is the first I'd heard of it. Well, when I was listening to one of it. Well, when I was listening to one of it. Well, when I was listening to one of your talks. Um of your talks. Um of your talks. Um &gt;&gt; it's a good thing you have 100 people in &gt;&gt; it's a good thing you have 100 people in &gt;&gt; it's a good thing you have 100 people in your lab. By the way, folks, having a your lab. By the way, folks, having a your lab. By the way, folks, having a 100 person lab is um exceedingly rare 100 person lab is um exceedingly rare 100 person lab is um exceedingly rare and um and um and um &gt;&gt; well, we're a little smaller now, but &gt;&gt; well, we're a little smaller now, but &gt;&gt; well, we're a little smaller now, but yeah, we're still very impressive. Your yeah, we're still very impressive. Your yeah, we're still very impressive. Your your vigor is undeniable and um and your vigor is undeniable and um and your vigor is undeniable and um and &gt;&gt; I'm just lucky to have amazing &gt;&gt; I'm just lucky to have amazing &gt;&gt; I'm just lucky to have amazing people in my lab. I consider myself very people in my lab. I consider myself very people in my lab. I consider myself very fortunate. &gt;&gt; Well, I will say not just because you're &gt;&gt; Well, I will say not just because you're &gt;&gt; Well, I will say not just because you're sitting here. I'm not just saying it to sitting here. I'm not just saying it to sitting here. I'm not just saying it to be kind. Uh many people in your lab have be kind. Uh many people in your lab have be kind. Uh many people in your lab have reached out uh for reasons related to reached out uh for reasons related to reached out uh for reasons related to collaborations, etc. and everyone in collaborations, etc. and everyone in collaborations, etc. and everyone in your lab speaks extremely highly of you your lab speaks extremely highly of you your lab speaks extremely highly of you and working with you. Um, which is not and working with you. Um, which is not and working with you. Um, which is not always the case in large laboratories or always the case in large laboratories or always the case in large laboratories or small ones, but they adore you. small ones, but they adore you. small ones, but they adore you. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcysteine, both of which can acetylcysteine, both of which can acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionalth.com/huberman to get early access to function. I'd to get early access to function. I'd to get early access to function. I'd like to talk about organ aging and organ like to talk about organ aging and organ like to talk about organ aging and organ health. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; As a separable set of features from &gt;&gt; As a separable set of features from &gt;&gt; As a separable set of features from general aging and general health. I general aging and general health. I general aging and general health. I think um you were one of the first think um you were one of the first think um you were one of the first people that I ever heard say listen our people that I ever heard say listen our people that I ever heard say listen our organs don't all age at the same rate organs don't all age at the same rate organs don't all age at the same rate just like most people eventually die just like most people eventually die just like most people eventually die because some organ goes first and then because some organ goes first and then because some organ goes first and then it cascades into other things. Uh we it cascades into other things. Uh we it cascades into other things. Uh we need to start thinking about organ need to start thinking about organ need to start thinking about organ health in the same way we think about health in the same way we think about health in the same way we think about organ disease. We need to start thinking organ disease. We need to start thinking organ disease. We need to start thinking about organ age um as an independent about organ age um as an independent about organ age um as an independent things like maybe my liver is much older things like maybe my liver is much older things like maybe my liver is much older than my heart at a genetic level at a than my heart at a genetic level at a than my heart at a genetic level at a functional level. uh what are your functional level. uh what are your functional level. uh what are your thoughts on this and how can we start to thoughts on this and how can we start to thoughts on this and how can we start to parse organ age? Um so I'd like you to parse organ age? Um so I'd like you to parse organ age? Um so I'd like you to comment on that and also um perhaps this comment on that and also um perhaps this comment on that and also um perhaps this idea that we just age uh linearly is not idea that we just age uh linearly is not idea that we just age uh linearly is not correct that maybe that there are some correct that maybe that there are some correct that maybe that there are some cliffs uh that come about at kind of cliffs uh that come about at kind of cliffs uh that come about at kind of particular phases of life. Can you talk particular phases of life. Can you talk particular phases of life. Can you talk about these things? about these things? about these things? &gt;&gt; Yeah, let me tell you a little how we &gt;&gt; Yeah, let me tell you a little how we &gt;&gt; Yeah, let me tell you a little how we got into this. So um we set up it comes got into this. So um we set up it comes got into this. So um we set up it comes from my philosophy that I think you know from my philosophy that I think you know from my philosophy that I think you know medicine is broken. We tend to do sick medicine is broken. We tend to do sick medicine is broken. We tend to do sick care rather than health care. So we care rather than health care. So we care rather than health care. So we started when I moved to Stanford now 16 started when I moved to Stanford now 16 started when I moved to Stanford now 16 years ago this idea maybe we should years ago this idea maybe we should years ago this idea maybe we should first of all you don't measure people first of all you don't measure people first of all you don't measure people very much when they're healthy. You very much when they're healthy. You very much when they're healthy. You don't measure them very often. So just don't measure them very often. So just don't measure them very often. So just you know it started with me but the goal you know it started with me but the goal you know it started with me but the goal was to do a bigger group which we did uh was to do a bigger group which we did uh was to do a bigger group which we did uh profiling people collecting as much data profiling people collecting as much data profiling people collecting as much data as possible while they're healthy. So as possible while they're healthy. So as possible while they're healthy. So we, you know, people would get blood, we, you know, people would get blood, we, you know, people would get blood, their microbiome, uh, all urine, uh, and their microbiome, uh, all urine, uh, and their microbiome, uh, all urine, uh, and we would take these and do what's called we would take these and do what's called we would take these and do what's called OMIX measurement. We'd make as many OMIX measurement. We'd make as many OMIX measurement. We'd make as many measurements from their blood as measurements from their blood as measurements from their blood as possible on top of deep clinical possible on top of deep clinical possible on top of deep clinical measurements using all these new tools. measurements using all these new tools. measurements using all these new tools. Uh, and we would do it every three Uh, and we would do it every three Uh, and we would do it every three months and we do it while they're months and we do it while they're months and we do it while they're healthy. if they got ill like from a healthy. if they got ill like from a healthy. if they got ill like from a viral infection, things like that, we viral infection, things like that, we viral infection, things like that, we would take more samples to be able to would take more samples to be able to would take more samples to be able to collect more carefully to see what was collect more carefully to see what was collect more carefully to see what was going on when they first got ill. And so going on when they first got ill. And so going on when they first got ill. And so we've been running this study on me now we've been running this study on me now we've been running this study on me now for about 15 and a half years. Uh and for about 15 and a half years. Uh and for about 15 and a half years. Uh and for this group of people about almost 12 for this group of people about almost 12 for this group of people about almost 12 and a half years. So we've been and a half years. So we've been and a half years. So we've been profiling this group of people. Well, profiling this group of people. Well, profiling this group of people. Well, some have dropped off by now because it some have dropped off by now because it some have dropped off by now because it takes a lot of energy to be part of one takes a lot of energy to be part of one takes a lot of energy to be part of one of these that particular study. But of these that particular study. But of these that particular study. But anyway, others have come in and so uh anyway, others have come in and so uh anyway, others have come in and so uh yeah, we've been running this for some yeah, we've been running this for some yeah, we've been running this for some time. And the idea is to see what a time. And the idea is to see what a time. And the idea is to see what a healthy profile looks like. How does it healthy profile looks like. How does it healthy profile looks like. How does it change over time, which we interpret as change over time, which we interpret as change over time, which we interpret as aging, you know, what happens when aging, you know, what happens when aging, you know, what happens when people first get ill? And we are very people first get ill? And we are very people first get ill? And we are very enamored by these technologies. In fact, enamored by these technologies. In fact, enamored by these technologies. In fact, we invented some of them. our lab did we invented some of them. our lab did we invented some of them. our lab did for these OMIX technologies like um uh for these OMIX technologies like um uh for these OMIX technologies like um uh something called RNA seek where we can something called RNA seek where we can something called RNA seek where we can measure all your transcripts and we measure all your transcripts and we measure all your transcripts and we have ways of following all your proteins have ways of following all your proteins have ways of following all your proteins with protein chips and things like that. with protein chips and things like that. with protein chips and things like that. So so our lab uh did invent a lot of So so our lab uh did invent a lot of So so our lab uh did invent a lot of these so they're called them omix these so they're called them omix these so they're called them omix technologies. So it's ways of collecting technologies. So it's ways of collecting technologies. So it's ways of collecting big data from your again your blood your big data from your again your blood your big data from your again your blood your urine uh and even your microbiome. So we urine uh and even your microbiome. So we urine uh and even your microbiome. So we basically sequenced people's genome, basically sequenced people's genome, basically sequenced people's genome, made all these measurements and made all these measurements and made all these measurements and followed them over time. Oh, I was going followed them over time. Oh, I was going followed them over time. Oh, I was going to say we we're also curious whether we to say we we're also curious whether we to say we we're also curious whether we could use some of these technologies could use some of these technologies could use some of these technologies like genome sequencing and uh you know like genome sequencing and uh you know like genome sequencing and uh you know this method for measuring this method for measuring this method for measuring transcripts RNA seeking things for transcripts RNA seeking things for transcripts RNA seeking things for better uh you know maybe managing better uh you know maybe managing better uh you know maybe managing people's health and then we brought in people's health and then we brought in people's health and then we brought in the wearables when they were first the wearables when they were first the wearables when they were first fitness trackers. We thought maybe fitness trackers. We thought maybe fitness trackers. We thought maybe they're a little more interesting than they're a little more interesting than they're a little more interesting than just fitness trackers. So we put them on just fitness trackers. So we put them on just fitness trackers. So we put them on for health monitoring and I can tell for health monitoring and I can tell for health monitoring and I can tell when we started it was a bit when we started it was a bit when we started it was a bit controversial at the time. A lot of the controversial at the time. A lot of the controversial at the time. A lot of the physicians are not like a sequencing the physicians are not like a sequencing the physicians are not like a sequencing the genomes of healthy people. This shows genomes of healthy people. This shows genomes of healthy people. This shows when we it was right after genome when we it was right after genome when we it was right after genome sequencing was first coming out. And uh sequencing was first coming out. And uh sequencing was first coming out. And uh you know they're worried we're going to you know they're worried we're going to you know they're worried we're going to turn everybody into hyperchondria. It's turn everybody into hyperchondria. It's turn everybody into hyperchondria. It's going to cost millions of dollars. And going to cost millions of dollars. And going to cost millions of dollars. And most people have warmed up to it now. most people have warmed up to it now. most people have warmed up to it now. Not 100%. A lot of people still don't Not 100%. A lot of people still don't Not 100%. A lot of people still don't like that. They still don't like the like that. They still don't like the like that. They still don't like the wearables. Sure. We'll talk about that. wearables. Sure. We'll talk about that. wearables. Sure. We'll talk about that. But um anyway, we did show that a lot of But um anyway, we did show that a lot of But um anyway, we did show that a lot of people learn some pretty important people learn some pretty important people learn some pretty important things from their genome. One young guy things from their genome. One young guy things from their genome. One young guy turned out he had a mutational heart turned out he had a mutational heart turned out he had a mutational heart gene and his father died right gene and his father died right gene and his father died right around time we sequenced his genome. His around time we sequenced his genome. His around time we sequenced his genome. His father died of a heart problem and sure father died of a heart problem and sure father died of a heart problem and sure enough he has a heart defect that was enough he has a heart defect that was enough he has a heart defect that was uncovered by genome sequence. So we had uncovered by genome sequence. So we had uncovered by genome sequence. So we had examples like that. Uh and then same examples like that. Uh and then same examples like that. Uh and then same with the wearables uncovered things. All with the wearables uncovered things. All with the wearables uncovered things. All kinds of things popped up. Actually 49 kinds of things popped up. Actually 49 kinds of things popped up. Actually 49 people had what we would call a major people had what we would call a major people had what we would call a major health discovery just in the first three health discovery just in the first three health discovery just in the first three and a half years of running the study and a half years of running the study and a half years of running the study and some were and some were and some were &gt;&gt; with the wearables &gt;&gt; with the wearables &gt;&gt; with the wearables &gt;&gt; with all kinds of things. It was the &gt;&gt; with all kinds of things. It was the &gt;&gt; with all kinds of things. It was the thing it was no one technology. What thing it was no one technology. What thing it was no one technology. What we're doing is we're getting a much more we're doing is we're getting a much more we're doing is we're getting a much more complete picture of people's health and complete picture of people's health and complete picture of people's health and we discovered these things then before we discovered these things then before we discovered these things then before they have symptoms. So we're profiling they have symptoms. So we're profiling they have symptoms. So we're profiling people while they're healthy and we're people while they're healthy and we're people while they're healthy and we're looking for things that might be we're looking for things that might be we're looking for things that might be off. And um so the way I like the off. And um so the way I like the off. And um so the way I like the analogy I like to use is that if your analogy I like to use is that if your analogy I like to use is that if your health is a thousand piece jigsaw puzzle health is a thousand piece jigsaw puzzle health is a thousand piece jigsaw puzzle the way when we you go to a physician's the way when we you go to a physician's the way when we you go to a physician's office today we would say they measure office today we would say they measure office today we would say they measure five or six of those thousand piece they five or six of those thousand piece they five or six of those thousand piece they just don't get a very good picture. just don't get a very good picture. just don't get a very good picture. We're trying to measure five or six We're trying to measure five or six We're trying to measure five or six hundred pieces, get a much clearer hundred pieces, get a much clearer hundred pieces, get a much clearer picture. And so 49 people, we uncovered picture. And so 49 people, we uncovered picture. And so 49 people, we uncovered something pre-ymptomatically. Caught something pre-ymptomatically. Caught something pre-ymptomatically. Caught someone with early lymphoma, two people someone with early lymphoma, two people someone with early lymphoma, two people with precancer, several two people with precancer, several two people with precancer, several two people with serious heart issues, one from the serious heart issues, one from the serious heart issues, one from the genome sequencing, one from the genome sequencing, one from the genome sequencing, one from the wearable. So wearable. So wearable. So &gt;&gt; this is part of a study. Is this been um &gt;&gt; this is part of a study. Is this been um &gt;&gt; this is part of a study. Is this been um commercialized? like if I want to commercialized? like if I want to commercialized? like if I want to if I want to uh RNA seek or uh if I want to uh RNA seek or uh if I want to uh RNA seek or uh deepseek or this is by the way just uh deepseek or this is by the way just uh deepseek or this is by the way just uh norm if I want to um look at mutations I norm if I want to um look at mutations I norm if I want to um look at mutations I might have or um how healthy or how sick might have or um how healthy or how sick might have or um how healthy or how sick different uh organs or cells of mine are different uh organs or cells of mine are different uh organs or cells of mine are what's available to me nowadays. what's available to me nowadays. what's available to me nowadays. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So we spun off a medical version &gt;&gt; Yeah. So we spun off a medical version &gt;&gt; Yeah. So we spun off a medical version of this Q bio that does whole body MRI of this Q bio that does whole body MRI of this Q bio that does whole body MRI which most people will tell you that which most people will tell you that which most people will tell you that most physicians will tell you should most physicians will tell you should most physicians will tell you should not do that. Oh, let's pause there for a not do that. Oh, let's pause there for a not do that. Oh, let's pause there for a second because I will say I've done a second because I will say I've done a second because I will say I've done a Proo scan. Proo scan. Proo scan. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um they're not a sponsor of the podcast. &gt;&gt; Um they're not a sponsor of the podcast. &gt;&gt; Um they're not a sponsor of the podcast. Um but I did POV scan. Yeah. Um but I did POV scan. Yeah. Um but I did POV scan. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um and &gt;&gt; Um and &gt;&gt; Um and &gt;&gt; what' you think? &gt;&gt; what' you think? &gt;&gt; what' you think? &gt;&gt; I thought it was great. I watched the &gt;&gt; I thought it was great. I watched the &gt;&gt; I thought it was great. I watched the first segment of a documentary on first segment of a documentary on first segment of a documentary on Netflix while my body got scanned. Um Netflix while my body got scanned. Um Netflix while my body got scanned. Um I'm not claustrophobic, so going into I'm not claustrophobic, so going into I'm not claustrophobic, so going into the tube was no big deal. Um I got to the tube was no big deal. Um I got to the tube was no big deal. Um I got to see, thankfully I, you know, I think see, thankfully I, you know, I think see, thankfully I, you know, I think you're allowed one white spot on the you're allowed one white spot on the you're allowed one white spot on the brain per decade of life. I'm brain per decade of life. I'm brain per decade of life. I'm approaching 50 in a few months. I've got approaching 50 in a few months. I've got approaching 50 in a few months. I've got so up to five would be okay. I've got so up to five would be okay. I've got so up to five would be okay. I've got one little one which is good because I one little one which is good because I one little one which is good because I did some uh did some uh did some uh &gt;&gt; high impact sports early in my life and &gt;&gt; high impact sports early in my life and &gt;&gt; high impact sports early in my life and some martial arts where I got hit in the some martial arts where I got hit in the some martial arts where I got hit in the head and I don't recommend doing that head and I don't recommend doing that head and I don't recommend doing that folks. Um so I was a little worried folks. Um so I was a little worried folks. Um so I was a little worried about that. Okay. about that. Okay. about that. Okay. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; I learned &gt;&gt; I learned &gt;&gt; I learned &gt;&gt; that my intracaler fat is very low. So I &gt;&gt; that my intracaler fat is very low. So I &gt;&gt; that my intracaler fat is very low. So I was uh relieved to see that. was uh relieved to see that. was uh relieved to see that. &gt;&gt; Um and you know for the most part it &gt;&gt; Um and you know for the most part it &gt;&gt; Um and you know for the most part it provided a useful baseline. provided a useful baseline. provided a useful baseline. A good friend of mine since childhood A good friend of mine since childhood A good friend of mine since childhood who's a chair of neurosurgery um not at who's a chair of neurosurgery um not at who's a chair of neurosurgery um not at Stanford but at a nearby university uh Stanford but at a nearby university uh Stanford but at a nearby university uh told me that it is not uncommon for him told me that it is not uncommon for him told me that it is not uncommon for him like on a monthly basis like on a monthly basis like on a monthly basis someone will reach out saying hey I went someone will reach out saying hey I went someone will reach out saying hey I went in for a whole body MRI and discovered in for a whole body MRI and discovered in for a whole body MRI and discovered that I've got a tumor on my optic kayazm that I've got a tumor on my optic kayazm that I've got a tumor on my optic kayazm or I've got a small gloma and you said or I've got a small gloma and you said or I've got a small gloma and you said physicians don't like that people are physicians don't like that people are physicians don't like that people are getting these whole body MRIs I'll set getting these whole body MRIs I'll set getting these whole body MRIs I'll set him out as an example of a physician who him out as an example of a physician who him out as an example of a physician who uh appreciates that people are doing uh appreciates that people are doing uh appreciates that people are doing this. Now then he's a surgeon. Surgeons this. Now then he's a surgeon. Surgeons this. Now then he's a surgeon. Surgeons like to cut. He's a he's perhaps like to cut. He's a he's perhaps like to cut. He's a he's perhaps one of the finest neurosurgeons in the one of the finest neurosurgeons in the one of the finest neurosurgeons in the world. I think all the neurosurgeons world. I think all the neurosurgeons world. I think all the neurosurgeons I've spoken to admire him tremendously. I've spoken to admire him tremendously. I've spoken to admire him tremendously. So um but I agree that many physicians So um but I agree that many physicians So um but I agree that many physicians don't like the idea of people getting don't like the idea of people getting don't like the idea of people getting scanned because that means they get scanned because that means they get scanned because that means they get calls of concerned quote unquote calls of concerned quote unquote calls of concerned quote unquote hypochondrics. But in my mind that hypochondrics. But in my mind that hypochondrics. But in my mind that speaks to the deficits of the medical speaks to the deficits of the medical speaks to the deficits of the medical community, not to the deficits of community, not to the deficits of community, not to the deficits of these scanning technologies. Right. I these scanning technologies. Right. I these scanning technologies. Right. I mean 100% agree. mean 100% agree. mean 100% agree. &gt;&gt; I mean I mean I mean it's kind of if you &gt;&gt; I mean I mean I mean it's kind of if you &gt;&gt; I mean I mean I mean it's kind of if you step back from it's kind of crazy, step back from it's kind of crazy, step back from it's kind of crazy, right? Like you doctors right? Like you doctors right? Like you doctors &gt;&gt; it's just I mean from a purely just like &gt;&gt; it's just I mean from a purely just like &gt;&gt; it's just I mean from a purely just like if we just made it completely a if we just made it completely a if we just made it completely a emotional it's more business for them if emotional it's more business for them if emotional it's more business for them if somebody has problems. So that doesn't somebody has problems. So that doesn't somebody has problems. So that doesn't square with their response. There's square with their response. There's square with their response. There's something about people advocating for something about people advocating for something about people advocating for their own um health exploration, their own um health exploration, their own um health exploration, controlling their own health exploration controlling their own health exploration controlling their own health exploration that really seems to vex a lot of that really seems to vex a lot of that really seems to vex a lot of doctors. They don't like it. And it doctors. They don't like it. And it doctors. They don't like it. And it doesn't make any sense to me. Like like doesn't make any sense to me. Like like doesn't make any sense to me. Like like wouldn't you want your patients to be wouldn't you want your patients to be wouldn't you want your patients to be healthminded? &gt;&gt; I think it's part of the broken health &gt;&gt; I think it's part of the broken health &gt;&gt; I think it's part of the broken health care system, right? They have 15 minutes care system, right? They have 15 minutes care system, right? They have 15 minutes to spend with you. Yeah. to spend with you. Yeah. to spend with you. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So when people show up with their I mean &gt;&gt; So when people show up with their I mean &gt;&gt; So when people show up with their I mean the number one concern about whole body the number one concern about whole body the number one concern about whole body MRIs is they'll find nodules, right? If MRIs is they'll find nodules, right? If MRIs is they'll find nodules, right? If you go high enough resolution, you're you go high enough resolution, you're you go high enough resolution, you're guaranteed to find nodules. Men have guaranteed to find nodules. Men have guaranteed to find nodules. Men have them in their prostate, women, their them in their prostate, women, their them in their prostate, women, their ovaries. If you go high enough ovaries. If you go high enough ovaries. If you go high enough resolution 100% of the time, resolution 100% of the time, resolution 100% of the time, &gt;&gt; then people show up and say, "Well, I &gt;&gt; then people show up and say, "Well, I &gt;&gt; then people show up and say, "Well, I got these nodules." And you know, got these nodules." And you know, got these nodules." And you know, &gt;&gt; nodules are cell growths and they can be &gt;&gt; nodules are cell growths and they can be &gt;&gt; nodules are cell growths and they can be benign cell growth. benign cell growth. benign cell growth. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or they're just not even growing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or they're just not even growing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Or they're just not even growing. They're just there. They may have showed They're just there. They may have showed They're just there. They may have showed up early in life. And I mentioned I've up early in life. And I mentioned I've up early in life. And I mentioned I've had 20 of these things and I have nine had 20 of these things and I have nine had 20 of these things and I have nine nodules. And the point is, it's not nodules. And the point is, it's not nodules. And the point is, it's not whether you have nodules or not. Do you whether you have nodules or not. Do you whether you have nodules or not. Do you have any growing nodules? Right. have any growing nodules? Right. have any growing nodules? Right. &gt;&gt; And that's the key. And if you've never &gt;&gt; And that's the key. And if you've never &gt;&gt; And that's the key. And if you've never done a baseline, you'll never know if done a baseline, you'll never know if done a baseline, you'll never know if they're growing. So, I'm happy to say they're growing. So, I'm happy to say they're growing. So, I'm happy to say none of my nine nodules that have been none of my nine nodules that have been none of my nine nodules that have been spotted are growing. And I know that. spotted are growing. And I know that. spotted are growing. And I know that. So, uh, and you probably have seen a So, uh, and you probably have seen a So, uh, and you probably have seen a similar situation, but a friend of mine, similar situation, but a friend of mine, similar situation, but a friend of mine, uh, &gt;&gt; you know, woke up one day and couldn't &gt;&gt; you know, woke up one day and couldn't &gt;&gt; you know, woke up one day and couldn't move his arm. And so, they rushed him to move his arm. And so, they rushed him to move his arm. And so, they rushed him to the emergency room. They did they the emergency room. They did they the emergency room. They did they scanned the relevant area. They saw he scanned the relevant area. They saw he scanned the relevant area. They saw he had a tumor on his spine. So, they took had a tumor on his spine. So, they took had a tumor on his spine. So, they took it out and uh, things seemed fine. Then it out and uh, things seemed fine. Then it out and uh, things seemed fine. Then they did a whole body MRI f later and they did a whole body MRI f later and they did a whole body MRI f later and they found three more nodules. So the they found three more nodules. So the they found three more nodules. So the question is were they there to begin question is were they there to begin question is were they there to begin with or had his tumor metastasized? No way to or had his tumor metastasized? No way to or had his tumor metastasized? No way to know. They had no baseline. know. They had no baseline. know. They had no baseline. &gt;&gt; So I think having these baselines is &gt;&gt; So I think having these baselines is &gt;&gt; So I think having these baselines is super important for everyone. super important for everyone. super important for everyone. &gt;&gt; I think people bulk at the cost. So it's &gt;&gt; I think people bulk at the cost. So it's &gt;&gt; I think people bulk at the cost. So it's about, as I recall, it's about $2,000 to about, as I recall, it's about $2,000 to about, as I recall, it's about $2,000 to get one of these whole body scans. I get one of these whole body scans. I get one of these whole body scans. I think we can assume that the cost is think we can assume that the cost is think we can assume that the cost is going to come down just as everything going to come down just as everything going to come down just as everything whole genome sequencing is going to whole genome sequencing is going to whole genome sequencing is going to come down. Maybe even insurance would come down. Maybe even insurance would come down. Maybe even insurance would cover it at some point. I mean, it's so cover it at some point. I mean, it's so cover it at some point. I mean, it's so trivially easy to do. trivially easy to do. trivially easy to do. &gt;&gt; Uh once you have, you know, uh a place &gt;&gt; Uh once you have, you know, uh a place &gt;&gt; Uh once you have, you know, uh a place that will do it that if the cost were to that will do it that if the cost were to that will do it that if the cost were to come down, I think you'd save tons and come down, I think you'd save tons and come down, I think you'd save tons and tons of lives. I see it as a boon to tons of lives. I see it as a boon to tons of lives. I see it as a boon to the medical industry. the medical industry. the medical industry. &gt;&gt; Um not just for making money, but for &gt;&gt; Um not just for making money, but for &gt;&gt; Um not just for making money, but for improving people's health. I mean, as improving people's health. I mean, as improving people's health. I mean, as you said, when you go to the doctor, you said, when you go to the doctor, you said, when you go to the doctor, they measure like they give you they put they measure like they give you they put they measure like they give you they put a thermometer in your mouth. They take a thermometer in your mouth. They take a thermometer in your mouth. They take your blood pressure, take your height, your blood pressure, take your height, your blood pressure, take your height, take your weight, ask you a few take your weight, ask you a few take your weight, ask you a few questions, ask you if anything's questions, ask you if anything's questions, ask you if anything's changed, and then you're like, it's changed, and then you're like, it's changed, and then you're like, it's almost like better off just like calling almost like better off just like calling almost like better off just like calling them up on the phone. At this point, you them up on the phone. At this point, you them up on the phone. At this point, you can do all of that stuff at home. can do all of that stuff at home. can do all of that stuff at home. &gt;&gt; You can, and in fact, we should be doing &gt;&gt; You can, and in fact, we should be doing &gt;&gt; You can, and in fact, we should be doing that stuff at home anyway. We can talk that stuff at home anyway. We can talk that stuff at home anyway. We can talk about that later. But yeah, what QIO about that later. But yeah, what QIO about that later. But yeah, what QIO does is they do whole body MRI and does is they do whole body MRI and does is they do whole body MRI and they've designed ways that uh they can they've designed ways that uh they can they've designed ways that uh they can do it in about 40 minutes, 35 to 40 do it in about 40 minutes, 35 to 40 do it in about 40 minutes, 35 to 40 minutes. So it saves a lot of time and minutes. So it saves a lot of time and minutes. So it saves a lot of time and then they also do some a medical version then they also do some a medical version then they also do some a medical version of what I was telling you before. They of what I was telling you before. They of what I was telling you before. They don't do for example the transcript on don't do for example the transcript on don't do for example the transcript on the RNA seek stuff, some of that uh the RNA seek stuff, some of that uh the RNA seek stuff, some of that uh because they have set it up in a way because they have set it up in a way because they have set it up in a way that it's actionable information because that it's actionable information because that it's actionable information because they you can then take the data to your they you can then take the data to your they you can then take the data to your physician who will know what to do with physician who will know what to do with physician who will know what to do with it. &gt;&gt; Great. And so um and yeah it turns out &gt;&gt; Great. And so um and yeah it turns out &gt;&gt; Great. And so um and yeah it turns out just like you're saying just from the just like you're saying just from the just like you're saying just from the first 100 plus people they discovered first 100 plus people they discovered first 100 plus people they discovered early ovarian cancer all early ovarian cancer all early ovarian cancer all presymptomatically just like in our presymptomatically just like in our presymptomatically just like in our study the 49 people um who found their study the 49 people um who found their study the 49 people um who found their things pre they found you know things pre they found you know things pre they found you know cardiovascular conditions are pretty cardiovascular conditions are pretty cardiovascular conditions are pretty serious. They found even early serious. They found even early serious. They found even early pancreatic cancer which is almost never pancreatic cancer which is almost never pancreatic cancer which is almost never found early. Uh and so they discovered found early. Uh and so they discovered found early. Uh and so they discovered these things and sometimes it was by the these things and sometimes it was by the these things and sometimes it was by the longitudinal measurements they saw longitudinal measurements they saw longitudinal measurements they saw things shift sometimes what we call things shift sometimes what we call things shift sometimes what we call multivariate they'd see several things multivariate they'd see several things multivariate they'd see several things shifting we discovered that in as well shifting we discovered that in as well shifting we discovered that in as well we might see one thing off and you'd say we might see one thing off and you'd say we might see one thing off and you'd say well I don't know but when you see three well I don't know but when you see three well I don't know but when you see three things all going in the same direction things all going in the same direction things all going in the same direction you worry about that and a good you worry about that and a good you worry about that and a good example is if you go to physician today example is if you go to physician today example is if you go to physician today and your glucose is high and it's and your glucose is high and it's and your glucose is high and it's normally been low and it might spike up normally been low and it might spike up normally been low and it might spike up they'll say Well, you know, have you they'll say Well, you know, have you they'll say Well, you know, have you were you ill yesterday or something like were you ill yesterday or something like were you ill yesterday or something like that. Oh, that explains it. Let's ignore that. Oh, that explains it. Let's ignore that. Oh, that explains it. Let's ignore it. Come back in two years, right? And it. Come back in two years, right? And it. Come back in two years, right? And that's just not enough. Uh and yeah, and that's just not enough. Uh and yeah, and that's just not enough. Uh and yeah, and that might have been a clue for that might have been a clue for that might have been a clue for something big. And we've seen that in something big. And we've seen that in something big. And we've seen that in our study. We'll see somebody who our study. We'll see somebody who our study. We'll see somebody who shifted off their liver enzymes and shifted off their liver enzymes and shifted off their liver enzymes and they'll come to me and say, "Mike, I'm they'll come to me and say, "Mike, I'm they'll come to me and say, "Mike, I'm still in the normal range." Even um you still in the normal range." Even um you still in the normal range." Even um you know, there and this is why we're know, there and this is why we're know, there and this is why we're big on baselines. That's a big theme in big on baselines. That's a big theme in big on baselines. That's a big theme in our work. no way your healthy baseline our work. no way your healthy baseline our work. no way your healthy baseline is like the MRIs and they'll be running is like the MRIs and they'll be running is like the MRIs and they'll be running in the low end of a normal range for in the low end of a normal range for in the low end of a normal range for their liver enzyme and suddenly it'll their liver enzyme and suddenly it'll their liver enzyme and suddenly it'll double but still be in a normal range double but still be in a normal range double but still be in a normal range and they'll call me up and say hey and they'll call me up and say hey and they'll call me up and say hey what's going on here I said I don't know what's going on here I said I don't know what's going on here I said I don't know why don't you go get another measurement why don't you go get another measurement why don't you go get another measurement sure enough then they shift it out of sure enough then they shift it out of sure enough then they shift it out of normal so I think the trajectories of normal so I think the trajectories of normal so I think the trajectories of these measurements is key I think these measurements is key I think these measurements is key I think knowing how you're progressing is a big knowing how you're progressing is a big knowing how you're progressing is a big deal and that's how we think just like deal and that's how we think just like deal and that's how we think just like your car if you see something going off. your car if you see something going off. your car if you see something going off. You want to see it when you catch the You want to see it when you catch the You want to see it when you catch the first symptoms, not once your car is first symptoms, not once your car is first symptoms, not once your car is broken down on the side of the road, the broken down on the side of the road, the broken down on the side of the road, the engine's blown up or something. So, I engine's blown up or something. So, I engine's blown up or something. So, I think that's how we have to shift think that's how we have to shift think that's how we have to shift medicine. &gt;&gt; Amen to that. Um, a thousand times over. &gt;&gt; Amen to that. Um, a thousand times over. &gt;&gt; Amen to that. Um, a thousand times over. Uh, let's talk about some of the sensors Uh, let's talk about some of the sensors Uh, let's talk about some of the sensors you're wearing and what people can you're wearing and what people can you're wearing and what people can monitor now. monitor now. monitor now. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh, you talked about continuous glucose &gt;&gt; Uh, you talked about continuous glucose &gt;&gt; Uh, you talked about continuous glucose monitors and that's non-invasive. I monitors and that's non-invasive. I monitors and that's non-invasive. I mean, you don't even feel it going in. mean, you don't even feel it going in. mean, you don't even feel it going in. That's just basically a That's just basically a That's just basically a &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; right &gt;&gt; sticker size thing. But what are some of &gt;&gt; sticker size thing. But what are some of &gt;&gt; sticker size thing. But what are some of the other things? Um the other things? Um the other things? Um &gt;&gt; most people are familiar now with sleep &gt;&gt; most people are familiar now with sleep &gt;&gt; most people are familiar now with sleep tracking, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um and of course that's pulling heart &gt;&gt; Um and of course that's pulling heart &gt;&gt; Um and of course that's pulling heart rate data and a few other things, but rate data and a few other things, but rate data and a few other things, but yeah, walk us through uh what's possible yeah, walk us through uh what's possible yeah, walk us through uh what's possible now with non-invasive uh trackers and now with non-invasive uh trackers and now with non-invasive uh trackers and maybe um maybe um maybe um &gt;&gt; just yeah, let us know which particular &gt;&gt; just yeah, let us know which particular &gt;&gt; just yeah, let us know which particular ones you're wearing. This isn't a you ones you're wearing. This isn't a you ones you're wearing. This isn't a you know, like a promotion of particular know, like a promotion of particular know, like a promotion of particular products. I'm just very curious. You're products. I'm just very curious. You're products. I'm just very curious. You're you're uh armed to the teeth with you're uh armed to the teeth with you're uh armed to the teeth with sensors here. So yeah, what do you got? sensors here. So yeah, what do you got? sensors here. So yeah, what do you got? &gt;&gt; I'm a big measurement guy. &gt;&gt; I'm a big measurement guy. &gt;&gt; I'm a big measurement guy. &gt;&gt; Well, your st your Stanford faculty &gt;&gt; Well, your st your Stanford faculty &gt;&gt; Well, your st your Stanford faculty after all. after all. after all. &gt;&gt; So I have my um this is my Fitbit. This &gt;&gt; So I have my um this is my Fitbit. This &gt;&gt; So I have my um this is my Fitbit. This is my Apple Watch. And then I happen to is my Apple Watch. And then I happen to is my Apple Watch. And then I happen to have a company that called Sensomics have a company that called Sensomics have a company that called Sensomics that has two different this is a new one that has two different this is a new one that has two different this is a new one they have out um and then the older they have out um and then the older they have out um and then the older one. And so they all measure heart rate, one. And so they all measure heart rate, one. And so they all measure heart rate, heart rate variability and reasonably heart rate variability and reasonably heart rate variability and reasonably accurate meaning, you know, not that far accurate meaning, you know, not that far accurate meaning, you know, not that far off. And so uh again for the listeners off. And so uh again for the listeners off. And so uh again for the listeners resting heart rate everybody knows and resting heart rate everybody knows and resting heart rate everybody knows and but heart rate variability is an but heart rate variability is an but heart rate variability is an important measurement more and more important measurement more and more important measurement more and more appreciated these days when you're ill appreciated these days when you're ill appreciated these days when you're ill your variability drops and both those your variability drops and both those your variability drops and both those are fairly accurate these days for most are fairly accurate these days for most are fairly accurate these days for most devices. Oh and I have a ring um this devices. Oh and I have a ring um this devices. Oh and I have a ring um this one happens to be a circle. I used to one happens to be a circle. I used to one happens to be a circle. I used to wear an aura ring. Uh and wear an aura ring. Uh and wear an aura ring. Uh and &gt;&gt; it's not an aura ring. What is that? &gt;&gt; it's not an aura ring. What is that? &gt;&gt; it's not an aura ring. What is that? &gt;&gt; It's called circle. Um they have they're &gt;&gt; It's called circle. Um they have they're &gt;&gt; It's called circle. Um they have they're different parameters. So there's no different parameters. So there's no different parameters. So there's no right or wrong to this. You have to same right or wrong to this. You have to same right or wrong to this. You have to same thing. You have to match it to your uh thing. You have to match it to your uh thing. You have to match it to your uh lifestyle. Some, you know, you charge lifestyle. Some, you know, you charge lifestyle. Some, you know, you charge them while you're in the shower, they're them while you're in the shower, they're them while you're in the shower, they're charged for 5 days, and others you have charged for 5 days, and others you have charged for 5 days, and others you have to charge for an hour, hour and a half to charge for an hour, hour and a half to charge for an hour, hour and a half to keep it going. So, you have to find to keep it going. So, you have to find to keep it going. So, you have to find the one that works best for you. I do the one that works best for you. I do the one that works best for you. I do think wearing them overnight, it's a think wearing them overnight, it's a think wearing them overnight, it's a great time for health monitoring. So, great time for health monitoring. So, great time for health monitoring. So, I'm a big fan of that. Anyway, they I'm a big fan of that. Anyway, they I'm a big fan of that. Anyway, they measure that. Some measure blood oxygen, measure that. Some measure blood oxygen, measure that. Some measure blood oxygen, some of that's accurate, some it's not some of that's accurate, some it's not some of that's accurate, some it's not accurate. Depends on the device. Uh, accurate. Depends on the device. Uh, accurate. Depends on the device. Uh, some measure skin temperature. Again, some measure skin temperature. Again, some measure skin temperature. Again, some of that's accurate, some it's not. some of that's accurate, some it's not. some of that's accurate, some it's not. Depends on the device. They also measure Depends on the device. They also measure Depends on the device. They also measure something called galvonic stress something called galvonic stress something called galvonic stress response. Some do. That's conductance on response. Some do. That's conductance on response. Some do. That's conductance on your skin. And that is not something we your skin. And that is not something we your skin. And that is not something we normally measure in a doctor's office, normally measure in a doctor's office, normally measure in a doctor's office, but it turns out has value for hydration but it turns out has value for hydration but it turns out has value for hydration because when you have drier, like when because when you have drier, like when because when you have drier, like when you're diabetic, you'll have drier skin. you're diabetic, you'll have drier skin. you're diabetic, you'll have drier skin. And I should have figured this out And I should have figured this out And I should have figured this out earlier when I first became diabetic. I earlier when I first became diabetic. I earlier when I first became diabetic. I got itchy because my skin got dry. Uh got itchy because my skin got dry. Uh got itchy because my skin got dry. Uh anyway, you can measure that with your anyway, you can measure that with your anyway, you can measure that with your smartwatch. um and get that in real smartwatch. um and get that in real smartwatch. um and get that in real time. &gt;&gt; The galvanic skin response. &gt;&gt; The galvanic skin response. &gt;&gt; The galvanic skin response. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And also it's a measure of stress. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And also it's a measure of stress. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And also it's a measure of stress. When you're stressed, you sweat more. When you're stressed, you sweat more. When you're stressed, you sweat more. And so you can pick that up as well with And so you can pick that up as well with And so you can pick that up as well with this with these devices. So there's a this with these devices. So there's a this with these devices. So there's a fair &gt;&gt; number of things. And then some of them &gt;&gt; number of things. And then some of them &gt;&gt; number of things. And then some of them you can measure, you know, an EKG and you can measure, you know, an EKG and you can measure, you know, an EKG and sleep, of course, super important. Their sleep, of course, super important. Their sleep, of course, super important. Their accuracy for the stages is still accuracy for the stages is still accuracy for the stages is still questionable. It depends on the device. questionable. It depends on the device. questionable. It depends on the device. They're getting better though. They're getting better though. They're getting better though. &gt;&gt; I use an eight sleep. Um and I will look &gt;&gt; I use an eight sleep. Um and I will look &gt;&gt; I use an eight sleep. Um and I will look I I'm now in the habit of only looking I I'm now in the habit of only looking I I'm now in the habit of only looking at the data every few days. at the data every few days. at the data every few days. &gt;&gt; Okay? &gt;&gt; Okay? &gt;&gt; Okay? &gt;&gt; Because I'm doing an experiment on &gt;&gt; Because I'm doing an experiment on &gt;&gt; Because I'm doing an experiment on myself where I measure my subjective myself where I measure my subjective myself where I measure my subjective feelings of rest and alertness and feelings of rest and alertness and feelings of rest and alertness and energy &gt;&gt; and compare it to the data. And the only &gt;&gt; and compare it to the data. And the only &gt;&gt; and compare it to the data. And the only way to do that properly is to not glance way to do that properly is to not glance way to do that properly is to not glance at the data first thing in the morning. at the data first thing in the morning. at the data first thing in the morning. Okay? &gt;&gt; Right? Because it just biases how you &gt;&gt; Right? Because it just biases how you &gt;&gt; Right? Because it just biases how you feel. Our colleague Ally Chrome at feel. Our colleague Ally Chrome at feel. Our colleague Ally Chrome at Stanford has done some nice experiments Stanford has done some nice experiments Stanford has done some nice experiments where they tell people after a where they tell people after a where they tell people after a genuinely poor night's sleep they got a genuinely poor night's sleep they got a genuinely poor night's sleep they got a great sleep or they tell people after a great sleep or they tell people after a great sleep or they tell people after a great night's sleep they got poor sleep great night's sleep they got poor sleep great night's sleep they got poor sleep and they show them a sleep score and they show them a sleep score and they show them a sleep score and they give them some data and it's and they give them some data and it's and they give them some data and it's false data basically and people's levels false data basically and people's levels false data basically and people's levels of alertness, well-being, etc. are of alertness, well-being, etc. are of alertness, well-being, etc. are strongly biased by what they are told strongly biased by what they are told strongly biased by what they are told their sleep was like as opposed to what their sleep was like as opposed to what their sleep was like as opposed to what it was actually like. This is a big it was actually like. This is a big it was actually like. This is a big deal, right? And I think um speaks to deal, right? And I think um speaks to deal, right? And I think um speaks to all the beautiful studies that uh Alli's all the beautiful studies that uh Alli's all the beautiful studies that uh Alli's done cuz she finds stuff like this all done cuz she finds stuff like this all done cuz she finds stuff like this all the time in nutrition and well-being. the time in nutrition and well-being. the time in nutrition and well-being. And these mindset effects are really And these mindset effects are really And these mindset effects are really powerful. So I look at my sleep data powerful. So I look at my sleep data powerful. So I look at my sleep data maybe once every two or three days, maybe once every two or three days, maybe once every two or three days, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um and I'm constantly striving to get &gt;&gt; Um and I'm constantly striving to get &gt;&gt; Um and I'm constantly striving to get more REM sleep. By the way, warming your more REM sleep. By the way, warming your more REM sleep. By the way, warming your sleeping environment in the last two sleeping environment in the last two sleeping environment in the last two hours of sleep will dramatically hours of sleep will dramatically hours of sleep will dramatically increase the amount of REM sleep you increase the amount of REM sleep you increase the amount of REM sleep you get. I learned that trick from Matt get. I learned that trick from Matt get. I learned that trick from Matt Walker and it works spectacularly well. Walker and it works spectacularly well. Walker and it works spectacularly well. &gt;&gt; I'll have to give it a try. Yeah, Matt &gt;&gt; I'll have to give it a try. Yeah, Matt &gt;&gt; I'll have to give it a try. Yeah, Matt taught me that trick and I'm getting taught me that trick and I'm getting taught me that trick and I'm getting close to two and a half hours of REM close to two and a half hours of REM close to two and a half hours of REM sleep now. sleep now. sleep now. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; And I only sleep about six and a half, &gt;&gt; And I only sleep about six and a half, &gt;&gt; And I only sleep about six and a half, seven hours to feel rested. So, it's seven hours to feel rested. So, it's seven hours to feel rested. So, it's pretty spectacular. And I thank I got to pretty spectacular. And I thank I got to pretty spectacular. And I thank I got to try it. try it. try it. &gt;&gt; I thank Matt for that tip. &gt;&gt; I thank Matt for that tip. &gt;&gt; I thank Matt for that tip. &gt;&gt; It's one of my biggest weaknesses. I &gt;&gt; It's one of my biggest weaknesses. I &gt;&gt; It's one of my biggest weaknesses. I don't sleep that well. don't sleep that well. don't sleep that well. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, cool bed in the beginning of &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, cool bed in the beginning of &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, cool bed in the beginning of the night and then the opposite toward the night and then the opposite toward the night and then the opposite toward morning. And so, Matt taught me that morning. And so, Matt taught me that morning. And so, Matt taught me that trick and it's like, whoa, it's so cool. trick and it's like, whoa, it's so cool. trick and it's like, whoa, it's so cool. I now emerge from sleep feeling so I now emerge from sleep feeling so I now emerge from sleep feeling so much better. Unless I was having a much better. Unless I was having a much better. Unless I was having a disturbing dream, in which case you got disturbing dream, in which case you got disturbing dream, in which case you got to like go think about something else. to like go think about something else. to like go think about something else. But in any case, the um sleep trackers, But in any case, the um sleep trackers, But in any case, the um sleep trackers, right, um on the eight sleep because the right, um on the eight sleep because the right, um on the eight sleep because the tracker is stationary. It's the it's tracker is stationary. It's the it's tracker is stationary. It's the it's fixed to the mattress. My understanding fixed to the mattress. My understanding fixed to the mattress. My understanding is that it's more accurate than if the is that it's more accurate than if the is that it's more accurate than if the tracker is on a limb where you could be tracker is on a limb where you could be tracker is on a limb where you could be moving because that will disrupt sleep moving because that will disrupt sleep moving because that will disrupt sleep stage measurement. Um but I don't know stage measurement. Um but I don't know stage measurement. Um but I don't know if that's actually true or not. I don't if that's actually true or not. I don't if that's actually true or not. I don't know. I haven't measured it and I know. I haven't measured it and I know. I haven't measured it and I haven't looked at the data on that. haven't looked at the data on that. haven't looked at the data on that. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, what about HRV? Uh, we're hearing &gt;&gt; So, what about HRV? Uh, we're hearing &gt;&gt; So, what about HRV? Uh, we're hearing more and more that HRV is um perhaps more and more that HRV is um perhaps more and more that HRV is um perhaps even more interesting than resting heart even more interesting than resting heart even more interesting than resting heart rate. &gt;&gt; I think it probably is. &gt;&gt; I think it probably is. &gt;&gt; I think it probably is. &gt;&gt; What are some things that we can do to &gt;&gt; What are some things that we can do to &gt;&gt; What are some things that we can do to improve our HRV? What should our HRV be? improve our HRV? What should our HRV be? improve our HRV? What should our HRV be? How much control do we have over HRV How much control do we have over HRV How much control do we have over HRV range? This kind of thing. range? This kind of thing. range? This kind of thing. &gt;&gt; Well, exercise is supposed to be one of &gt;&gt; Well, exercise is supposed to be one of &gt;&gt; Well, exercise is supposed to be one of the best ways to do this. Again, I'm not the best ways to do this. Again, I'm not the best ways to do this. Again, I'm not a cardiologist. I'm not an expert there. a cardiologist. I'm not an expert there. a cardiologist. I'm not an expert there. I don't know for sure, but I know I don't know for sure, but I know I don't know for sure, but I know personally um keeping my stress down and personally um keeping my stress down and personally um keeping my stress down and sleeping better seems to help. I I've sleeping better seems to help. I I've sleeping better seems to help. I I've noticed that makes sense. noticed that makes sense. noticed that makes sense. &gt;&gt; Recently, yeah. Um you know, one of &gt;&gt; Recently, yeah. Um you know, one of &gt;&gt; Recently, yeah. Um you know, one of these AI programs, this again happens to these AI programs, this again happens to these AI programs, this again happens to come from January. They take all your come from January. They take all your come from January. They take all your data, bring it in, and they were like data, bring it in, and they were like data, bring it in, and they were like looking at this and my HRV, believe it looking at this and my HRV, believe it looking at this and my HRV, believe it or not, went up like 28% or some or not, went up like 28% or some or not, went up like 28% or some incredible number. Yeah. And I was incredible number. Yeah. And I was incredible number. Yeah. And I was trying to figure out what it was due to trying to figure out what it was due to trying to figure out what it was due to it. And I think I'm sleeping better it. And I think I'm sleeping better it. And I think I'm sleeping better actually. Are you a meditator? actually. Are you a meditator? actually. Are you a meditator? &gt;&gt; No, I used to and I need I know I need &gt;&gt; No, I used to and I need I know I need &gt;&gt; No, I used to and I need I know I need to make more time in some sense. Maybe to make more time in some sense. Maybe to make more time in some sense. Maybe my bike ride is the equivalent of that my bike ride is the equivalent of that my bike ride is the equivalent of that at the end of the day and on the at the end of the day and on the at the end of the day and on the weekends I try and do a little bit of weekends I try and do a little bit of weekends I try and do a little bit of gardening at that's my form fun. gardening at that's my form fun. gardening at that's my form fun. &gt;&gt; I am a big believer you need some form &gt;&gt; I am a big believer you need some form &gt;&gt; I am a big believer you need some form of calmness and I used to meditate for of calmness and I used to meditate for of calmness and I used to meditate for like five minutes after exercise. I need like five minutes after exercise. I need like five minutes after exercise. I need to get back to that for sure. to get back to that for sure. to get back to that for sure. &gt;&gt; There's some interesting data on just &gt;&gt; There's some interesting data on just &gt;&gt; There's some interesting data on just maybe give this a try as an experiment. maybe give this a try as an experiment. maybe give this a try as an experiment. uh periodically throughout the day just uh periodically throughout the day just uh periodically throughout the day just do a deliberate to lungs empty exhale do a deliberate to lungs empty exhale do a deliberate to lungs empty exhale which activates the veagal pathway which activates the veagal pathway which activates the veagal pathway to the cyanoatrial node slows your heart to the cyanoatrial node slows your heart to the cyanoatrial node slows your heart rate down there's evidence that will rate down there's evidence that will rate down there's evidence that will improve your HRV both in waking and improve your HRV both in waking and improve your HRV both in waking and sleep states yeah just try it out see sleep states yeah just try it out see sleep states yeah just try it out see what you think what you think what you think &gt;&gt; one minute every day or &gt;&gt; one minute every day or &gt;&gt; one minute every day or &gt;&gt; no just periodically throughout &gt;&gt; no just periodically throughout &gt;&gt; no just periodically throughout the day just remember to uh dump all the day just remember to uh dump all the day just remember to uh dump all your air as the uh free divers would say your air as the uh free divers would say your air as the uh free divers would say just &gt;&gt; really the long exhale which I try the &gt;&gt; really the long exhale which I try the &gt;&gt; really the long exhale which I try the breathing that'll slow your heart rate breathing that'll slow your heart rate breathing that'll slow your heart rate interperse it so there's no breath work. interperse it so there's no breath work. interperse it so there's no breath work. You don't have to set aside time. I'll You don't have to set aside time. I'll You don't have to set aside time. I'll ask you something different related to ask you something different related to ask you something different related to stress. &gt;&gt; Um it goes back to some sleep data. Um &gt;&gt; Um it goes back to some sleep data. Um &gt;&gt; Um it goes back to some sleep data. Um you seem to love your work like you're h you seem to love your work like you're h you seem to love your work like you're h before we came in here. You're like I before we came in here. You're like I before we came in here. You're like I love my job, you know. Um love my job, you know. Um love my job, you know. Um &gt;&gt; there are really interesting data out of &gt;&gt; there are really interesting data out of &gt;&gt; there are really interesting data out of the sleep lab at Stanford that show that the sleep lab at Stanford that show that the sleep lab at Stanford that show that &gt;&gt; positive next day anticipation is one of &gt;&gt; positive next day anticipation is one of &gt;&gt; positive next day anticipation is one of the strongest determinants of sleep the strongest determinants of sleep the strongest determinants of sleep quality. Oh, quality. Oh, quality. Oh, &gt;&gt; I didn't know that. Yeah. and that it &gt;&gt; I didn't know that. Yeah. and that it &gt;&gt; I didn't know that. Yeah. and that it really does seem to be that if you are really does seem to be that if you are really does seem to be that if you are excited about your life, you can get by excited about your life, you can get by excited about your life, you can get by with less sleep because the amount of with less sleep because the amount of with less sleep because the amount of quality sleep you get is higher. quality sleep you get is higher. quality sleep you get is higher. &gt;&gt; So maybe you don't need to meditate, you &gt;&gt; So maybe you don't need to meditate, you &gt;&gt; So maybe you don't need to meditate, you just need to continue to do what you just need to continue to do what you just need to continue to do what you love. &gt;&gt; Maybe. Yeah. No, I do love what I do. &gt;&gt; Maybe. Yeah. No, I do love what I do. &gt;&gt; Maybe. Yeah. No, I do love what I do. And um for me, there's no better rush And um for me, there's no better rush And um for me, there's no better rush than a great result. Uh I'm an academic than a great result. Uh I'm an academic than a great result. Uh I'm an academic at heart. We spin off the companies to at heart. We spin off the companies to at heart. We spin off the companies to try to get I think the things we're try to get I think the things we're try to get I think the things we're doing, you know, I hope out to a broader doing, you know, I hope out to a broader doing, you know, I hope out to a broader group of people. uh which you know I it group of people. uh which you know I it group of people. uh which you know I it also is a way of showing the stuff also is a way of showing the stuff also is a way of showing the stuff really works and that it's not all BS really works and that it's not all BS really works and that it's not all BS that you're doing in the lab. So I do that you're doing in the lab. So I do that you're doing in the lab. So I do love what I do. Um and um I don't know love what I do. Um and um I don't know love what I do. Um and um I don't know I'm very fortunate. I have amazing I'm very fortunate. I have amazing I'm very fortunate. I have amazing people in my lab as I mentioned before people in my lab as I mentioned before people in my lab as I mentioned before who they come up with a lot of the who they come up with a lot of the who they come up with a lot of the ideas. I view us as a team that try to ideas. I view us as a team that try to ideas. I view us as a team that try to push forward on these various things. I push forward on these various things. I push forward on these various things. I try to create an open environment uh try to create an open environment uh try to create an open environment uh where people aren't afraid to share where people aren't afraid to share where people aren't afraid to share ideas and push things forward. ideas and push things forward. ideas and push things forward. Yeah. Anyway, I realized we got away Yeah. Anyway, I realized we got away Yeah. Anyway, I realized we got away from the a organ aging part. If you want from the a organ aging part. If you want from the a organ aging part. If you want to go back to that, to go back to that, to go back to that, &gt;&gt; let's go back to that. And then I &gt;&gt; let's go back to that. And then I &gt;&gt; let's go back to that. And then I would like to also get back to would like to also get back to would like to also get back to psychological factors and mental health. psychological factors and mental health. psychological factors and mental health. &gt;&gt; On the aging, I mentioned how we're &gt;&gt; On the aging, I mentioned how we're &gt;&gt; On the aging, I mentioned how we're doing all these measurements and doing all these measurements and doing all these measurements and tracking people over time. We've now tracking people over time. We've now tracking people over time. We've now been doing this for over 12 years on been doing this for over 12 years on been doing this for over 12 years on this 109. Some have dropped off as say this 109. Some have dropped off as say this 109. Some have dropped off as say new ones have popped on. And uh what we new ones have popped on. And uh what we new ones have popped on. And uh what we discovered by just looking at the discovered by just looking at the discovered by just looking at the healthy time points is that people you healthy time points is that people you healthy time points is that people you know they do change over time uh even in know they do change over time uh even in know they do change over time uh even in the healthy times but they're all the healthy times but they're all the healthy times but they're all changing differently. Meaning we look at changing differently. Meaning we look at changing differently. Meaning we look at the biochemical pathways. Some will have the biochemical pathways. Some will have the biochemical pathways. Some will have their top biochemical path dilated their top biochemical path dilated their top biochemical path dilated cardio myopathy pathway changing and or cardio myopathy pathway changing and or cardio myopathy pathway changing and or sorry that was dilated uh sorry that was sorry that was dilated uh sorry that was sorry that was dilated uh sorry that was hypertrophic cardia myopathy uh hypertrophic cardia myopathy uh hypertrophic cardia myopathy uh signaling pathway shifted other people signaling pathway shifted other people signaling pathway shifted other people it's metabolic some are immune we call it's metabolic some are immune we call it's metabolic some are immune we call these age types aging pathways and I these age types aging pathways and I these age types aging pathways and I kind of like that a little bit better kind of like that a little bit better kind of like that a little bit better than organ aging because some of the than organ aging because some of the than organ aging because some of the things you pick up are like oxidative things you pick up are like oxidative things you pick up are like oxidative stress which go across lots of organs or stress which go across lots of organs or stress which go across lots of organs or you know the you know inflammatory you know the you know inflammatory you know the you know inflammatory inflammation that's kind of crossorgan inflammation that's kind of crossorgan inflammation that's kind of crossorgan as well. So we call these agot types as well. So we call these agot types as well. So we call these agot types aging patterns that we see and it turns aging patterns that we see and it turns aging patterns that we see and it turns out everybody's different. So some out everybody's different. So some out everybody's different. So some people will be the cardio, some people will be the cardio, some people will be the cardio, some people be the metabolic, some are liver, some be the metabolic, some are liver, some be the metabolic, some are liver, some are kidney based on the markers we see are kidney based on the markers we see are kidney based on the markers we see in the blood and some are immune and in the blood and some are immune and in the blood and some are immune and some are all the above or parts some are all the above or parts some are all the above or parts thereof. So, we're all different. And thereof. So, we're all different. And thereof. So, we're all different. And what's cool about it is it's actionable what's cool about it is it's actionable what's cool about it is it's actionable information. Meaning, we a metabolic information. Meaning, we a metabolic information. Meaning, we a metabolic gagger when you actually see that gagger when you actually see that gagger when you actually see that they'll see how they're shifting. And they'll see how they're shifting. And they'll see how they're shifting. And again, have another company involved in again, have another company involved in again, have another company involved in this. They do this micro sampling. I'm this. They do this micro sampling. I'm this. They do this micro sampling. I'm sure we'll get into where they're sure we'll get into where they're sure we'll get into where they're measure your metabolic patterns. And by measure your metabolic patterns. And by measure your metabolic patterns. And by the way, we think your metabolism is the way, we think your metabolism is the way, we think your metabolism is the best way to see these shifts of all the best way to see these shifts of all the best way to see these shifts of all the different proteom is good too. And my different proteom is good too. And my different proteom is good too. And my colleague Tony Vores, he basically has colleague Tony Vores, he basically has colleague Tony Vores, he basically has looked at this organ aging stuff as well looked at this organ aging stuff as well looked at this organ aging stuff as well from the proteomic st from uh proteomics from the proteomic st from uh proteomics from the proteomic st from uh proteomics meaning group of proteins. He's he's meaning group of proteins. He's he's meaning group of proteins. He's he's followed this and same thing you can followed this and same thing you can followed this and same thing you can follow this these agot types if you will follow this these agot types if you will follow this these agot types if you will these aging patterns and the information these aging patterns and the information these aging patterns and the information is totally actionable. You can see as I is totally actionable. You can see as I is totally actionable. You can see as I say for metabolic age or some of the say for metabolic age or some of the say for metabolic age or some of the folks seeing this they lost weight or folks seeing this they lost weight or folks seeing this they lost weight or they exercised and they improved their they exercised and they improved their they exercised and they improved their patterns. Now I'm not saying they got patterns. Now I'm not saying they got patterns. Now I'm not saying they got younger but they did improve their agot younger but they did improve their agot younger but they did improve their agot types. And so I think the information is types. And so I think the information is types. And so I think the information is very actionable and so again uh and this very actionable and so again uh and this very actionable and so again uh and this is one where we commercialize because I is one where we commercialize because I is one where we commercialize because I want it's a very simple test. You can want it's a very simple test. You can want it's a very simple test. You can get these little drops of blood mail it get these little drops of blood mail it get these little drops of blood mail it in and they'll profile 650 metabolites in and they'll profile 650 metabolites in and they'll profile 650 metabolites and the information is actionable. and the information is actionable. and the information is actionable. They make recommendations and it's not They make recommendations and it's not They make recommendations and it's not just exercise more eat better but very just exercise more eat better but very just exercise more eat better but very specific. very specific. very specific. &gt;&gt; What what is the name of this company? &gt;&gt; What what is the name of this company? &gt;&gt; What what is the name of this company? &gt;&gt; It's called Iolo. I O L O. And &gt;&gt; It's called Iolo. I O L O. And &gt;&gt; It's called Iolo. I O L O. And &gt;&gt; and this is now commercially available. &gt;&gt; and this is now commercially available. &gt;&gt; and this is now commercially available. So if I want So if I want to figure out So if I want So if I want to figure out So if I want So if I want to figure out my age type, did I get that right? My my age type, did I get that right? My my age type, did I get that right? My agot type. Um I can do that by sending agot type. Um I can do that by sending agot type. Um I can do that by sending in a few drops of blood and it will tell in a few drops of blood and it will tell in a few drops of blood and it will tell me &gt;&gt; they'll send you a kit. It's a very &gt;&gt; they'll send you a kit. It's a very &gt;&gt; they'll send you a kit. It's a very special kit because not any like putting special kit because not any like putting special kit because not any like putting things on cellulose is not the best way things on cellulose is not the best way things on cellulose is not the best way to save your blood. Uh anyway, it's a to save your blood. Uh anyway, it's a to save your blood. Uh anyway, it's a special kit. You mail it in. Yeah. And special kit. You mail it in. Yeah. And special kit. You mail it in. Yeah. And they'll with something called they'll with something called they'll with something called metabolomics and mass spectrometry you metabolomics and mass spectrometry you metabolomics and mass spectrometry you can profile. It's a targeted assay 650 can profile. It's a targeted assay 650 can profile. It's a targeted assay 650 metabolites. And they cover all these metabolites. And they cover all these metabolites. And they cover all these areas and many there most of it's in the areas and many there most of it's in the areas and many there most of it's in the scientific literature. It's just not in scientific literature. It's just not in scientific literature. It's just not in the clinical labs uh like things around the clinical labs uh like things around the clinical labs uh like things around your kidney function, your heart, things your kidney function, your heart, things your kidney function, your heart, things like this. And they give you these like this. And they give you these like this. And they give you these profiles and they say these are normal, profiles and they say these are normal, profiles and they say these are normal, these are going off. And then they can these are going off. And then they can these are going off. And then they can even predict your again biological age. even predict your again biological age. even predict your again biological age. So you may know your biological age is So you may know your biological age is So you may know your biological age is not necessarily as your chronological not necessarily as your chronological not necessarily as your chronological age or age in years. And if that goes if age or age in years. And if that goes if age or age in years. And if that goes if things are off and maybe a not so good things are off and maybe a not so good things are off and maybe a not so good direction, you can actually take action. direction, you can actually take action. direction, you can actually take action. You can say, well, all right, my You can say, well, all right, my You can say, well, all right, my inflammation's fine, my but my heart age inflammation's fine, my but my heart age inflammation's fine, my but my heart age is off. And they can give you very is off. And they can give you very is off. And they can give you very specific recommendations to do around specific recommendations to do around specific recommendations to do around that. Or if it's kidney, again, same that. Or if it's kidney, again, same that. Or if it's kidney, again, same thing. maybe eat more of certain things thing. maybe eat more of certain things thing. maybe eat more of certain things and avoid other things. and avoid other things. and avoid other things. &gt;&gt; Cool. I'm going to try it. So, let's &gt;&gt; Cool. I'm going to try it. So, let's &gt;&gt; Cool. I'm going to try it. So, let's talk about biological age because I talk about biological age because I talk about biological age because I think the first time I heard about the think the first time I heard about the think the first time I heard about the concept of measuring one's biological concept of measuring one's biological concept of measuring one's biological age versus chronological age was from age versus chronological age was from age versus chronological age was from David Sinclair when he was referencing David Sinclair when he was referencing David Sinclair when he was referencing Horvath clocks. That was some years ago. Horvath clocks. That was some years ago. Horvath clocks. That was some years ago. Um, and then of course Brian Johnson um Um, and then of course Brian Johnson um Um, and then of course Brian Johnson um likes to boast his biological age. He likes to boast his biological age. He likes to boast his biological age. He has a biological age competition I think has a biological age competition I think has a biological age competition I think online. uh with some folks and then online. uh with some folks and then online. uh with some folks and then there are also folks like my friend there are also folks like my friend there are also folks like my friend Peter Aia who will be very direct in Peter Aia who will be very direct in Peter Aia who will be very direct in telling you that he doesn't think much telling you that he doesn't think much telling you that he doesn't think much of biological age when it's a number to of biological age when it's a number to of biological age when it's a number to assess whole body age. He's like I won't assess whole body age. He's like I won't assess whole body age. He's like I won't use the words that he uses but he use the words that he uses but he use the words that he uses but he doesn't think it's worth anything at all doesn't think it's worth anything at all doesn't think it's worth anything at all frankly um as a measure. But here you're frankly um as a measure. But here you're frankly um as a measure. But here you're talking about something distinctly talking about something distinctly talking about something distinctly different. You're talking about the different. You're talking about the different. You're talking about the progression of aging of different organs progression of aging of different organs progression of aging of different organs or different organ systems. or different organ systems. or different organ systems. &gt;&gt; I think the hor clocks are correct. Um &gt;&gt; I think the hor clocks are correct. Um &gt;&gt; I think the hor clocks are correct. Um meaning they do measure biological age, meaning they do measure biological age, meaning they do measure biological age, but the problem is it's not actionable. but the problem is it's not actionable. but the problem is it's not actionable. What do you do? Your methylation pattern What do you do? Your methylation pattern What do you do? Your methylation pattern that's a modification of DNA has shifted that's a modification of DNA has shifted that's a modification of DNA has shifted and it gives you an overall value. Well, and it gives you an overall value. Well, and it gives you an overall value. Well, what do you do with that? You don't what do you do with that? You don't what do you do with that? You don't know. You wouldn't. Yeah. and they can know. You wouldn't. Yeah. and they can know. You wouldn't. Yeah. and they can predict something called grim age these predict something called grim age these predict something called grim age these days your time to death your mortality. days your time to death your mortality. days your time to death your mortality. Oh, nice. Oh, nice. Oh, nice. &gt;&gt; Same thing. I mean, what are you going &gt;&gt; Same thing. I mean, what are you going &gt;&gt; Same thing. I mean, what are you going to do with that? What's special about to do with that? What's special about to do with that? What's special about the age ofotypes is that they're the age ofotypes is that they're the age ofotypes is that they're breaking it down. And so they say, "All breaking it down. And so they say, "All breaking it down. And so they say, "All right, your immune age is off, you can right, your immune age is off, you can right, your immune age is off, you can do X. Uh your other, you know, your do X. Uh your other, you know, your do X. Uh your other, you know, your oxidative stress is off, you do Y." So oxidative stress is off, you do Y." So oxidative stress is off, you do Y." So it's basically actionable information. it's basically actionable information. it's basically actionable information. So, I think it makes all the difference So, I think it makes all the difference So, I think it makes all the difference and it conceptually it makes a lot of and it conceptually it makes a lot of and it conceptually it makes a lot of sense, too. It's like your car. I know I sense, too. It's like your car. I know I sense, too. It's like your car. I know I keep coming back to that analogy, but keep coming back to that analogy, but keep coming back to that analogy, but your car gets older, but certain parts your car gets older, but certain parts your car gets older, but certain parts wear out first. You don't Well, maybe wear out first. You don't Well, maybe wear out first. You don't Well, maybe some people do. They replace their whole some people do. They replace their whole some people do. They replace their whole car, but generally you would fix the car, but generally you would fix the car, but generally you would fix the parts that are wearing and ideally you'd parts that are wearing and ideally you'd parts that are wearing and ideally you'd catch it before they break. And I think catch it before they break. And I think catch it before they break. And I think that's how we think of a types. you can that's how we think of a types. you can that's how we think of a types. you can go in and so I mentioned this company go in and so I mentioned this company go in and so I mentioned this company earlier I what they do is they're earlier I what they do is they're earlier I what they do is they're tracking your agot types because they're tracking your agot types because they're tracking your agot types because they're doing these deep metabolic a profiles doing these deep metabolic a profiles doing these deep metabolic a profiles and they actually make they use AI they and they actually make they use AI they and they actually make they use AI they pull in things and make very specific pull in things and make very specific pull in things and make very specific recommendations and then um you can some you know and then um you can some you know and then um you can some you know they'll tell you exact foods to eat and they'll tell you exact foods to eat and they'll tell you exact foods to eat and things like that uh and 95% of people things like that uh and 95% of people things like that uh and 95% of people improve their markers again I'm not improve their markers again I'm not improve their markers again I'm not going to say they're getting younger but going to say they're getting younger but going to say they're getting younger but at least they're improving their at least they're improving their at least they're improving their metabolic markers in the right metabolic markers in the right metabolic markers in the right direction. And so it it's actionable direction. And so it it's actionable direction. And so it it's actionable information and it makes a lot of sense. information and it makes a lot of sense. information and it makes a lot of sense. &gt;&gt; How powerful a role do genetics play in &gt;&gt; How powerful a role do genetics play in &gt;&gt; How powerful a role do genetics play in determining potential lifespan? Uh determining potential lifespan? Uh determining potential lifespan? Uh shortly before starting this discussion, shortly before starting this discussion, shortly before starting this discussion, I looked at the chart of longest living I looked at the chart of longest living I looked at the chart of longest living humans. Um they're all deceased now, but humans. Um they're all deceased now, but humans. Um they're all deceased now, but I think the record is 122 years and some I think the record is 122 years and some I think the record is 122 years and some change. Um, change. Um, change. Um, &gt;&gt; and some people she may have cheated, &gt;&gt; and some people she may have cheated, &gt;&gt; and some people she may have cheated, but it's not clear. but it's not clear. but it's not clear. &gt;&gt; Oh, really? That was a French woman. Um, &gt;&gt; Oh, really? That was a French woman. Um, &gt;&gt; Oh, really? That was a French woman. Um, &gt;&gt; yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; 120 plus or minus five years seems to be &gt;&gt; 120 plus or minus five years seems to be &gt;&gt; 120 plus or minus five years seems to be kind of what people consider a, you kind of what people consider a, you kind of what people consider a, you know, a spectacularly long life. know, a spectacularly long life. know, a spectacularly long life. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And that does seem to be the cap. And &gt;&gt; And that does seem to be the cap. And &gt;&gt; And that does seem to be the cap. And so, you know, most of our research is so, you know, most of our research is so, you know, most of our research is built around extending health span. It built around extending health span. It built around extending health span. It is the case that for is the case that for is the case that for lifespan in general it's estimated to be lifespan in general it's estimated to be lifespan in general it's estimated to be about 16% of your lifespan's due to about 16% of your lifespan's due to about 16% of your lifespan's due to genetics. &gt;&gt; That's it. &gt;&gt; That's it. &gt;&gt; That's it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now there's a big error bar on &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now there's a big error bar on &gt;&gt; Yeah. Now there's a big error bar on that. That comes from twin studies and that. That comes from twin studies and that. That comes from twin studies and family studies. Uh so although it's family studies. Uh so although it's family studies. Uh so although it's thought that for people live to be a thought that for people live to be a thought that for people live to be a hundred or older then it might be hundred or older then it might be hundred or older then it might be higher. Some people have said 60%. So to higher. Some people have said 60%. So to higher. Some people have said 60%. So to live to be really long, you may need live to be really long, you may need live to be really long, you may need good genes in general, but there's still good genes in general, but there's still good genes in general, but there's still a lot there, right? There's another 40% a lot there, right? There's another 40% a lot there, right? There's another 40% that suit lifestyle. Uh but for the that suit lifestyle. Uh but for the that suit lifestyle. Uh but for the average person, it's only one six. So average person, it's only one six. So average person, it's only one six. So your lifestyle is by far your biggest your lifestyle is by far your biggest your lifestyle is by far your biggest factor. And you look at people in these factor. And you look at people in these factor. And you look at people in these blue zones, these areas where people blue zones, these areas where people blue zones, these areas where people there's an enrichment for people live to there's an enrichment for people live to there's an enrichment for people live to be 100 or more. They have several things be 100 or more. They have several things be 100 or more. They have several things in common. One is they tend to eat a in common. One is they tend to eat a in common. One is they tend to eat a diet with not much ultrarocessed foods diet with not much ultrarocessed foods diet with not much ultrarocessed foods or processed foods in general. And or processed foods in general. And or processed foods in general. And generally they tend to be towards the generally they tend to be towards the generally they tend to be towards the Mediterranean vegan kind of diet. Mediterranean vegan kind of diet. Mediterranean vegan kind of diet. &gt;&gt; They eat animal proteins as I &gt;&gt; They eat animal proteins as I &gt;&gt; They eat animal proteins as I understand, but it's more fish and understand, but it's more fish and understand, but it's more fish and chicken. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's correct. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's correct. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's correct. &gt;&gt; And less red meat. And they're &gt;&gt; And less red meat. And they're &gt;&gt; And less red meat. And they're eating a lot of vegetables. eating a lot of vegetables. eating a lot of vegetables. &gt;&gt; Yes, for sure. Uh and getting fiber &gt;&gt; Yes, for sure. Uh and getting fiber &gt;&gt; Yes, for sure. Uh and getting fiber through that as well. And then uh they through that as well. And then uh they through that as well. And then uh they tend to have um uh they're fairly active tend to have um uh they're fairly active tend to have um uh they're fairly active meaning but their form of activity can meaning but their form of activity can meaning but their form of activity can vary and they have really good social vary and they have really good social vary and they have really good social networks. &gt;&gt; So either through family or through &gt;&gt; So either through family or through &gt;&gt; So either through family or through community networks and so that's pretty community networks and so that's pretty community networks and so that's pretty clear. My prediction is they probably clear. My prediction is they probably clear. My prediction is they probably sleep pretty well too. I don't know if sleep pretty well too. I don't know if sleep pretty well too. I don't know if that's been as well measured as it as that's been as well measured as it as that's been as well measured as it as the other parameters. So, so I think you the other parameters. So, so I think you the other parameters. So, so I think you do need all of those things if you want do need all of those things if you want do need all of those things if you want to live a long healthy life. And and uh to live a long healthy life. And and uh to live a long healthy life. And and uh and that you know that weight may vary and that you know that weight may vary and that you know that weight may vary from one person to the next and I from one person to the next and I from one person to the next and I think that's the kind of thing we want think that's the kind of thing we want think that's the kind of thing we want to look at. Again, I view people as a to look at. Again, I view people as a to look at. Again, I view people as a combination of things or genetics or combination of things or genetics or combination of things or genetics or epigenetics. You know, I don't know if epigenetics. You know, I don't know if epigenetics. You know, I don't know if I told you all the details when I became I told you all the details when I became I told you all the details when I became diabetic. It was predicted from my diabetic. It was predicted from my diabetic. It was predicted from my genome. Matul but actually predicted genome. Matul but actually predicted genome. Matul but actually predicted this from something called apologenic this from something called apologenic this from something called apologenic risk score these ways of analyzing risk score these ways of analyzing risk score these ways of analyzing genomes and I'm at the extreme end that genomes and I'm at the extreme end that genomes and I'm at the extreme end that doesn't work for most people by the way doesn't work for most people by the way doesn't work for most people by the way but I'm at the extreme end that work for but I'm at the extreme end that work for but I'm at the extreme end that work for me so you predict I was high risk for me so you predict I was high risk for me so you predict I was high risk for diabetes but I didn't become diabetic diabetes but I didn't become diabetic diabetes but I didn't become diabetic until after a viral infection it's very until after a viral infection it's very until after a viral infection it's very strong correlation and because I measure strong correlation and because I measure strong correlation and because I measure myself a lot I figured this out as myself a lot I figured this out as myself a lot I figured this out as respiratory sensitial virus which uh respiratory sensitial virus which uh respiratory sensitial virus which uh actually you know it's not that common actually you know it's not that common actually you know it's not that common adults. It's more common now. But um adults. It's more common now. But um adults. It's more common now. But um anyway, I was literally in bed, which is anyway, I was literally in bed, which is anyway, I was literally in bed, which is a little unusual for me. I uh and I got a little unusual for me. I uh and I got a little unusual for me. I uh and I got a very high temperature uh and I wound a very high temperature uh and I wound a very high temperature uh and I wound up several weeks later becoming up several weeks later becoming up several weeks later becoming diabetic. It's very fascinating because diabetic. It's very fascinating because diabetic. It's very fascinating because we actually looked at the modification we actually looked at the modification we actually looked at the modification of my DNA. It's called DNA methylation. of my DNA. It's called DNA methylation. of my DNA. It's called DNA methylation. It actually shifted in something like It actually shifted in something like It actually shifted in something like 100 metabolic genes in the in their 100 metabolic genes in the in their 100 metabolic genes in the in their control regions called the promoters. control regions called the promoters. control regions called the promoters. And so And so And so it's the thought is that I was it's the thought is that I was it's the thought is that I was genetically at risk. And then in genetically at risk. And then in genetically at risk. And then in combination with this viral infection, combination with this viral infection, combination with this viral infection, it's environmental. That's what it's environmental. That's what it's environmental. That's what triggered my diabetes. Now I don't think triggered my diabetes. Now I don't think triggered my diabetes. Now I don't think that's true of most people. We're that's true of most people. We're that's true of most people. We're tracking people. I may have mentioned in tracking people. I may have mentioned in tracking people. I may have mentioned in the first part of study we saw nine the first part of study we saw nine the first part of study we saw nine people become diabetic as we've been people become diabetic as we've been people become diabetic as we've been tracking them and seven gradually became tracking them and seven gradually became tracking them and seven gradually became diabetic as though it was you know diabetic as though it was you know diabetic as though it was you know accumulation of something. But two accumulation of something. But two accumulation of something. But two people, one of which was me, something people, one of which was me, something people, one of which was me, something triggered it, meaning it kind of got triggered it, meaning it kind of got triggered it, meaning it kind of got there and stayed. It wasn't just a there and stayed. It wasn't just a there and stayed. It wasn't just a transient spike. transient spike. transient spike. &gt;&gt; Uh, and so how often this you get these &gt;&gt; Uh, and so how often this you get these &gt;&gt; Uh, and so how often this you get these gen EP they're called epigenetic gen EP they're called epigenetic gen EP they're called epigenetic modifications happening is not so clear, modifications happening is not so clear, modifications happening is not so clear, but it's now the case. You may know with but it's now the case. You may know with but it's now the case. You may know with COVID 2 to 4% of people are becoming COVID 2 to 4% of people are becoming COVID 2 to 4% of people are becoming diabetic after a COVID infection. So, diabetic after a COVID infection. So, diabetic after a COVID infection. So, it's not unreasonable to think that it's not unreasonable to think that it's not unreasonable to think that they're having epigenetic changes like they're having epigenetic changes like they're having epigenetic changes like me. It hasn't been measured. That's me. It hasn't been measured. That's me. It hasn't been measured. That's something we'd like to pursue. But the something we'd like to pursue. But the something we'd like to pursue. But the effects of these viral infections and effects of these viral infections and effects of these viral infections and stuff, you may know a lot of people get stuff, you may know a lot of people get stuff, you may know a lot of people get something called chronic fatigue something called chronic fatigue something called chronic fatigue syndrome after some adverse pathogen. syndrome after some adverse pathogen. syndrome after some adverse pathogen. It's not always clear what's causing it. It's not always clear what's causing it. It's not always clear what's causing it. Seems to be different for different Seems to be different for different Seems to be different for different people. But the idea of these intense people. But the idea of these intense people. But the idea of these intense stresses maybe from a viral infection or stresses maybe from a viral infection or stresses maybe from a viral infection or other pathogen triggering some long-term other pathogen triggering some long-term other pathogen triggering some long-term chronic effects is maybe more common chronic effects is maybe more common chronic effects is maybe more common than people realize for autoimmune than people realize for autoimmune than people realize for autoimmune disease for uh chronic fatigue syndrome disease for uh chronic fatigue syndrome disease for uh chronic fatigue syndrome in my case for diabetes in my case for diabetes in my case for diabetes maybe as I say more prevalent than maybe as I say more prevalent than maybe as I say more prevalent than people realize. It's so interesting to people realize. It's so interesting to people realize. It's so interesting to think about viral infections setting off think about viral infections setting off think about viral infections setting off a bunch of things that are acute like a bunch of things that are acute like a bunch of things that are acute like rise in temperature, rise in temperature, rise in temperature, GI tract disruption, etc. But then, uh, GI tract disruption, etc. But then, uh, GI tract disruption, etc. But then, uh, as you said, longer term changes in, uh, as you said, longer term changes in, uh, as you said, longer term changes in, uh, genes related to metabolism, genes related to metabolism, genes related to metabolism, inflammation, and other pathways setting inflammation, and other pathways setting inflammation, and other pathways setting a predisposition, uh, a genetic a predisposition, uh, a genetic a predisposition, uh, a genetic predisposition in motion, kind of like predisposition in motion, kind of like predisposition in motion, kind of like flicking the domino that was already flicking the domino that was already flicking the domino that was already kind of, uh, tilted. Um and kind of, uh, tilted. Um and kind of, uh, tilted. Um and &gt;&gt; once again that homeostatic system &gt;&gt; once again that homeostatic system &gt;&gt; once again that homeostatic system concept that you're yeah maybe if your concept that you're yeah maybe if your concept that you're yeah maybe if your genetics is a little bit weaker genetics is a little bit weaker genetics is a little bit weaker &gt;&gt; uh we've noticed um yeah that you know &gt;&gt; uh we've noticed um yeah that you know &gt;&gt; uh we've noticed um yeah that you know we found a new if you will set of genes we found a new if you will set of genes we found a new if you will set of genes involved in ALS and that those genes involved in ALS and that those genes involved in ALS and that those genes tend to be underexpressed in you know tend to be underexpressed in you know tend to be underexpressed in you know called IPS derived motor neurons the called IPS derived motor neurons the called IPS derived motor neurons the relevant cell types for ALS patients. So relevant cell types for ALS patients. So relevant cell types for ALS patients. So it may be that you know if your genetics it may be that you know if your genetics it may be that you know if your genetics is a little weaker in some areas than is a little weaker in some areas than is a little weaker in some areas than others and other things could trigger others and other things could trigger others and other things could trigger that sort of thing. So I like that sort of thing. So I like that sort of thing. So I like that general concept that we're and in some general concept that we're and in some general concept that we're and in some cases maybe that's beneficial. I'm not cases maybe that's beneficial. I'm not cases maybe that's beneficial. I'm not saying getting ALS is beneficial, but saying getting ALS is beneficial, but saying getting ALS is beneficial, but maybe we're attuned certain ways because maybe we're attuned certain ways because maybe we're attuned certain ways because in ancient times we had to deal with in ancient times we had to deal with in ancient times we had to deal with things like TB and stuff and the idea things like TB and stuff and the idea things like TB and stuff and the idea that you would be well the classic is that you would be well the classic is that you would be well the classic is cickle cell, right? That folks with cickle cell, right? That folks with cickle cell, right? That folks with cickle cell mutations might be more cickle cell mutations might be more cickle cell mutations might be more resistance to malaria. So so maybe some resistance to malaria. So so maybe some resistance to malaria. So so maybe some of this tuning helps you in some ways of this tuning helps you in some ways of this tuning helps you in some ways but is adverse in other ways or more but is adverse in other ways or more but is adverse in other ways or more makes you more susceptible. Let's put it makes you more susceptible. Let's put it makes you more susceptible. Let's put it that way. that way. that way. Yeah, I've heard um you know here and Yeah, I've heard um you know here and Yeah, I've heard um you know here and there uh about data linking um herpes there uh about data linking um herpes there uh about data linking um herpes virus to Alzheimer's for instance um and virus to Alzheimer's for instance um and virus to Alzheimer's for instance um and you could imagine how uh it might not be you could imagine how uh it might not be you could imagine how uh it might not be directly related to the symptoms or directly related to the symptoms or directly related to the symptoms or the pathology of herpes virus but the pathology of herpes virus but the pathology of herpes virus but that something about the neural that something about the neural that something about the neural inflammation caused on the trigeminal inflammation caused on the trigeminal inflammation caused on the trigeminal nerve which is where the herpes virus nerve which is where the herpes virus nerve which is where the herpes virus lives that's why people get cold sores lives that's why people get cold sores lives that's why people get cold sores this is HSV1 um which is very common this is HSV1 um which is very common this is HSV1 um which is very common right I think um and most people just right I think um and most people just right I think um and most people just combat it and they don't get cold sores combat it and they don't get cold sores combat it and they don't get cold sores um &gt;&gt; but that something about that the &gt;&gt; but that something about that the &gt;&gt; but that something about that the inflammation of that trigeminal nerve inflammation of that trigeminal nerve inflammation of that trigeminal nerve pathway maybe it breaches the blood pathway maybe it breaches the blood pathway maybe it breaches the blood brain barrier in certain people and then brain barrier in certain people and then brain barrier in certain people and then it sets off a cascade that we eventually it sets off a cascade that we eventually it sets off a cascade that we eventually call Alzheimer's so these uh these call Alzheimer's so these uh these call Alzheimer's so these uh these correlations because that's really all correlations because that's really all correlations because that's really all that they are correct and the these that they are correct and the these that they are correct and the these multiffactorial um multiffactorial um multiffactorial um &gt;&gt; uh I think that the way you described it &gt;&gt; uh I think that the way you described it &gt;&gt; uh I think that the way you described it earlier is the best way, you know, if earlier is the best way, you know, if earlier is the best way, you know, if you have a thousand piece jigsaw you have a thousand piece jigsaw you have a thousand piece jigsaw puzzle, you want to know which pieces puzzle, you want to know which pieces puzzle, you want to know which pieces are, you know, slightly out of alignment are, you know, slightly out of alignment are, you know, slightly out of alignment or missing entirely. Um, but what we or missing entirely. Um, but what we or missing entirely. Um, but what we call diseases like Alzheimer's or autism call diseases like Alzheimer's or autism call diseases like Alzheimer's or autism or diabetes or diabetes or diabetes presumably are different combinations of presumably are different combinations of presumably are different combinations of puzzle pieces missing. puzzle pieces missing. puzzle pieces missing. &gt;&gt; I think so. And I think until now &gt;&gt; I think so. And I think until now &gt;&gt; I think so. And I think until now medicine and the general public has been medicine and the general public has been medicine and the general public has been trained to think of disease as like trained to think of disease as like trained to think of disease as like those puzzle pieces are missing and those puzzle pieces are missing and those puzzle pieces are missing and that's what we call Alzheimer's. That's that's what we call Alzheimer's. That's that's what we call Alzheimer's. That's what we call autism. That's what we call what we call autism. That's what we call what we call autism. That's what we call diabetes. And what I'm realizing in diabetes. And what I'm realizing in diabetes. And what I'm realizing in talking to you today is that that's far talking to you today is that that's far talking to you today is that that's far too simplistic. too simplistic. too simplistic. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean there are &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean there are &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean there are &gt;&gt; it can't be that. It can't be that &gt;&gt; it can't be that. It can't be that &gt;&gt; it can't be that. It can't be that simple. &gt;&gt; That's correct. A a good example would &gt;&gt; That's correct. A a good example would &gt;&gt; That's correct. A a good example would be Huntington's, right? Where you have be Huntington's, right? Where you have be Huntington's, right? Where you have an expansion of a specific genetic an expansion of a specific genetic an expansion of a specific genetic locus. Uh there elements that shift locus. Uh there elements that shift locus. Uh there elements that shift there. Uh and that's highly associated there. Uh and that's highly associated there. Uh and that's highly associated with Huntington. Those would be single with Huntington. Those would be single with Huntington. Those would be single condition things that trigger it. And condition things that trigger it. And condition things that trigger it. And that does happen, but that's not most that does happen, but that's not most that does happen, but that's not most disease. That's more of the exception disease. That's more of the exception disease. That's more of the exception than the rule. And by the way, even in than the rule. And by the way, even in than the rule. And by the way, even in those cases, there are people that those cases, there are people that those cases, there are people that escape it. escape it. escape it. &gt;&gt; Oh, you have escapers. &gt;&gt; Oh, you have escapers. &gt;&gt; Oh, you have escapers. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Who have somehow escaped that. not &gt;&gt; Yeah. Who have somehow escaped that. not &gt;&gt; Yeah. Who have somehow escaped that. not always understood, although they may always understood, although they may always understood, although they may hold clues to perhaps how others could hold clues to perhaps how others could hold clues to perhaps how others could be helped. be helped. be helped. &gt;&gt; You mentioned ALS. We've not covered ALS &gt;&gt; You mentioned ALS. We've not covered ALS &gt;&gt; You mentioned ALS. We've not covered ALS on this podcast uh before, but just very on this podcast uh before, but just very on this podcast uh before, but just very briefly um my understanding is a few briefly um my understanding is a few briefly um my understanding is a few years ago there was a lot of interest in years ago there was a lot of interest in years ago there was a lot of interest in SOD and super oxide duty SOD and super oxide duty SOD and super oxide duty um being involved in the degeneration of um being involved in the degeneration of um being involved in the degeneration of motor neurons, which is why ALS used to motor neurons, which is why ALS used to motor neurons, which is why ALS used to be called L Garri's disease, but ALS be called L Garri's disease, but ALS be called L Garri's disease, but ALS people uh Stephen Hawin had ALS, right? people uh Stephen Hawin had ALS, right? people uh Stephen Hawin had ALS, right? Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Um what is the role of superoxid &gt;&gt; Um what is the role of superoxid &gt;&gt; Um what is the role of superoxid mutation and it is there anything mutation and it is there anything mutation and it is there anything protective in terms of behavior protective in terms of behavior protective in terms of behavior supplementation drugs that people can supplementation drugs that people can supplementation drugs that people can take to protect themselves against neuro take to protect themselves against neuro take to protect themselves against neuro degeneration of motor neurons or central degeneration of motor neurons or central degeneration of motor neurons or central neurons? You know, we talk a lot about neurons? You know, we talk a lot about neurons? You know, we talk a lot about what to do once it's started, but what to do once it's started, but what to do once it's started, but there's not a lot of discussion about there's not a lot of discussion about there's not a lot of discussion about how to protect your neurons. Um, just as how to protect your neurons. Um, just as how to protect your neurons. Um, just as a general theme, like protect the health a general theme, like protect the health a general theme, like protect the health of your neurons, right, by doing or of your neurons, right, by doing or of your neurons, right, by doing or taking X, taking X, taking X, &gt;&gt; right? Well, first of all, I'm not an &gt;&gt; right? Well, first of all, I'm not an &gt;&gt; right? Well, first of all, I'm not an ALS expert. This is where my genetics ALS expert. This is where my genetics ALS expert. This is where my genetics came in. We came up with new ways of came in. We came up with new ways of came in. We came up with new ways of analyzing genomes, analyzing genomes, analyzing genomes, &gt;&gt; and we applied it to ALS for reasons we &gt;&gt; and we applied it to ALS for reasons we &gt;&gt; and we applied it to ALS for reasons we thought might work. Um here I just had thought might work. Um here I just had thought might work. Um here I just had you know an amazing posttock uh Saison you know an amazing posttock uh Saison you know an amazing posttock uh Saison and a great collaborator Jonathan and a great collaborator Jonathan and a great collaborator Jonathan Cooper Knock who uh basically sort of Cooper Knock who uh basically sort of Cooper Knock who uh basically sort of said Mike this is a great problem to said Mike this is a great problem to said Mike this is a great problem to apply these new methods we had for apply these new methods we had for apply these new methods we had for analyzing so there were seven genes analyzing so there were seven genes analyzing so there were seven genes known and we wound up finding 690 genes known and we wound up finding 690 genes known and we wound up finding 690 genes just and that that's true with these new just and that that's true with these new just and that that's true with these new AI methods we have for analyzing genomes AI methods we have for analyzing genomes AI methods we have for analyzing genomes and it explains a lot more what's called and it explains a lot more what's called and it explains a lot more what's called the heritability of the disease and the heritability of the disease and the heritability of the disease and then yeah and That's how I got into it. then yeah and That's how I got into it. then yeah and That's how I got into it. But I mean, there still is no cure for But I mean, there still is no cure for But I mean, there still is no cure for ALS. Uh, and how to modify lifestyle, I ALS. Uh, and how to modify lifestyle, I ALS. Uh, and how to modify lifestyle, I don't know. But I do know uh I'm on don't know. But I do know uh I'm on don't know. But I do know uh I'm on sbatical at UC Irvine right now. And sbatical at UC Irvine right now. And sbatical at UC Irvine right now. And there's, you know, people who are trying there's, you know, people who are trying there's, you know, people who are trying to take this sort of thing on. We we'll to take this sort of thing on. We we'll to take this sort of thing on. We we'll see how well it works. It is clear there see how well it works. It is clear there see how well it works. It is clear there is a study that if you overex exercise is a study that if you overex exercise is a study that if you overex exercise that's worse for you for ALS. Uh, but that's worse for you for ALS. Uh, but that's worse for you for ALS. Uh, but whether that helps you predict, I don't whether that helps you predict, I don't whether that helps you predict, I don't know. So I think it's still yeah not know. So I think it's still yeah not know. So I think it's still yeah not very much known there at least not to very much known there at least not to very much known there at least not to me. You may know more than I do. me. You may know more than I do. me. You may know more than I do. &gt;&gt; No I you know I'm very interested in &gt;&gt; No I you know I'm very interested in &gt;&gt; No I you know I'm very interested in what one can do to protect against ner what one can do to protect against ner what one can do to protect against ner degeneration. the one that I'm very degeneration. the one that I'm very degeneration. the one that I'm very intrigued by and here I am not promoting intrigued by and here I am not promoting intrigued by and here I am not promoting this specifically for everybody but um this specifically for everybody but um this specifically for everybody but um years ago this is purely anecdotal uh years ago this is purely anecdotal uh years ago this is purely anecdotal uh but years ago I was in the office of but years ago I was in the office of but years ago I was in the office of Richard Axel at Colombia Nobel Prize Richard Axel at Colombia Nobel Prize Richard Axel at Colombia Nobel Prize winner for discovering the molecular winner for discovering the molecular winner for discovering the molecular basis of whole faction etc. And I basis of whole faction etc. And I basis of whole faction etc. And I observed what many people had told me I observed what many people had told me I observed what many people had told me I would observe, which is that he chewed would observe, which is that he chewed would observe, which is that he chewed no fewer than like six pieces of no fewer than like six pieces of no fewer than like six pieces of nicarette in a 90-minute meeting. And I nicarette in a 90-minute meeting. And I nicarette in a 90-minute meeting. And I asked him, I said, "What's the deal?" asked him, I said, "What's the deal?" asked him, I said, "What's the deal?" And he said, "Well, I used to smoke, but And he said, "Well, I used to smoke, but And he said, "Well, I used to smoke, but I don't smoke because it causes cancer, I don't smoke because it causes cancer, I don't smoke because it causes cancer, but I like the nicotine for the but I like the nicotine for the but I like the nicotine for the cognitive stimulation." And he looked at cognitive stimulation." And he looked at cognitive stimulation." And he looked at me and he said, "And it's protective me and he said, "And it's protective me and he said, "And it's protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's." I against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's." I against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's." I said, "Really?" And he goes, "Yeah, read said, "Really?" And he goes, "Yeah, read said, "Really?" And he goes, "Yeah, read up about it." And indeed, I went and up about it." And indeed, I went and up about it." And indeed, I went and looked and it does seem to be um looked and it does seem to be um looked and it does seem to be um neuroprotective. Now, it also raises neuroprotective. Now, it also raises neuroprotective. Now, it also raises blood pressure. It's highly habit blood pressure. It's highly habit blood pressure. It's highly habit forming slashaddictive. Most people I forming slashaddictive. Most people I forming slashaddictive. Most people I know that take two milligrams of a of a know that take two milligrams of a of a know that take two milligrams of a of a nicot nicotine gum or a pouch suddenly nicot nicotine gum or a pouch suddenly nicot nicotine gum or a pouch suddenly are taking four, six, eight, then are taking four, six, eight, then are taking four, six, eight, then they're taking a canister every two they're taking a canister every two they're taking a canister every two days. Like, it's very habit forming very days. Like, it's very habit forming very days. Like, it's very habit forming very fast. So, it's not something I fast. So, it's not something I fast. So, it's not something I recommend. Um, but I'm very intrigued by recommend. Um, but I'm very intrigued by recommend. Um, but I'm very intrigued by the idea of this substance nicotine when the idea of this substance nicotine when the idea of this substance nicotine when it's not smoked, vaped, you know, dipped it's not smoked, vaped, you know, dipped it's not smoked, vaped, you know, dipped or snuffed that it might actually be or snuffed that it might actually be or snuffed that it might actually be neuroprotective. Richard's a molecular neuroprotective. Richard's a molecular neuroprotective. Richard's a molecular biologist by training. He's not somebody biologist by training. He's not somebody biologist by training. He's not somebody um who just says stuff when it comes to um who just says stuff when it comes to um who just says stuff when it comes to science. Sometimes he just says stuff. science. Sometimes he just says stuff. science. Sometimes he just says stuff. He's kind of an out known to be kind of He's kind of an out known to be kind of He's kind of an out known to be kind of an outrageous guy. But um the data are an outrageous guy. But um the data are an outrageous guy. But um the data are kind of interesting like in rodent kind of interesting like in rodent kind of interesting like in rodent studies that nicotine can be protective studies that nicotine can be protective studies that nicotine can be protective in the face of a of a bunch of in the face of a of a bunch of in the face of a of a bunch of different insults to um dopamine neurons different insults to um dopamine neurons different insults to um dopamine neurons like uh a com a combined lowgrade uh like uh a com a combined lowgrade uh like uh a com a combined lowgrade uh head uh injury with something else like head uh injury with something else like head uh injury with something else like hypoglycemia, right? The the two hit hypoglycemia, right? The the two hit hypoglycemia, right? The the two hit model. It's not a head injury that would model. It's not a head injury that would model. It's not a head injury that would kill neurons. It's not hypoglycemia that kill neurons. It's not hypoglycemia that kill neurons. It's not hypoglycemia that would kill neurons, but when they would kill neurons, but when they would kill neurons, but when they when they coincide, the so-called two when they coincide, the so-called two when they coincide, the so-called two hit model, then you start losing hit model, then you start losing hit model, then you start losing neurons. And in some cases, like neurons. And in some cases, like neurons. And in some cases, like nicotine can be protect. This kind of nicotine can be protect. This kind of nicotine can be protect. This kind of thing. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; So, I'm intrigued by things that one &gt;&gt; So, I'm intrigued by things that one &gt;&gt; So, I'm intrigued by things that one could potentially do to protect neurons. could potentially do to protect neurons. could potentially do to protect neurons. &gt;&gt; Um, aside from wearing a bike helmet, &gt;&gt; Um, aside from wearing a bike helmet, &gt;&gt; Um, aside from wearing a bike helmet, &gt;&gt; which I'm relieved to hear that you do. &gt;&gt; which I'm relieved to hear that you do. &gt;&gt; which I'm relieved to hear that you do. &gt;&gt; In any case, uh, room for &gt;&gt; In any case, uh, room for &gt;&gt; In any case, uh, room for &gt;&gt; motor neurons for ALS. Motor. So, I &gt;&gt; motor neurons for ALS. Motor. So, I &gt;&gt; motor neurons for ALS. Motor. So, I don't know how similar different. Yeah. don't know how similar different. Yeah. don't know how similar different. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Super interesting. I don't &gt;&gt; Yeah. Super interesting. I don't &gt;&gt; Yeah. Super interesting. I don't think anyone wants to lose their motor think anyone wants to lose their motor think anyone wants to lose their motor dopamine or any other neurons. So, it's dopamine or any other neurons. So, it's dopamine or any other neurons. So, it's uh you know, with rare exception, it's uh you know, with rare exception, it's uh you know, with rare exception, we don't replace them. So, um I think we don't replace them. So, um I think we don't replace them. So, um I think that's going to be a really important that's going to be a really important that's going to be a really important area going forward. Right now, it's area going forward. Right now, it's area going forward. Right now, it's mostly the don'ts. mostly the don'ts. mostly the don'ts. &gt;&gt; Don't get a head injury. If you do, &gt;&gt; Don't get a head injury. If you do, &gt;&gt; Don't get a head injury. If you do, don't get a second one. Quit the sport. don't get a second one. Quit the sport. don't get a second one. Quit the sport. People always say, I, you know, I play People always say, I, you know, I play People always say, I, you know, I play rugby and I got a really bad concussion. rugby and I got a really bad concussion. rugby and I got a really bad concussion. What should I do? And I go, find a new What should I do? And I go, find a new What should I do? And I go, find a new sport. And they never like that answer. sport. And they never like that answer. sport. And they never like that answer. But, you know, um, But, you know, um, But, you know, um, &gt;&gt; back to behavioral modification. &gt;&gt; back to behavioral modification. &gt;&gt; back to behavioral modification. &gt;&gt; Exactly. It's mostly don'ts. Um, I'd &gt;&gt; Exactly. It's mostly don'ts. Um, I'd &gt;&gt; Exactly. It's mostly don'ts. Um, I'd like to talk about some things that like to talk about some things that like to talk about some things that might seem a little bit more in the might seem a little bit more in the might seem a little bit more in the esoteric realm. esoteric realm. esoteric realm. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Let's start with, uh, low esoteric, but &gt;&gt; Let's start with, uh, low esoteric, but &gt;&gt; Let's start with, uh, low esoteric, but still in the kind of area that now still in the kind of area that now still in the kind of area that now people are talking about, um, which used people are talking about, um, which used people are talking about, um, which used to be considered kind of woo, which is to be considered kind of woo, which is to be considered kind of woo, which is air quality. air quality. air quality. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Everyone agrees pollution is bad. What &gt;&gt; Everyone agrees pollution is bad. What &gt;&gt; Everyone agrees pollution is bad. What people don't agree upon so much is how people don't agree upon so much is how people don't agree upon so much is how much otherwise like permissible air like much otherwise like permissible air like much otherwise like permissible air like not during a fire or um living in a city not during a fire or um living in a city not during a fire or um living in a city versus a suburb versus uh in a rural versus a suburb versus uh in a rural versus a suburb versus uh in a rural area uh pesticides etc. You know how air area uh pesticides etc. You know how air area uh pesticides etc. You know how air quality impacts our health. You've got a quality impacts our health. You've got a quality impacts our health. You've got a device on the table that literally is device on the table that literally is device on the table that literally is measuring how's our air quality in here measuring how's our air quality in here measuring how's our air quality in here by the way. by the way. by the way. &gt;&gt; Uh you're good. You're at PM 2.5 of &gt;&gt; Uh you're good. You're at PM 2.5 of &gt;&gt; Uh you're good. You're at PM 2.5 of three PM 10 of four. three PM 10 of four. three PM 10 of four. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. which is very low by the way. &gt;&gt; Yeah. which is very low by the way. &gt;&gt; Yeah. which is very low by the way. &gt;&gt; We've turned off the AC for &gt;&gt; We've turned off the AC for &gt;&gt; We've turned off the AC for recording purposes. Afterwards, we tend recording purposes. Afterwards, we tend recording purposes. Afterwards, we tend to ventilate the to ventilate the to ventilate the &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was one earlier. So, uh it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was one earlier. So, uh it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was one earlier. So, uh it's in, &gt;&gt; but we had fires here in LA not long &gt;&gt; but we had fires here in LA not long &gt;&gt; but we had fires here in LA not long ago. How ago. How ago. How &gt;&gt; probably would have gotten to 200, maybe &gt;&gt; probably would have gotten to 200, maybe &gt;&gt; probably would have gotten to 200, maybe more. &gt;&gt; I mean that it was dreadful. &gt;&gt; I mean that it was dreadful. &gt;&gt; I mean that it was dreadful. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; it was really bad. &gt;&gt; it was really bad. &gt;&gt; it was really bad. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And a lot of people and animals are &gt;&gt; And a lot of people and animals are &gt;&gt; And a lot of people and animals are still suffering um symptoms, you know. still suffering um symptoms, you know. still suffering um symptoms, you know. So, um so what's the logic behind this So, um so what's the logic behind this So, um so what's the logic behind this device and what's I mean, I imagine device and what's I mean, I imagine device and what's I mean, I imagine you brought it here for a reason. Well, you brought it here for a reason. Well, you brought it here for a reason. Well, no. I bring it all the time. It's no. I bring it all the time. It's no. I bring it all the time. It's always next to me. always next to me. always next to me. &gt;&gt; Oh, you carry this everywhere? &gt;&gt; Oh, you carry this everywhere? &gt;&gt; Oh, you carry this everywhere? &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I've been doing this for eight &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I've been doing this for eight &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I've been doing this for eight or 10 years now. or 10 years now. or 10 years now. &gt;&gt; And if a restaurant or another space &gt;&gt; And if a restaurant or another space &gt;&gt; And if a restaurant or another space doesn't have uh good air quality, you doesn't have uh good air quality, you doesn't have uh good air quality, you just leave. Is that you just leave. Is that you just leave. Is that &gt;&gt; No. Uh probably &gt;&gt; No. Uh probably &gt;&gt; No. Uh probably &gt;&gt; you inform them and then leave. &gt;&gt; you inform them and then leave. &gt;&gt; you inform them and then leave. &gt;&gt; Uh people ask and I I'm always honest. I &gt;&gt; Uh people ask and I I'm always honest. I &gt;&gt; Uh people ask and I I'm always honest. I tell them what it is. I It hasn't been tell them what it is. I It hasn't been tell them what it is. I It hasn't been so bad. Where it will get bad is during so bad. Where it will get bad is during so bad. Where it will get bad is during the fires, but there are a few times. the fires, but there are a few times. the fires, but there are a few times. Um, so I'm doing it backing up a little Um, so I'm doing it backing up a little Um, so I'm doing it backing up a little bit. It's a very underexplored area and bit. It's a very underexplored area and bit. It's a very underexplored area and that's kind of again the academic side that's kind of again the academic side that's kind of again the academic side of me. I want to understand of me. I want to understand of me. I want to understand how does your environment impact your how does your environment impact your how does your environment impact your health and it's not just air but I health and it's not just air but I health and it's not just air but I that's the area we decide to start in that's the area we decide to start in that's the area we decide to start in and you know what are you breathing and you know what are you breathing and you know what are you breathing right now? You have no idea, right now? You have no idea, right now? You have no idea, &gt;&gt; right? And so that's the principle. I'm &gt;&gt; right? And so that's the principle. I'm &gt;&gt; right? And so that's the principle. I'm a sort of big data guy as you can tell. a sort of big data guy as you can tell. a sort of big data guy as you can tell. I do all these measurements on the I do all these measurements on the I do all these measurements on the inside. What about the outside? And we inside. What about the outside? And we inside. What about the outside? And we know from plenty of work from others you know from plenty of work from others you know from plenty of work from others you mentioned, you know, particulates in the mentioned, you know, particulates in the mentioned, you know, particulates in the air. This is where the PM2.5 that's air. This is where the PM2.5 that's air. This is where the PM2.5 that's thought to be the stuff that penetrates thought to be the stuff that penetrates thought to be the stuff that penetrates your lungs and causes all kinds of your lungs and causes all kinds of your lungs and causes all kinds of problems. &gt;&gt; Goes from the lungs into the bloodstream &gt;&gt; Goes from the lungs into the bloodstream &gt;&gt; Goes from the lungs into the bloodstream and can cross the bloodb brain barrier. and can cross the bloodb brain barrier. and can cross the bloodb brain barrier. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's Yeah. Not good. So &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's Yeah. Not good. So &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's Yeah. Not good. So anyway, the um and these days, as you anyway, the um and these days, as you anyway, the um and these days, as you know, plastics and microplastics have know, plastics and microplastics have know, plastics and microplastics have erupted as a as a pretty big health have erupted as a as a pretty big health have erupted as a as a pretty big health concern, but nobody's 100% sure what it concern, but nobody's 100% sure what it concern, but nobody's 100% sure what it means. But they do know now that when means. But they do know now that when means. But they do know now that when you dissect people's brains of folks who you dissect people's brains of folks who you dissect people's brains of folks who have died, and you'll see microplastics, have died, and you'll see microplastics, have died, and you'll see microplastics, they're everywhere. they're everywhere. they're everywhere. &gt;&gt; Um and so what is it doing to your &gt;&gt; Um and so what is it doing to your &gt;&gt; Um and so what is it doing to your health? I don't think we fully know, but health? I don't think we fully know, but health? I don't think we fully know, but we're starting by just trying to measure we're starting by just trying to measure we're starting by just trying to measure this stuff. So, we've decided to start this stuff. So, we've decided to start this stuff. So, we've decided to start with airborne, but you could argue, you with airborne, but you could argue, you with airborne, but you could argue, you know, what are you drinking? What's in know, what are you drinking? What's in know, what are you drinking? What's in your food? That's all very relevant, by your food? That's all very relevant, by your food? That's all very relevant, by the way. Um, but we'll start with the way. Um, but we'll start with the way. Um, but we'll start with the air. Uh, and so what we're doing air. Uh, and so what we're doing air. Uh, and so what we're doing here, it's not just measuring PM 2.5 and here, it's not just measuring PM 2.5 and here, it's not just measuring PM 2.5 and PM10. It's basically um there's it's a it's It's basically um there's it's a it's It's basically um there's it's a it's sucking up air. There's a pump in here sucking up air. There's a pump in here sucking up air. There's a pump in here and underneath the intake valve there's and underneath the intake valve there's and underneath the intake valve there's a filter that captures all the a filter that captures all the a filter that captures all the particullet like pollen, bacteria, fungi particullet like pollen, bacteria, fungi particullet like pollen, bacteria, fungi and under that there's a chemical and under that there's a chemical and under that there's a chemical absorbent. It's called zeelite. Capture absorbent. It's called zeelite. Capture absorbent. It's called zeelite. Capture is both hydrophobic, hydrophilic, is both hydrophobic, hydrophilic, is both hydrophobic, hydrophilic, positive and negative. Uh and then not positive and negative. Uh and then not positive and negative. Uh and then not in real time but offline we'll measure in real time but offline we'll measure in real time but offline we'll measure all the biologicals like the fungi, the all the biologicals like the fungi, the all the biologicals like the fungi, the pollen, the whatever that's captured on pollen, the whatever that's captured on pollen, the whatever that's captured on the filter and we'll measure the filter and we'll measure the filter and we'll measure the chemicals using something called mass chemicals using something called mass chemicals using something called mass spectrometry the things that have an spectrometry the things that have an spectrometry the things that have an airport that measures you know bombs and airport that measures you know bombs and airport that measures you know bombs and things like that. So, we're trying to things like that. So, we're trying to things like that. So, we're trying to measure that in real time to see what's measure that in real time to see what's measure that in real time to see what's going on. And then we try and correlate going on. And then we try and correlate going on. And then we try and correlate what's outside with what's inside what's outside with what's inside what's outside with what's inside because we'll measure your blood as well because we'll measure your blood as well because we'll measure your blood as well with these deep profiles. And so, what with these deep profiles. And so, what with these deep profiles. And so, what we've discovered is first of all, we've discovered is first of all, we've discovered is first of all, they're you know, you'll be getting they're you know, you'll be getting they're you know, you'll be getting exposed to we for me I'll do one of exposed to we for me I'll do one of exposed to we for me I'll do one of these during the week, one on the these during the week, one on the these during the week, one on the weekend. So it's not we don't do it weekend. So it's not we don't do it weekend. So it's not we don't do it every five minutes kind of thing because every five minutes kind of thing because every five minutes kind of thing because you have to collect enough sample but we you have to collect enough sample but we you have to collect enough sample but we will basically determine you know what will basically determine you know what will basically determine you know what kind of exposure you're getting and kind of exposure you're getting and kind of exposure you're getting and if you're at high risk for certain if you're at high risk for certain if you're at high risk for certain things you may want to know this like things you may want to know this like things you may want to know this like asthma or allergies what are you exposed asthma or allergies what are you exposed asthma or allergies what are you exposed and there I can give you an example I and there I can give you an example I and there I can give you an example I used to have moderate allergies now used to have moderate allergies now used to have moderate allergies now they're pretty mild but because they're pretty mild but because they're pretty mild but because allergies can fluctuate a bit and they allergies can fluctuate a bit and they allergies can fluctuate a bit and they would come every spring and I just would come every spring and I just would come every spring and I just assumed it was pollen assumed it was pollen assumed it was pollen But what is pollen in the end? But I But what is pollen in the end? But I But what is pollen in the end? But I assumed it was pine. But uh when we did assumed it was pine. But uh when we did assumed it was pine. But uh when we did the correlation, well, turns out it the correlation, well, turns out it the correlation, well, turns out it correlates better with eucalyptus. correlates better with eucalyptus. correlates better with eucalyptus. And then it's like, duh, I should have And then it's like, duh, I should have And then it's like, duh, I should have realized this, but um I don't get them realized this, but um I don't get them realized this, but um I don't get them on the northeast where there's no on the northeast where there's no on the northeast where there's no eucalyptus. And so in the end, it makes eucalyptus. And so in the end, it makes eucalyptus. And so in the end, it makes a lot of sense. So, um, that one hasn't a lot of sense. So, um, that one hasn't a lot of sense. So, um, that one hasn't affect my lifestyle, meaning I still affect my lifestyle, meaning I still affect my lifestyle, meaning I still have a big eucalyptus tree out back that have a big eucalyptus tree out back that have a big eucalyptus tree out back that I have not chopped down. Mind you, it's I have not chopped down. Mind you, it's I have not chopped down. Mind you, it's on Stanford land, so I can't do that on Stanford land, so I can't do that on Stanford land, so I can't do that anyway. But, um, yeah, at least I know anyway. But, um, yeah, at least I know anyway. But, um, yeah, at least I know what's going on. Um, but then like on what's going on. Um, but then like on what's going on. Um, but then like on the chemical side, which is very the chemical side, which is very the chemical side, which is very interesting, we discover there's DE interesting, we discover there's DE interesting, we discover there's DE everywhere, even in my office, everywhere, even in my office, everywhere, even in my office, Stanford. DE insect repellent. The Stanford. DE insect repellent. The Stanford. DE insect repellent. The carcinogenic insect repellent. Yes. Uh carcinogenic insect repellent. Yes. Uh carcinogenic insect repellent. Yes. Uh &gt;&gt; I used it years ago when I was a camp &gt;&gt; I used it years ago when I was a camp &gt;&gt; I used it years ago when I was a camp counselor and then one day someone said counselor and then one day someone said counselor and then one day someone said someone on the maintenance staff said someone on the maintenance staff said someone on the maintenance staff said take some DE put it into a Ziploc bag take some DE put it into a Ziploc bag take some DE put it into a Ziploc bag &gt;&gt; and put that Ziploc bag into a glass &gt;&gt; and put that Ziploc bag into a glass &gt;&gt; and put that Ziploc bag into a glass jar. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; I was like okay. And I did that and &gt;&gt; I was like okay. And I did that and &gt;&gt; I was like okay. And I did that and within a few hours the plastic bag was within a few hours the plastic bag was within a few hours the plastic bag was completely disintegrated. completely disintegrated. completely disintegrated. &gt;&gt; Ouch. &gt;&gt; Ouch. &gt;&gt; Ouch. &gt;&gt; And I was slathering that stuff on my &gt;&gt; And I was slathering that stuff on my &gt;&gt; And I was slathering that stuff on my skin way back when skin way back when skin way back when &gt;&gt; and I lived with mosquito bites for the &gt;&gt; and I lived with mosquito bites for the &gt;&gt; and I lived with mosquito bites for the rest of the summer. I'm like, I'm not rest of the summer. I'm like, I'm not rest of the summer. I'm like, I'm not putting this stuff on my skin. putting this stuff on my skin. putting this stuff on my skin. &gt;&gt; Yeah, of course. Now I had to worry &gt;&gt; Yeah, of course. Now I had to worry &gt;&gt; Yeah, of course. Now I had to worry about getting West Nile or something about getting West Nile or something about getting West Nile or something else. &gt;&gt; Not in Yusede. Yeah. You had to worry &gt;&gt; Not in Yusede. Yeah. You had to worry &gt;&gt; Not in Yusede. Yeah. You had to worry about getting jardia. Yeah, about getting jardia. Yeah, about getting jardia. Yeah, &gt;&gt; that's a different issue. &gt;&gt; that's a different issue. &gt;&gt; that's a different issue. &gt;&gt; Yeah. From the water. &gt;&gt; Yeah. From the water. &gt;&gt; Yeah. From the water. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Anyway, we But and same &gt;&gt; Interesting. Anyway, we But and same &gt;&gt; Interesting. Anyway, we But and same with pesticides are most places. with pesticides are most places. with pesticides are most places. &gt;&gt; Uh and carcinogens of course are &gt;&gt; Uh and carcinogens of course are &gt;&gt; Uh and carcinogens of course are everywhere, but their types vary and the everywhere, but their types vary and the everywhere, but their types vary and the amounts vary a lot. So like when I was amounts vary a lot. So like when I was amounts vary a lot. So like when I was when I'm in UC Davis giving talks or when I'm in UC Davis giving talks or when I'm in UC Davis giving talks or something, I get a pesticide exposure. something, I get a pesticide exposure. something, I get a pesticide exposure. Yeah. Because all the fields are out Yeah. Because all the fields are out Yeah. Because all the fields are out there. Yeah. And same with when I was in there. Yeah. And same with when I was in there. Yeah. And same with when I was in Fresno. So you can see these Fresno. So you can see these Fresno. So you can see these correlations and so that's what correlations and so that's what correlations and so that's what we're doing. We'll measure what's where we're doing. We'll measure what's where we're doing. We'll measure what's where and then we'll measure how does that and then we'll measure how does that and then we'll measure how does that relate to what's going on inside. So we relate to what's going on inside. So we relate to what's going on inside. So we can see what microbes are outside can see what microbes are outside can see what microbes are outside relating to inflammation markers like relating to inflammation markers like relating to inflammation markers like cytoines, things like that on the cytoines, things like that on the cytoines, things like that on the inside. And same with uh some of the inside. And same with uh some of the inside. And same with uh some of the chemical markers like your glucose chemical markers like your glucose chemical markers like your glucose levels. And right now that's mostly been levels. And right now that's mostly been levels. And right now that's mostly been built those models around me. But we're built those models around me. But we're built those models around me. But we're trying to run the study with a lot of trying to run the study with a lot of trying to run the study with a lot of people. Uh so we can first of all even people. Uh so we can first of all even people. Uh so we can first of all even break it down further. What's the break it down further. What's the break it down further. What's the difference between your kitchen and your difference between your kitchen and your difference between your kitchen and your living room and outside your house? And living room and outside your house? And living room and outside your house? And the same thing, how does that relate to the same thing, how does that relate to the same thing, how does that relate to some of the levels of key markers, your some of the levels of key markers, your some of the levels of key markers, your metabolites, your um inflammatory metabolites, your um inflammatory metabolites, your um inflammatory markers. So we want to correlate markers. So we want to correlate markers. So we want to correlate that. We know studies from others uh that. We know studies from others uh that. We know studies from others uh have shown right pesticides correlate have shown right pesticides correlate have shown right pesticides correlate with Parkinson's and things like this. with Parkinson's and things like this. with Parkinson's and things like this. So we want to um see what's going on So we want to um see what's going on So we want to um see what's going on there. I can tell you some fun stuff there. I can tell you some fun stuff there. I can tell you some fun stuff that we just made. Again, these are all that we just made. Again, these are all that we just made. Again, these are all correlations. Now we do something called correlations. Now we do something called correlations. Now we do something called mediation analysis. I can let you get a mediation analysis. I can let you get a mediation analysis. I can let you get a little better about causality, not proof little better about causality, not proof little better about causality, not proof in many cases, but it's better idea. in many cases, but it's better idea. in many cases, but it's better idea. Anyway, here's a fun thing we Anyway, here's a fun thing we Anyway, here's a fun thing we discovered. We found a correlation discovered. We found a correlation discovered. We found a correlation between something called pyodine which between something called pyodine which between something called pyodine which is used to be common in paints and it's is used to be common in paints and it's is used to be common in paints and it's in other places too. They've recently in other places too. They've recently in other places too. They've recently don't put it in paints but purodine don't put it in paints but purodine don't put it in paints but purodine exposures are associated with lack of exposures are associated with lack of exposures are associated with lack of fungi meaning I have more bacterial fungi meaning I have more bacterial fungi meaning I have more bacterial plant or other exposure. So my house was plant or other exposure. So my house was plant or other exposure. So my house was painted by a green guy. No purodine in painted by a green guy. No purodine in painted by a green guy. No purodine in the paints there. So I get a fungal the paints there. So I get a fungal the paints there. So I get a fungal exposure when I'm at home. And so is exposure when I'm at home. And so is exposure when I'm at home. And so is that good or bad? I don't know. But that good or bad? I don't know. But that good or bad? I don't know. But imagine I was very allergic to black imagine I was very allergic to black imagine I was very allergic to black mold. So maybe I do want purity in my mold. So maybe I do want purity in my mold. So maybe I do want purity in my plate. &gt;&gt; I know a lot of people who struggle with &gt;&gt; I know a lot of people who struggle with &gt;&gt; I know a lot of people who struggle with mold. &gt;&gt; We can make that association with the &gt;&gt; We can make that association with the &gt;&gt; We can make that association with the allergies, of course. Anyway, you get allergies, of course. Anyway, you get allergies, of course. Anyway, you get the idea. We're trying to correlate the idea. We're trying to correlate the idea. We're trying to correlate what's going on the outside with the what's going on the outside with the what's going on the outside with the inside. Well, in that case with inside. Well, in that case with inside. Well, in that case with other outside things, but later with the other outside things, but later with the other outside things, but later with the inside. So um yeah where measurements inside. So um yeah where measurements inside. So um yeah where measurements will make these things that'll lead to will make these things that'll lead to will make these things that'll lead to hypotheses that we could then probably hypotheses that we could then probably hypotheses that we could then probably test by either mouse models or in humans test by either mouse models or in humans test by either mouse models or in humans who live in certain places who wind up who live in certain places who wind up who live in certain places who wind up sort of testing whether they're trying sort of testing whether they're trying sort of testing whether they're trying to or not. Imagine you live near you to or not. Imagine you live near you to or not. Imagine you live near you know obviously you live near certain know obviously you live near certain know obviously you live near certain areas you will see uh if you live near areas you will see uh if you live near areas you will see uh if you live near you know mines you will see autoimmune you know mines you will see autoimmune you know mines you will see autoimmune disease things like that. So we can try disease things like that. So we can try disease things like that. So we can try and make these associations and then you and make these associations and then you and make these associations and then you correlate with similar people who aren't correlate with similar people who aren't correlate with similar people who aren't living their minds to you know try to living their minds to you know try to living their minds to you know try to test that. test that. test that. &gt;&gt; I love that you're linking outside &gt;&gt; I love that you're linking outside &gt;&gt; I love that you're linking outside environment with internal you know environment with internal you know environment with internal you know &gt;&gt; I feel like it's a totally unexplored &gt;&gt; I feel like it's a totally unexplored &gt;&gt; I feel like it's a totally unexplored area and a pretty important one. area and a pretty important one. area and a pretty important one. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think the fires in LA &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think the fires in LA &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think the fires in LA among other things have sensitized among other things have sensitized among other things have sensitized people to this notion of air quality um people to this notion of air quality um people to this notion of air quality um in a real way. Um, it's a shame it took in a real way. Um, it's a shame it took in a real way. Um, it's a shame it took that. Um, but it does seem to be a theme that. Um, but it does seem to be a theme that. Um, but it does seem to be a theme that's persisting. People are starting that's persisting. People are starting that's persisting. People are starting to think about like, yeah, how clean to think about like, yeah, how clean to think about like, yeah, how clean or dirty is my air. And I think the or dirty is my air. And I think the or dirty is my air. And I think the interest and emphasis on microplastics interest and emphasis on microplastics interest and emphasis on microplastics recently, right? recently, right? recently, right? &gt;&gt; Um, is interesting. I did an episode &gt;&gt; Um, is interesting. I did an episode &gt;&gt; Um, is interesting. I did an episode about microplastics, we had Shauna Swan about microplastics, we had Shauna Swan about microplastics, we had Shauna Swan on the podcast. I mean, I think on the podcast. I mean, I think on the podcast. I mean, I think &gt;&gt; it's been known for a long time that &gt;&gt; it's been known for a long time that &gt;&gt; it's been known for a long time that these microplastics, BPAs, and phalates, these microplastics, BPAs, and phalates, these microplastics, BPAs, and phalates, so-called forever chemicals, have been so-called forever chemicals, have been so-called forever chemicals, have been an issue. I think that um people are now an issue. I think that um people are now an issue. I think that um people are now just shocked to learn how many of these just shocked to learn how many of these just shocked to learn how many of these things we've accumulated and maintained things we've accumulated and maintained things we've accumulated and maintained in our body in our body in our body &gt;&gt; and they're all over our body too. &gt;&gt; and they're all over our body too. &gt;&gt; and they're all over our body too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the health effects are still &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the health effects are still &gt;&gt; Yeah. And the health effects are still unclear, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; I mean, it's really unclear. &gt;&gt; I mean, it's really unclear. &gt;&gt; I mean, it's really unclear. &gt;&gt; They've been talked about endocrine &gt;&gt; They've been talked about endocrine &gt;&gt; They've been talked about endocrine disruptors and things like this. Yeah. disruptors and things like this. Yeah. disruptors and things like this. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I mean, I filter my water and um uh I &gt;&gt; I mean, I filter my water and um uh I &gt;&gt; I mean, I filter my water and um uh I try not to drink out of plastic try not to drink out of plastic try not to drink out of plastic disposable bottles. Um that seems to be disposable bottles. Um that seems to be disposable bottles. Um that seems to be an important one. And but you know, an important one. And but you know, an important one. And but you know, there was there was there was &gt;&gt; I've only recently switched. I should &gt;&gt; I've only recently switched. I should &gt;&gt; I've only recently switched. I should have done it. We should have done it have done it. We should have done it have done it. We should have done it years ago, right? But there's a recent years ago, right? But there's a recent years ago, right? But there's a recent study showing that actually the glass study showing that actually the glass study showing that actually the glass bottles contain more microplastics than bottles contain more microplastics than bottles contain more microplastics than plastic bottles because of the what's on plastic bottles because of the what's on plastic bottles because of the what's on the lines, the underside of the caps. I the lines, the underside of the caps. I the lines, the underside of the caps. I see. &gt;&gt; But what's less discussed around that &gt;&gt; But what's less discussed around that &gt;&gt; But what's less discussed around that study is that was focused on the study is that was focused on the study is that was focused on the glass and plastic cap configuration in glass and plastic cap configuration in glass and plastic cap configuration in Europe. It's different here. So, it's Europe. It's different here. So, it's Europe. It's different here. So, it's like it really needs to be it's like it really needs to be it's like it really needs to be explored. I think simple ways to measure explored. I think simple ways to measure explored. I think simple ways to measure one's own environment using sensors like one's own environment using sensors like one's own environment using sensors like the one that you have here for the air the one that you have here for the air the one that you have here for the air uh as well as for water um can be uh as well as for water um can be uh as well as for water um can be really important. Um so I'm really important. Um so I'm really important. Um so I'm grateful that you're commercializing so grateful that you're commercializing so grateful that you're commercializing so many of these things. I can tell you many of these things. I can tell you many of these things. I can tell you are a data guy but the fact that you are a data guy but the fact that you are a data guy but the fact that you translate things into real world tools translate things into real world tools translate things into real world tools is so valuable. Speaking of which, um is so valuable. Speaking of which, um is so valuable. Speaking of which, um I'm going to be very direct about this. I'm going to be very direct about this. I'm going to be very direct about this. uh two Stanford faculty talking about two Stanford faculty talking about two Stanford faculty talking about measuring lots of biomarkers from a measuring lots of biomarkers from a measuring lots of biomarkers from a single drop of blood. Screams of single drop of blood. Screams of single drop of blood. Screams of Theronos, let's just call it what it is Theronos, let's just call it what it is Theronos, let's just call it what it is and not dance around it. Uh which was a and not dance around it. Uh which was a and not dance around it. Uh which was a um spectacular failure uh that involved um spectacular failure uh that involved um spectacular failure uh that involved apparently at least the courts decided apparently at least the courts decided apparently at least the courts decided um seems there was a lot of corruption um seems there was a lot of corruption um seems there was a lot of corruption and lying and stuff there. However, that and lying and stuff there. However, that and lying and stuff there. However, that was some years ago and you were not was some years ago and you were not was some years ago and you were not involved with that. And so the involved with that. And so the involved with that. And so the technology has now evolved to the point technology has now evolved to the point technology has now evolved to the point where my understanding is that you are where my understanding is that you are where my understanding is that you are able to measure lots of biomarkers from able to measure lots of biomarkers from able to measure lots of biomarkers from a single drop of blood, a single drop of blood, a single drop of blood, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; thousands. &gt;&gt; thousands. &gt;&gt; thousands. &gt;&gt; Thousands. So that's exciting. Um &gt;&gt; Thousands. So that's exciting. Um &gt;&gt; Thousands. So that's exciting. Um because no one likes to get their blood because no one likes to get their blood because no one likes to get their blood drawn. I guess if there might be a drawn. I guess if there might be a drawn. I guess if there might be a subset of people, but uh so tell us subset of people, but uh so tell us subset of people, but uh so tell us about that. Like what is that um about that. Like what is that um about that. Like what is that um pursuit called? uh what are you pursuit called? uh what are you pursuit called? uh what are you measuring? Why are you measuring it? And measuring? Why are you measuring it? And measuring? Why are you measuring it? And and maybe underscore the real value and maybe underscore the real value and maybe underscore the real value of like single drop of blood analysis. of like single drop of blood analysis. of like single drop of blood analysis. &gt;&gt; First of all, we don't get measured very &gt;&gt; First of all, we don't get measured very &gt;&gt; First of all, we don't get measured very often when we're healthy. Uh this idea often when we're healthy. Uh this idea often when we're healthy. Uh this idea that we mostly practice sick care, not that we mostly practice sick care, not that we mostly practice sick care, not health care. And why do you go to health care. And why do you go to health care. And why do you go to physician all the time when you're physician all the time when you're physician all the time when you're healthy to get measured? I think that's healthy to get measured? I think that's healthy to get measured? I think that's a barrier to getting measured. So, can a barrier to getting measured. So, can a barrier to getting measured. So, can we come up with more, you know, fasile we come up with more, you know, fasile we come up with more, you know, fasile ways of measuring people? Well, the ways of measuring people? Well, the ways of measuring people? Well, the wearables are obviously one and they're wearables are obviously one and they're wearables are obviously one and they're perfect because they're, you know, perfect because they're, you know, perfect because they're, you know, passive monitoring and continuous. So, passive monitoring and continuous. So, passive monitoring and continuous. So, you're really collecting a lot of data you're really collecting a lot of data you're really collecting a lot of data just in the background. I mean, the just in the background. I mean, the just in the background. I mean, the inconvenience is wearing them, charging inconvenience is wearing them, charging inconvenience is wearing them, charging these things, but um we don't measure these things, but um we don't measure these things, but um we don't measure what's on the inside. And I think that what's on the inside. And I think that what's on the inside. And I think that still has value and the idea about still has value and the idea about still has value and the idea about trying to set up home tests for this trying to set up home tests for this trying to set up home tests for this sort of thing, I think, is powerful. So, sort of thing, I think, is powerful. So, sort of thing, I think, is powerful. So, that was the motivation that was the that was the motivation that was the that was the motivation that was the motivation for Theronos, I think, too. motivation for Theronos, I think, too. motivation for Theronos, I think, too. uh and our you know shick if you will uh and our you know shick if you will uh and our you know shick if you will was to try and do this but um we're not was to try and do this but um we're not was to try and do this but um we're not trying to measure the exact clinical trying to measure the exact clinical trying to measure the exact clinical values because some of that is hard. How values because some of that is hard. How values because some of that is hard. How do you measure LDL droplets in micro do you measure LDL droplets in micro do you measure LDL droplets in micro samples? It's probably doable but it's a samples? It's probably doable but it's a samples? It's probably doable but it's a lot trickier. We were just trying to it lot trickier. We were just trying to it lot trickier. We were just trying to it fits with our idea of doing deep data fits with our idea of doing deep data fits with our idea of doing deep data profiles on little drops of blood. And profiles on little drops of blood. And profiles on little drops of blood. And the key is to find a format that would the key is to find a format that would the key is to find a format that would keep the analytes as we call them keep the analytes as we call them keep the analytes as we call them the molecules stable. And so we tested the molecules stable. And so we tested the molecules stable. And so we tested we spent seven years actually trying we spent seven years actually trying we spent seven years actually trying different things finding formats. The different things finding formats. The different things finding formats. The old format was to do use paper actually old format was to do use paper actually old format was to do use paper actually cellulose to collect the stuff and that cellulose to collect the stuff and that cellulose to collect the stuff and that doesn't work very well. The the analytes doesn't work very well. The the analytes doesn't work very well. The the analytes oxidize. It's a mess. And so ultimately oxidize. It's a mess. And so ultimately oxidize. It's a mess. And so ultimately we test a lot of things out there. We we test a lot of things out there. We we test a lot of things out there. We were trying to invent a few of our own were trying to invent a few of our own were trying to invent a few of our own and the net result was we did settle and the net result was we did settle and the net result was we did settle on some that were out there, tested on some that were out there, tested on some that were out there, tested them. They're being used in a more them. They're being used in a more them. They're being used in a more limited fashion. Then we showed you limited fashion. Then we showed you limited fashion. Then we showed you could actually do the kinds of things we could actually do the kinds of things we could actually do the kinds of things we do the metabolomics is called lipidomics do the metabolomics is called lipidomics do the metabolomics is called lipidomics uh and proteomics and again with uh and proteomics and again with uh and proteomics and again with certain configurations the proteins turn certain configurations the proteins turn certain configurations the proteins turn most of them are quite stable not 100% most of them are quite stable not 100% most of them are quite stable not 100% but most are we can measure all this. um but most are we can measure all this. um but most are we can measure all this. um metabolites, same thing. Most are metabolites, same thing. Most are metabolites, same thing. Most are lipids, some are, some aren't. So, we lipids, some are, some aren't. So, we lipids, some are, some aren't. So, we figured out which ones are, which ones figured out which ones are, which ones figured out which ones are, which ones aren't. And then we basically did just aren't. And then we basically did just aren't. And then we basically did just that. We we showed you could do this, that. We we showed you could do this, that. We we showed you could do this, did fun experiments like my case, we did fun experiments like my case, we did fun experiments like my case, we took a sample every hour for seven took a sample every hour for seven took a sample every hour for seven straight days to try and correlate straight days to try and correlate straight days to try and correlate &gt;&gt; around the clock. &gt;&gt; around the clock. &gt;&gt; around the clock. &gt;&gt; Well, at night when I was sleeping, no. &gt;&gt; Well, at night when I was sleeping, no. &gt;&gt; Well, at night when I was sleeping, no. But although when I did wake up, I would But although when I did wake up, I would But although when I did wake up, I would take a sample sometimes. Yeah. take a sample sometimes. Yeah. take a sample sometimes. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Oh, it's just a drop. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's just a drop. &gt;&gt; Oh, it's just a drop. &gt;&gt; Yeah. not so great for sleep disruption &gt;&gt; Yeah. not so great for sleep disruption &gt;&gt; Yeah. not so great for sleep disruption I suppose but anyway the um and the idea I suppose but anyway the um and the idea I suppose but anyway the um and the idea there was to correlate you know what's there was to correlate you know what's there was to correlate you know what's going on with and I was wearing a going on with and I was wearing a going on with and I was wearing a CGM and a smartwatch like a follow CGM and a smartwatch like a follow CGM and a smartwatch like a follow activity doing food logging all that activity doing food logging all that activity doing food logging all that sort of stuff and then the end we're sort of stuff and then the end we're sort of stuff and then the end we're trying to correlate basically people's trying to correlate basically people's trying to correlate basically people's activities and phys people's biochemistry and phys people's biochemistry and phys people's biochemistry and physiology with their activities and physiology with their activities and physiology with their activities and heart rate and things like that and heart rate and things like that and heart rate and things like that and so we found literally thousands of so we found literally thousands of so we found literally thousands of correlations It's pretty cool. A lot of correlations It's pretty cool. A lot of correlations It's pretty cool. A lot of which is known right after your which is known right after your which is known right after your insulin goes up after your glucose. But insulin goes up after your glucose. But insulin goes up after your glucose. But we can precisely measure we for me it's we can precisely measure we for me it's we can precisely measure we for me it's 10 minutes. We know exactly the 10 minutes. We know exactly the 10 minutes. We know exactly the magnitude with certain kinds of food and magnitude with certain kinds of food and magnitude with certain kinds of food and that sort of thing. Uh we also that sort of thing. Uh we also that sort of thing. Uh we also discovered I don't know if this will go discovered I don't know if this will go discovered I don't know if this will go anywhere but we're pursuing it. anywhere but we're pursuing it. anywhere but we're pursuing it. Alphasucine which is involved in Alphasucine which is involved in Alphasucine which is involved in Parkinson's and dementia actually showed Parkinson's and dementia actually showed Parkinson's and dementia actually showed an interesting pattern. that seem to an interesting pattern. that seem to an interesting pattern. that seem to fluctuate with stress actually fluctuate with stress actually fluctuate with stress actually &gt;&gt; goes up with stress. &gt;&gt; goes up with stress. &gt;&gt; goes up with stress. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that's what we're trying to &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that's what we're trying to &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that's what we're trying to figure out what kinds of stress. So, I figure out what kinds of stress. So, I figure out what kinds of stress. So, I don't think we have that sorted out yet. don't think we have that sorted out yet. don't think we have that sorted out yet. Um, yeah. So, anyway, I'll leave it at Um, yeah. So, anyway, I'll leave it at Um, yeah. So, anyway, I'll leave it at that because we don't have it all that because we don't have it all that because we don't have it all sorted. But, so that's the thing. We're sorted. But, so that's the thing. We're sorted. But, so that's the thing. We're trying to measure that, see exactly what trying to measure that, see exactly what trying to measure that, see exactly what it correlates with, and then maybe it correlates with, and then maybe it correlates with, and then maybe that's a useful assay for trying to that's a useful assay for trying to that's a useful assay for trying to manage that and therefore push off manage that and therefore push off manage that and therefore push off dementia. That's the hypothesis. No dementia. That's the hypothesis. No dementia. That's the hypothesis. No guarantee that's right. But these are guarantee that's right. But these are guarantee that's right. But these are the kinds of observations we make that the kinds of observations we make that the kinds of observations we make that I'd like to see if they turn into I'd like to see if they turn into I'd like to see if they turn into real world value that we could then help real world value that we could then help real world value that we could then help you know maybe have get out there to you know maybe have get out there to you know maybe have get out there to help people in some fashion or help people in some fashion or help people in some fashion or &gt;&gt; very cool. &gt;&gt; very cool. &gt;&gt; very cool. &gt;&gt; So this is the kind of stuff we do and &gt;&gt; So this is the kind of stuff we do and &gt;&gt; So this is the kind of stuff we do and these are what you're calling these are what you're calling these are what you're calling observational trials. Take deep data observational trials. Take deep data observational trials. Take deep data measurements on people to better see measurements on people to better see measurements on people to better see what's going on, make hypotheses and what's going on, make hypotheses and what's going on, make hypotheses and then Yeah. ideally roll it out into the then Yeah. ideally roll it out into the then Yeah. ideally roll it out into the real world. real world. real world. &gt;&gt; I love it. Well, let's go further into &gt;&gt; I love it. Well, let's go further into &gt;&gt; I love it. Well, let's go further into what most people consider kind of what most people consider kind of what most people consider kind of esoteric, at least in this half of the esoteric, at least in this half of the esoteric, at least in this half of the world, but it's not really um esoteric world, but it's not really um esoteric world, but it's not really um esoteric at all. Has tremendous precedent, which at all. Has tremendous precedent, which at all. Has tremendous precedent, which is acupuncture. is acupuncture. is acupuncture. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Um I think for people who know, uh &gt;&gt; Um I think for people who know, uh &gt;&gt; Um I think for people who know, uh acupuncture makes perfect sense as acupuncture makes perfect sense as acupuncture makes perfect sense as something that would be a valuable tool, something that would be a valuable tool, something that would be a valuable tool, right? thousands of years of data uh and right? thousands of years of data uh and right? thousands of years of data uh and practice um less known about and practice um less known about and practice um less known about mechanism but Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard mechanism but Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard mechanism but Chufu Ma's lab at Harvard in recent years has been studying how in recent years has been studying how in recent years has been studying how different needle configurations um different needle configurations um different needle configurations um impact different organs that's in mouse impact different organs that's in mouse impact different organs that's in mouse models but you know different models but you know different models but you know different inflammatory molecules or inflammatory molecules or inflammatory molecules or anti-inflammatory molecules. So there's anti-inflammatory molecules. So there's anti-inflammatory molecules. So there's some mechanistic data starting to come some mechanistic data starting to come some mechanistic data starting to come out. You have an interesting story about out. You have an interesting story about out. You have an interesting story about acupuncture and um and perhaps what it acupuncture and um and perhaps what it acupuncture and um and perhaps what it can uh offer or not offer in terms of can uh offer or not offer in terms of can uh offer or not offer in terms of health support. I'm down on of health support. I'm down on of health support. I'm down on sabbatical at UC Irvine with Shyista sabbatical at UC Irvine with Shyista sabbatical at UC Irvine with Shyista Malik who uh runs an integrative health Malik who uh runs an integrative health Malik who uh runs an integrative health institute where they bring in nutrition, institute where they bring in nutrition, institute where they bring in nutrition, exercise, and things like acupuncture exercise, and things like acupuncture exercise, and things like acupuncture into trying to better manage people's into trying to better manage people's into trying to better manage people's health and lives. And it's been very health and lives. And it's been very health and lives. And it's been very fascinating for me because they're doing fascinating for me because they're doing fascinating for me because they're doing it on the clinical side. I'm kind of a it on the clinical side. I'm kind of a it on the clinical side. I'm kind of a big data measurement guy and uh and so I big data measurement guy and uh and so I big data measurement guy and uh and so I want to see what's going on, if there's want to see what's going on, if there's want to see what's going on, if there's ways that makes sense to collaborate. ways that makes sense to collaborate. ways that makes sense to collaborate. And as you point out, acupuncture has And as you point out, acupuncture has And as you point out, acupuncture has been around for 3,000 years or some been around for 3,000 years or some been around for 3,000 years or some incredible number. There must be incredible number. There must be incredible number. There must be something to it, right? People use it a something to it, right? People use it a something to it, right? People use it a lot for pain and apparently for lot for pain and apparently for lot for pain and apparently for fertility and other things as well. fertility and other things as well. fertility and other things as well. &gt;&gt; It's shown to be effective in a number &gt;&gt; It's shown to be effective in a number &gt;&gt; It's shown to be effective in a number of domains. And I've had quote unquote of domains. And I've had quote unquote of domains. And I've had quote unquote standard MDs, including our director of standard MDs, including our director of standard MDs, including our director of pain medicine, Sean Mackey, on this pain medicine, Sean Mackey, on this pain medicine, Sean Mackey, on this podcast, is like, "Yep, there is podcast, is like, "Yep, there is podcast, is like, "Yep, there is evidence acupuncture can work." evidence acupuncture can work." evidence acupuncture can work." &gt;&gt; And there are plenty of people swear by &gt;&gt; And there are plenty of people swear by &gt;&gt; And there are plenty of people swear by it. And and she uses it for blood it. And and she uses it for blood it. And and she uses it for blood pressure. Okay. for blood pressure pressure. Okay. for blood pressure pressure. Okay. for blood pressure management. So, I run a little high on management. So, I run a little high on management. So, I run a little high on the blood pressure. Not nobody's overly the blood pressure. Not nobody's overly the blood pressure. Not nobody's overly panicked. Um, but you know, I tend to be panicked. Um, but you know, I tend to be panicked. Um, but you know, I tend to be in the high 130s, but I guess because it in the high 130s, but I guess because it in the high 130s, but I guess because it was getting a very large grain out, I was getting a very large grain out, I was getting a very large grain out, I was in the low 140s. And so, I was in the low 140s. And so, I was in the low 140s. And so, I measured myself right before measured myself right before measured myself right before acupuncture, you know, um, very specific acupuncture, you know, um, very specific acupuncture, you know, um, very specific time of day with my moderate home. And time of day with my moderate home. And time of day with my moderate home. And uh yeah, I was running 140 over the low uh yeah, I was running 140 over the low uh yeah, I was running 140 over the low 80s, something like 82, 83. Did you know 80s, something like 82, 83. Did you know 80s, something like 82, 83. Did you know five measurements? So did the five measurements? So did the five measurements? So did the acupuncture, which is designed for blood acupuncture, which is designed for blood acupuncture, which is designed for blood pressure and diabetes. And maybe I can pressure and diabetes. And maybe I can pressure and diabetes. And maybe I can go off the jail piece if all this works. go off the jail piece if all this works. go off the jail piece if all this works. But anyway, the next day I measured it But anyway, the next day I measured it But anyway, the next day I measured it the exact same time and son of a gun, it the exact same time and son of a gun, it the exact same time and son of a gun, it was 25 points lower. The high teams like was 25 points lower. The high teams like was 25 points lower. The high teams like 118 kind of. It was unbelievable. I can 118 kind of. It was unbelievable. I can 118 kind of. It was unbelievable. I can show you the data. show you the data. show you the data. &gt;&gt; Uh and the other went to like 72, &gt;&gt; Uh and the other went to like 72, &gt;&gt; Uh and the other went to like 72, right? some the diastolic. So I just right? some the diastolic. So I just right? some the diastolic. So I just with one treatment that was with one treatment that was with one treatment that was electroactive puncture I should say. So electroactive puncture I should say. So electroactive puncture I should say. So they zap you. they zap you. they zap you. &gt;&gt; Um and they yeah had 30ome points and &gt;&gt; Um and they yeah had 30ome points and &gt;&gt; Um and they yeah had 30ome points and they've added a few more since you and they've added a few more since you and they've added a few more since you do it every week for eight weeks. So do it every week for eight weeks. So do it every week for eight weeks. So I've now done four of these things I've now done four of these things I've now done four of these things &gt;&gt; and I can tell you that my blood &gt;&gt; and I can tell you that my blood &gt;&gt; and I can tell you that my blood pressure stayed low. It's running in pressure stayed low. It's running in pressure stayed low. It's running in this one high 11s maybe 120 uh which is this one high 11s maybe 120 uh which is this one high 11s maybe 120 uh which is pretty good roughly where you want to be pretty good roughly where you want to be pretty good roughly where you want to be and the other is always around maybe 74 and the other is always around maybe 74 and the other is always around maybe 74 so it's like so it's like so it's like &gt;&gt; it was never running like that before I &gt;&gt; it was never running like that before I &gt;&gt; it was never running like that before I can show you my data can show you my data can show you my data &gt;&gt; great &gt;&gt; great &gt;&gt; great &gt;&gt; it's pretty incredible so it does seem &gt;&gt; it's pretty incredible so it does seem &gt;&gt; it's pretty incredible so it does seem to be working now how long does it last to be working now how long does it last to be working now how long does it last I'm only halfway through my treatments I I'm only halfway through my treatments I I'm only halfway through my treatments I don't know but I will track all this don't know but I will track all this don't know but I will track all this stuff right so I'm a responder no stuff right so I'm a responder no stuff right so I'm a responder no question to this treatment that I love question to this treatment that I love question to this treatment that I love hearing it. I haven't done acupuncture hearing it. I haven't done acupuncture hearing it. I haven't done acupuncture in years. So it's and I've you have done in years. So it's and I've you have done in years. So it's and I've you have done it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Years ago when I was a posttock a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Years ago when I was a posttock a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Years ago when I was a posttock a stressful time in my life and then a stressful time in my life and then a stressful time in my life and then a junior professor also stressful time in junior professor also stressful time in junior professor also stressful time in my life you know a lot of uncertainty my life you know a lot of uncertainty my life you know a lot of uncertainty right in grants and things of that sort. right in grants and things of that sort. right in grants and things of that sort. Um my sister suggested I go see a my sister suggested I go see a my sister suggested I go see a acupuncturist and I got a lot out of it acupuncturist and I got a lot out of it acupuncturist and I got a lot out of it in terms of stress reduction. We'll put in terms of stress reduction. We'll put in terms of stress reduction. We'll put it a link to it in the show not captions it a link to it in the show not captions it a link to it in the show not captions but I'll also send you these papers from but I'll also send you these papers from but I'll also send you these papers from Chufu Ma's lab that I mentioned a few Chufu Ma's lab that I mentioned a few Chufu Ma's lab that I mentioned a few moments ago. First of all, not that this moments ago. First of all, not that this moments ago. First of all, not that this means everything, but published as means everything, but published as means everything, but published as articles and letters in nature which has articles and letters in nature which has articles and letters in nature which has a very high bar for you know for sure a very high bar for you know for sure a very high bar for you know for sure not most papers get rejected obviously not most papers get rejected obviously not most papers get rejected obviously as you know um and what they found is as you know um and what they found is as you know um and what they found is interesting that the combination interesting that the combination interesting that the combination of needle placements turns out to be of needle placements turns out to be of needle placements turns out to be vitally important. So in this one paper vitally important. So in this one paper vitally important. So in this one paper that Chufu has, he shows that for that Chufu has, he shows that for that Chufu has, he shows that for instance, if the if the needles are instance, if the if the needles are instance, if the if the needles are inserted into like the equivalent of inserted into like the equivalent of inserted into like the equivalent of like the palm area and the foot area and like the palm area and the foot area and like the palm area and the foot area and some flank area, you get an increase in some flank area, you get an increase in some flank area, you get an increase in inflammatory cytoines. Whereas if you inflammatory cytoines. Whereas if you inflammatory cytoines. Whereas if you change that combination, you get a change that combination, you get a change that combination, you get a decrease in inflammatory cytoines. But decrease in inflammatory cytoines. But decrease in inflammatory cytoines. But what's really beautiful about these what's really beautiful about these what's really beautiful about these papers is he maps it to um specific papers is he maps it to um specific papers is he maps it to um specific output from the spleen output from the spleen output from the spleen &gt;&gt; regulated by the vagus nerve regulated &gt;&gt; regulated by the vagus nerve regulated &gt;&gt; regulated by the vagus nerve regulated by the um these receptors at the level by the um these receptors at the level by the um these receptors at the level of the skin. So mechanistically it all of the skin. So mechanistically it all of the skin. So mechanistically it all makes sense. It's just that these makes sense. It's just that these makes sense. It's just that these thousands of years of charts and thousands of years of charts and thousands of years of charts and data that have been collected in humans, data that have been collected in humans, data that have been collected in humans, you know, clinical practice has never you know, clinical practice has never you know, clinical practice has never been parsed mechanistically. So I'm 100% been parsed mechanistically. So I'm 100% been parsed mechanistically. So I'm 100% a believer that there's a mechanistic a believer that there's a mechanistic a believer that there's a mechanistic basis that it's not just all placebo. basis that it's not just all placebo. basis that it's not just all placebo. some of it might be placebo much like some of it might be placebo much like some of it might be placebo much like &gt;&gt; some of the GLP appetite suppression &gt;&gt; some of the GLP appetite suppression &gt;&gt; some of the GLP appetite suppression might be placebo but a lot of it might be placebo but a lot of it might be placebo but a lot of it probably isn't. So um in any case I'm a probably isn't. So um in any case I'm a probably isn't. So um in any case I'm a I'm a fan of the rigorous exploration of I'm a fan of the rigorous exploration of I'm a fan of the rigorous exploration of things that have been thought to work things that have been thought to work things that have been thought to work for many years and it's always for many years and it's always for many years and it's always gratifying when you see ah like here's a gratifying when you see ah like here's a gratifying when you see ah like here's a mechanism &gt;&gt; it really does work I mean I go into the &gt;&gt; it really does work I mean I go into the &gt;&gt; it really does work I mean I go into the stuff completely open it may not work stuff completely open it may not work stuff completely open it may not work &gt;&gt; and I don't know I didn't even she said &gt;&gt; and I don't know I didn't even she said &gt;&gt; and I don't know I didn't even she said oh because first of all she said well oh because first of all she said well oh because first of all she said well just try acupuncture I wasn't even sure just try acupuncture I wasn't even sure just try acupuncture I wasn't even sure what kind she was going to try so in the what kind she was going to try so in the what kind she was going to try so in the end she said oh yeah we'll do blood end she said oh yeah we'll do blood end she said oh yeah we'll do blood pressure and diabetes now they've added pressure and diabetes now they've added pressure and diabetes now they've added on some stress on some stress on some stress points as well. And I don't consider points as well. And I don't consider points as well. And I don't consider myself uh I'm probably in a high stress myself uh I'm probably in a high stress myself uh I'm probably in a high stress job, but I don't consider myself a very job, but I don't consider myself a very job, but I don't consider myself a very stressful person. stressful person. stressful person. &gt;&gt; You don't seem stressed. &gt;&gt; You don't seem stressed. &gt;&gt; You don't seem stressed. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think I generally handle all &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think I generally handle all &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think I generally handle all right. But anyway, they're putting all right. But anyway, they're putting all right. But anyway, they're putting all these things on me and I didn't know I these things on me and I didn't know I these things on me and I didn't know I was you 24 hours later. Is it going to was you 24 hours later. Is it going to was you 24 hours later. Is it going to work or I don't know. But the data, I work or I don't know. But the data, I work or I don't know. But the data, I mean, that was a pretty big jump, right? mean, that was a pretty big jump, right? mean, that was a pretty big jump, right? Speaking of fun and uh things that are Speaking of fun and uh things that are Speaking of fun and uh things that are at least on the face of them kind of out at least on the face of them kind of out at least on the face of them kind of out there. Uh I have one final question um there. Uh I have one final question um there. Uh I have one final question um which is which is which is my understanding is a few years ago your my understanding is a few years ago your my understanding is a few years ago your laboratory was involved in looking at laboratory was involved in looking at laboratory was involved in looking at big data sets genomics proteomics etc big data sets genomics proteomics etc big data sets genomics proteomics etc from people who had attended a Tony from people who had attended a Tony from people who had attended a Tony Robbins event. I don't know what the Robbins event. I don't know what the Robbins event. I don't know what the control condition was and I only know control condition was and I only know control condition was and I only know this because uh I believe it was a this because uh I believe it was a this because uh I believe it was a postoc or a student in your lab had postoc or a student in your lab had postoc or a student in your lab had reached out about some protocols uh that reached out about some protocols uh that reached out about some protocols uh that we had going in my lab in collaboration we had going in my lab in collaboration we had going in my lab in collaboration with uh the psychiatry department. Um with uh the psychiatry department. Um with uh the psychiatry department. Um could you describe the contour of this could you describe the contour of this could you describe the contour of this study and I realize it's not study and I realize it's not study and I realize it's not published yet but if there were any published yet but if there were any published yet but if there were any preliminary findings that you could preliminary findings that you could preliminary findings that you could share with us I think that would be share with us I think that would be share with us I think that would be interesting. I um I'm interested interesting. I um I'm interested interesting. I um I'm interested generally in immersive events and generally in immersive events and generally in immersive events and psychological health and um there are psychological health and um there are psychological health and um there are interesting data comparing attendance of interesting data comparing attendance of interesting data comparing attendance of these events but which by the way I have these events but which by the way I have these events but which by the way I have no financial relationship to never met no financial relationship to never met no financial relationship to never met Tony in person or anything like that Tony in person or anything like that Tony in person or anything like that with prescription anti-depressant with prescription anti-depressant with prescription anti-depressant treatments and they actually measure up treatments and they actually measure up treatments and they actually measure up pretty well in terms of I forget how pretty well in terms of I forget how pretty well in terms of I forget how long term the study was. So I'm long term the study was. So I'm long term the study was. So I'm generally an open person when it comes generally an open person when it comes generally an open person when it comes to ideas. What was the study and what to ideas. What was the study and what to ideas. What was the study and what did you find? did you find? did you find? &gt;&gt; Maybe to put it in context. So this all &gt;&gt; Maybe to put it in context. So this all &gt;&gt; Maybe to put it in context. So this all started when a posttock joined my lab started when a posttock joined my lab started when a posttock joined my lab was very interested in mental health and was very interested in mental health and was very interested in mental health and knowing that we're good at measurements knowing that we're good at measurements knowing that we're good at measurements and the idea and I thought about a and the idea and I thought about a and the idea and I thought about a lot and I realized that we don't measure lot and I realized that we don't measure lot and I realized that we don't measure mental health very well right surveys mental health very well right surveys mental health very well right surveys are still the gold standards for most are still the gold standards for most are still the gold standards for most things and so how do you know if you're things and so how do you know if you're things and so how do you know if you're getting better? You do more surveys. getting better? You do more surveys. getting better? You do more surveys. That whole concept is very uh That whole concept is very uh That whole concept is very uh unsatisfying to me. So we thought with unsatisfying to me. So we thought with unsatisfying to me. So we thought with the wearables right there's got to be a the wearables right there's got to be a the wearables right there's got to be a lot of physiology around this thing this lot of physiology around this thing this lot of physiology around this thing this biochemistry do a lot of micro this biochemistry do a lot of micro this biochemistry do a lot of micro sampling mentioned earlier where you can sampling mentioned earlier where you can sampling mentioned earlier where you can now profile deeply so we thought we now profile deeply so we thought we now profile deeply so we thought we could bring this kind of stuff maybe and could bring this kind of stuff maybe and could bring this kind of stuff maybe and we're still is an it's a growing area in we're still is an it's a growing area in we're still is an it's a growing area in the lab I'm very interested in this the lab I'm very interested in this the lab I'm very interested in this because I feel like there's a lot because I feel like there's a lot because I feel like there's a lot going on in the mental health space it's going on in the mental health space it's going on in the mental health space it's just unexplored and the biggest problem just unexplored and the biggest problem just unexplored and the biggest problem is we just don't have good biomarkers is we just don't have good biomarkers is we just don't have good biomarkers for the meetings I've been at for the for the meetings I've been at for the for the meetings I've been at for the stuff that keeps popping up. Number one, stuff that keeps popping up. Number one, stuff that keeps popping up. Number one, we don't have good biomarkers. So, we don't have good biomarkers. So, we don't have good biomarkers. So, we think the digital, meaning from the think the digital, meaning from the think the digital, meaning from the wearables, the um uh um the micro wearables, the um uh um the micro wearables, the um uh um the micro sampling could ultimately prove to give sampling could ultimately prove to give sampling could ultimately prove to give us good biomarkers. We're already seeing us good biomarkers. We're already seeing us good biomarkers. We're already seeing some evidence of that now. So, we ran some evidence of that now. So, we ran some evidence of that now. So, we ran several studies. We did one with Byron several studies. We did one with Byron several studies. We did one with Byron Katy, who runs one of these immersive Katy, who runs one of these immersive Katy, who runs one of these immersive programs, &gt;&gt; and I don't know any about this stuff. &gt;&gt; and I don't know any about this stuff. &gt;&gt; and I don't know any about this stuff. And so, I basically said, "All right, if And so, I basically said, "All right, if And so, I basically said, "All right, if we're going to do this, let's bring in we're going to do this, let's bring in we're going to do this, let's bring in first." brought a colleague George first." brought a colleague George first." brought a colleague George Slavich who you may or may not know he's Slavich who you may or may not know he's Slavich who you may or may not know he's uh basically an average childhood he's uh basically an average childhood he's uh basically an average childhood exp but knows a lot more than I do about exp but knows a lot more than I do about exp but knows a lot more than I do about the childhood and I met him and he's the childhood and I met him and he's the childhood and I met him and he's very bright guy so he you know we very bright guy so he you know we very bright guy so he you know we came up with some surveys because we came up with some surveys because we came up with some surveys because we have to compare up against something we have to compare up against something we have to compare up against something we put smartwatches the one on Byron Katy put smartwatches the one on Byron Katy put smartwatches the one on Byron Katy didn't quite work out but we did do didn't quite work out but we did do didn't quite work out but we did do blood sampling and stuff for her and blood sampling and stuff for her and blood sampling and stuff for her and even microbiome for people before and even microbiome for people before and even microbiome for people before and after and that case it went out for way after and that case it went out for way after and that case it went out for way and then We so we ran that study and then We so we ran that study and then We so we ran that study and then shortly thereafter we ran a pilot then shortly thereafter we ran a pilot then shortly thereafter we ran a pilot one with Tony Robbins where we had a one with Tony Robbins where we had a one with Tony Robbins where we had a smalish number of people who did the smalish number of people who did the smalish number of people who did the Tony Robbins uh and we profiled them you Tony Robbins uh and we profiled them you Tony Robbins uh and we profiled them you know uh before right before uh I know uh before right before uh I know uh before right before uh I immediately after and then at that point immediately after and then at that point immediately after and then at that point I think that study was done out for I think that study was done out for I think that study was done out for several months um and then I'll tell you several months um and then I'll tell you several months um and then I'll tell you about the larger one in a minute and so about the larger one in a minute and so about the larger one in a minute and so we had them do these surveys and things we had them do these surveys and things we had them do these surveys and things and I went in. I have no idea if and I went in. I have no idea if and I went in. I have no idea if this stuff works or not. And son of a this stuff works or not. And son of a this stuff works or not. And son of a gun, these people really did improve by gun, these people really did improve by gun, these people really did improve by these questionnaires, by the standards these questionnaires, by the standards these questionnaires, by the standards in the field. Uh basically, they improve in the field. Uh basically, they improve in the field. Uh basically, they improve their markers, their markers, their markers, &gt;&gt; their mental health. &gt;&gt; their mental health. &gt;&gt; their mental health. &gt;&gt; Their mental health. Yeah. By the &gt;&gt; Their mental health. Yeah. By the &gt;&gt; Their mental health. Yeah. By the surveys. So that first and that was true surveys. So that first and that was true surveys. So that first and that was true for the Byron Katy one. It was true for the Byron Katy one. It was true for the Byron Katy one. It was true for the Tony Robbins one. and the Byron Katy the Tony Robbins one. and the Byron Katy the Tony Robbins one. and the Byron Katy one. We now have some of the OMIX data one. We now have some of the OMIX data one. We now have some of the OMIX data back and they're they do seem to improve back and they're they do seem to improve back and they're they do seem to improve in their inflammatory markers as well. in their inflammatory markers as well. in their inflammatory markers as well. So, we have some data there that's not So, we have some data there that's not So, we have some data there that's not yet published. yet published. yet published. &gt;&gt; Her stuff for people that aren't &gt;&gt; Her stuff for people that aren't &gt;&gt; Her stuff for people that aren't familiar and I'm this is a very top familiar and I'm this is a very top familiar and I'm this is a very top contour thing is a lot of reframing contour thing is a lot of reframing contour thing is a lot of reframing &gt;&gt; um as I understand through language, &gt;&gt; um as I understand through language, &gt;&gt; um as I understand through language, testing assumptions, counter, you know, testing assumptions, counter, you know, testing assumptions, counter, you know, uh challenging internal beliefs, uh challenging internal beliefs, uh challenging internal beliefs, external beliefs. Uh I I'm again I'm external beliefs. Uh I I'm again I'm external beliefs. Uh I I'm again I'm just scratching the surface and I'm just scratching the surface and I'm just scratching the surface and I'm probably getting some of it wrong, but probably getting some of it wrong, but probably getting some of it wrong, but just for those that don't know who Byron just for those that don't know who Byron just for those that don't know who Byron Katy is, whereas Tony Robbins I think Katy is, whereas Tony Robbins I think Katy is, whereas Tony Robbins I think more people are familiar with those are more people are familiar with those are more people are familiar with those are very immersive events. There's a lot of very immersive events. There's a lot of very immersive events. There's a lot of high energy activity. Also some breath high energy activity. Also some breath high energy activity. Also some breath work stuff done. Um some uh work stuff done. Um some uh work stuff done. Um some uh &gt;&gt; must be very intense. I've never done a &gt;&gt; must be very intense. I've never done a &gt;&gt; must be very intense. I've never done a &gt;&gt; almost like um h self-hypnosis type &gt;&gt; almost like um h self-hypnosis type &gt;&gt; almost like um h self-hypnosis type stuff where people direct themselves stuff where people direct themselves stuff where people direct themselves down a memory that's very painful, down a memory that's very painful, down a memory that's very painful, memory that's very positive. a lot of memory that's very positive. a lot of memory that's very positive. a lot of somatic um stuff. I mean, you know, somatic um stuff. I mean, you know, somatic um stuff. I mean, you know, there's a wide pallet there. But anyway, there's a wide pallet there. But anyway, there's a wide pallet there. But anyway, that hopefully that gives a little more that hopefully that gives a little more that hopefully that gives a little more context for people. context for people. context for people. &gt;&gt; So, anyway, we did see a positive result &gt;&gt; So, anyway, we did see a positive result &gt;&gt; So, anyway, we did see a positive result uh on the pilot study and that was 20, I uh on the pilot study and that was 20, I uh on the pilot study and that was 20, I don't know, 27 people. I may have the don't know, 27 people. I may have the don't know, 27 people. I may have the number wrong, but it's a small number. number wrong, but it's a small number. number wrong, but it's a small number. Uh and then we now have done a um a Uh and then we now have done a um a Uh and then we now have done a um a follow-up and um well, I should say follow-up and um well, I should say follow-up and um well, I should say actually for uh the first one, they actually for uh the first one, they actually for uh the first one, they actually went out even further. Now they actually went out even further. Now they actually went out even further. Now they have some additional data points but in have some additional data points but in have some additional data points but in the followup there we did a much bigger the followup there we did a much bigger the followup there we did a much bigger one at 600 almost 700 people who went one at 600 almost 700 people who went one at 600 almost 700 people who went through Tony Robbins and then we had through Tony Robbins and then we had through Tony Robbins and then we had another set of people who didn't do Tony another set of people who didn't do Tony another set of people who didn't do Tony Robbins who we also profiled and same Robbins who we also profiled and same Robbins who we also profiled and same thing they see they wore smart watches thing they see they wore smart watches thing they see they wore smart watches we had to scramble to get the IRB we had to scramble to get the IRB we had to scramble to get the IRB approval it's always a rate limiting approval it's always a rate limiting approval it's always a rate limiting step uh so we didn't get as many step uh so we didn't get as many step uh so we didn't get as many wearables on folks as ahead of time but wearables on folks as ahead of time but wearables on folks as ahead of time but we do did do the micro sampling we did we do did do the micro sampling we did we do did do the micro sampling we did do all the surveys and we have a do all the surveys and we have a do all the surveys and we have a battery of wellness surveys it be battery of wellness surveys it be battery of wellness surveys it be official depression scores and things, official depression scores and things, official depression scores and things, but they're things about, you know, are but they're things about, you know, are but they're things about, you know, are you depressed and anxiety and are you depressed and anxiety and are you depressed and anxiety and burnout and all kinds of stuff. So, we burnout and all kinds of stuff. So, we burnout and all kinds of stuff. So, we it's a series of questionnaires. They we it's a series of questionnaires. They we it's a series of questionnaires. They they did it before, they did immediately they did it before, they did immediately they did it before, they did immediately after, one month, three months, six after, one month, three months, six after, one month, three months, six months, one year. And it's a pretty months, one year. And it's a pretty months, one year. And it's a pretty sizable study now. Like I say, it's sizable study now. Like I say, it's sizable study now. Like I say, it's almost 700 people who did it. 700 people almost 700 people who did it. 700 people almost 700 people who did it. 700 people who were controls. But I will say the who were controls. But I will say the who were controls. But I will say the caveat is they're not randomly assigned caveat is they're not randomly assigned caveat is they're not randomly assigned because there people who did it did it because there people who did it did it because there people who did it did it signed up for it and the people who signed up for it and the people who signed up for it and the people who didn't do it well they did it separate. didn't do it well they did it separate. didn't do it well they did it separate. So um that's the only caveat that I see. So um that's the only caveat that I see. So um that's the only caveat that I see. But the bottom line is the ones who did But the bottom line is the ones who did But the bottom line is the ones who did do it once again they improved in all do it once again they improved in all do it once again they improved in all like virtually all these things anxiety like virtually all these things anxiety like virtually all these things anxiety depression significantly. Yeah. depression significantly. Yeah. depression significantly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh and we have just put together a paper &gt;&gt; Uh and we have just put together a paper &gt;&gt; Uh and we have just put together a paper on the psychological part now. on the psychological part now. on the psychological part now. Uh and then on the we're still doing the Uh and then on the we're still doing the Uh and then on the we're still doing the OMIX stuff. So we actually did the micro OMIX stuff. So we actually did the micro OMIX stuff. So we actually did the micro sampling I mentioned earlier where they sampling I mentioned earlier where they sampling I mentioned earlier where they gave samples before for not everybody gave samples before for not everybody gave samples before for not everybody not everybody signed up for that but not everybody signed up for that but not everybody signed up for that but it's like 130 140 people who did the it's like 130 140 people who did the it's like 130 140 people who did the micro sampling before the you know micro sampling before the you know micro sampling before the you know immediately after each of those same immediately after each of those same immediately after each of those same time points. And so we will see that time points. And so we will see that time points. And so we will see that data is still coming in uh and hopefully data is still coming in uh and hopefully data is still coming in uh and hopefully we'll know in a few months but uh at we'll know in a few months but uh at we'll know in a few months but uh at least on the survey stuff these people least on the survey stuff these people least on the survey stuff these people did all improve and that control group did all improve and that control group did all improve and that control group which was separate did not and it is which was separate did not and it is which was separate did not and it is significant. So I'm sure we'll put the significant. So I'm sure we'll put the significant. So I'm sure we'll put the paper up on either bioarchchive which is paper up on either bioarchchive which is paper up on either bioarchchive which is this preprint thing uh or can even send this preprint thing uh or can even send this preprint thing uh or can even send you a copy. you a copy. you a copy. uh say my uh person who's been running uh say my uh person who's been running uh say my uh person who's been running that's up for that. So anyway, um yeah, that's up for that. So anyway, um yeah, that's up for that. So anyway, um yeah, it does work. It's pretty amazing it does work. It's pretty amazing it does work. It's pretty amazing actually. So again, people lot not actually. So again, people lot not actually. So again, people lot not everybody's in the so-called depressed everybody's in the so-called depressed everybody's in the so-called depressed state or whatever. It's it kind of state or whatever. It's it kind of state or whatever. It's it kind of worked out half and half. Uh and their worked out half and half. Uh and their worked out half and half. Uh and their values all improve. Not again not 100% values all improve. Not again not 100% values all improve. Not again not 100% but pretty darn most of them. It sort of pretty darn most of them. It sort of pretty darn most of them. It sort of surprised me and we didn't obviously in surprised me and we didn't obviously in surprised me and we didn't obviously in the control group we didn't see anything the control group we didn't see anything the control group we didn't see anything so it looks pretty good. so it looks pretty good. so it looks pretty good. &gt;&gt; Wow. Well, I love how you are willing to &gt;&gt; Wow. Well, I love how you are willing to &gt;&gt; Wow. Well, I love how you are willing to explore these sorts of things. Um explore these sorts of things. Um explore these sorts of things. Um &gt;&gt; people are have asking Mike what the &gt;&gt; people are have asking Mike what the &gt;&gt; people are have asking Mike what the hell are you doing here? And I said I hell are you doing here? And I said I hell are you doing here? And I said I don't know. I'll just let but let's take don't know. I'll just let but let's take don't know. I'll just let but let's take a like thousands of people do this a like thousands of people do this a like thousands of people do this stuff. Shouldn't somebody look at this? stuff. Shouldn't somebody look at this? stuff. Shouldn't somebody look at this? I think the answer is yes. I know people I think the answer is yes. I know people I think the answer is yes. I know people um who I would characterize as highly um who I would characterize as highly um who I would characterize as highly motivated generally toward their health motivated generally toward their health motivated generally toward their health and careers etc relationships um who had and careers etc relationships um who had and careers etc relationships um who had uh pain points of struggle in one or uh pain points of struggle in one or uh pain points of struggle in one or several domains of life or just were in several domains of life or just were in several domains of life or just were in a kind of a like you know aimless part a kind of a like you know aimless part a kind of a like you know aimless part of life or struggling with something. uh of life or struggling with something. uh of life or struggling with something. uh who went and did these uh one of uh who went and did these uh one of uh who went and did these uh one of these immersive seminars and these immersive seminars and these immersive seminars and reported and it does seem from the reported and it does seem from the reported and it does seem from the outside as well to be positively outside as well to be positively outside as well to be positively transformed, right? transformed, right? transformed, right? &gt;&gt; They continue to do &gt;&gt; They continue to do &gt;&gt; They continue to do &gt;&gt; the work on their own. Um that's &gt;&gt; the work on their own. Um that's &gt;&gt; the work on their own. Um that's correct. &gt;&gt; You know, they continue to do practices &gt;&gt; You know, they continue to do practices &gt;&gt; You know, they continue to do practices that they learned there on their that they learned there on their that they learned there on their own, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Seems to be an important component. But &gt;&gt; Seems to be an important component. But &gt;&gt; Seems to be an important component. But you know I think um what's exciting you know I think um what's exciting you know I think um what's exciting about these kinds of experiments about these kinds of experiments about these kinds of experiments and conversations to me is that whereas and conversations to me is that whereas and conversations to me is that whereas 5 years ago certainly 10 years ago any 5 years ago certainly 10 years ago any 5 years ago certainly 10 years ago any discussion about let's just think about discussion about let's just think about discussion about let's just think about some of the themes that we've touched on some of the themes that we've touched on some of the themes that we've touched on right um breath work long exhales slow right um breath work long exhales slow right um breath work long exhales slow your heart rate we know that the your heart rate we know that the your heart rate we know that the respiratory sinus rhythmia increases HRV respiratory sinus rhythmia increases HRV respiratory sinus rhythmia increases HRV we know that right um I asked you about we know that right um I asked you about we know that right um I asked you about meditation you don't meditate but uh but meditation you don't meditate but uh but meditation you don't meditate but uh but exercise &gt;&gt; I used to but and I'd like to get back &gt;&gt; I used to but and I'd like to get back &gt;&gt; I used to but and I'd like to get back to it. to it. to it. &gt;&gt; And certainly there are data to support &gt;&gt; And certainly there are data to support &gt;&gt; And certainly there are data to support it. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Resistance training. You know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Resistance training. You know, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Resistance training. You know, when I was I'm about to turn 50, as I when I was I'm about to turn 50, as I when I was I'm about to turn 50, as I mentioned, when I was in high school, mentioned, when I was in high school, mentioned, when I was in high school, the only people who did weightlifting the only people who did weightlifting the only people who did weightlifting were bodybuilders, people going off to were bodybuilders, people going off to were bodybuilders, people going off to the military or preseason football the military or preseason football the military or preseason football players. They told us it would turn to players. They told us it would turn to players. They told us it would turn to fat if we stopped and we shouldn't fat if we stopped and we shouldn't fat if we stopped and we shouldn't weight train, right? We know that's weight train, right? We know that's weight train, right? We know that's completely false. Everyone should weight completely false. Everyone should weight completely false. Everyone should weight train. Women should weight train. Men train. Women should weight train. Men train. Women should weight train. Men should weight train, should weight train, should weight train, &gt;&gt; especially as you get old, right? Um &gt;&gt; especially as you get old, right? Um &gt;&gt; especially as you get old, right? Um &gt;&gt; Byron Katy, Tony Robbins have entered &gt;&gt; Byron Katy, Tony Robbins have entered &gt;&gt; Byron Katy, Tony Robbins have entered the conversation. um uh their work that the conversation. um uh their work that the conversation. um uh their work that is acupuncture. is acupuncture. is acupuncture. You're parsing diabetes into these You're parsing diabetes into these You're parsing diabetes into these subcategories or phenotypes. We're now subcategories or phenotypes. We're now subcategories or phenotypes. We're now we're no longer talking about talking we're no longer talking about talking we're no longer talking about talking about fiber as a single thing. You've about fiber as a single thing. You've about fiber as a single thing. You've now divided that into separable now divided that into separable now divided that into separable actionable uh paths for you know actionable uh paths for you know actionable uh paths for you know addressing one's health, improving one's addressing one's health, improving one's addressing one's health, improving one's health. And so, you know, this really health. And so, you know, this really health. And so, you know, this really just brings me to what I've, you know, just brings me to what I've, you know, just brings me to what I've, you know, been thinking more and more as I've read been thinking more and more as I've read been thinking more and more as I've read your work and certainly after your work and certainly after your work and certainly after today's conversation, which is that I'm today's conversation, which is that I'm today's conversation, which is that I'm so grateful that somebody like you who so grateful that somebody like you who so grateful that somebody like you who is into big data, you like numbers, you is into big data, you like numbers, you is into big data, you like numbers, you like statistics, you like um proteomics, like statistics, you like um proteomics, like statistics, you like um proteomics, genomics, RNA seek, you know, I mean, genomics, RNA seek, you know, I mean, genomics, RNA seek, you know, I mean, this is serious science that you're this is serious science that you're this is serious science that you're willing to look at what's out there, willing to look at what's out there, willing to look at what's out there, what people are doing, what they're what people are doing, what they're what people are doing, what they're willing to do, and ask what are the willing to do, and ask what are the willing to do, and ask what are the things to avoid, what are the things to things to avoid, what are the things to things to avoid, what are the things to do more of and really customizing it for do more of and really customizing it for do more of and really customizing it for people's needs. Um I think it's truly people's needs. Um I think it's truly people's needs. Um I think it's truly important slashh heroic work because it important slashh heroic work because it important slashh heroic work because it really would take somebody in your really would take somebody in your really would take somebody in your position you know at least until very position you know at least until very position you know at least until very recently you were chair of the recently you were chair of the recently you were chair of the department of genetics but you're department of genetics but you're department of genetics but you're professor of genetics trained at Caltech professor of genetics trained at Caltech professor of genetics trained at Caltech and all these places to really embrace and all these places to really embrace and all these places to really embrace you know the these different uh you know the these different uh you know the these different uh directions in health with serious directions in health with serious directions in health with serious mechanistic reductionist approaches but mechanistic reductionist approaches but mechanistic reductionist approaches but then be able to step back and say here's then be able to step back and say here's then be able to step back and say here's what I do here's what people are doing what I do here's what people are doing what I do here's what people are doing here's what seems to help here's what we here's what seems to help here's what we here's what seems to help here's what we don't know and uh there seems to be don't know and uh there seems to be don't know and uh there seems to be basically no limit to what um you're basically no limit to what um you're basically no limit to what um you're willing to explore using these highly willing to explore using these highly willing to explore using these highly rigorous tools. So, I just want to rigorous tools. So, I just want to rigorous tools. So, I just want to really extend my gratitude and I know really extend my gratitude and I know really extend my gratitude and I know the gratitude that people who listen to the gratitude that people who listen to the gratitude that people who listen to this and have watched this are surely this and have watched this are surely this and have watched this are surely feeling because feeling because feeling because things have been very siloed up until things have been very siloed up until things have been very siloed up until recently and you're one of the people I recently and you're one of the people I recently and you're one of the people I really see as putting um sand and really see as putting um sand and really see as putting um sand and hopefully concrete between those silos hopefully concrete between those silos hopefully concrete between those silos because this notion of health and health because this notion of health and health because this notion of health and health practice is really just one thing and practice is really just one thing and practice is really just one thing and we need to be less siloed. So, and we need to be less siloed. So, and we need to be less siloed. So, thank you for doing that. thank you for doing that. thank you for doing that. &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. I think you bring up a good &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. I think you bring up a good &gt;&gt; Oh, sure. I think you bring up a good point. I think we're trained to be point. I think we're trained to be point. I think we're trained to be siloed. That's part of the problem as siloed. That's part of the problem as siloed. That's part of the problem as you go through graduate school and you go through graduate school and you go through graduate school and things like that. Even medicine, right? things like that. Even medicine, right? things like that. Even medicine, right? You have people trained in very specific You have people trained in very specific You have people trained in very specific areas. So, they never look at the whole areas. So, they never look at the whole areas. So, they never look at the whole yet. We know again that we are yet. We know again that we are yet. We know again that we are homeostatic systems that involves all homeostatic systems that involves all homeostatic systems that involves all these different things. And you'll never these different things. And you'll never these different things. And you'll never solve it. Like I like to say when I solve it. Like I like to say when I solve it. Like I like to say when I got um because everybody on my father's got um because everybody on my father's got um because everybody on my father's side has died of heart problems and I side has died of heart problems and I side has died of heart problems and I used to have high cholesterol until I used to have high cholesterol until I used to have high cholesterol until I went on sat on PCSK9 inhibitors and went on sat on PCSK9 inhibitors and went on sat on PCSK9 inhibitors and they're amazing. Uh and you know um my they're amazing. Uh and you know um my they're amazing. Uh and you know um my heart guy would tell me, "Well, you need heart guy would tell me, "Well, you need heart guy would tell me, "Well, you need to raise your sins." He didn't think it to raise your sins." He didn't think it to raise your sins." He didn't think it was low enough. I said, "Well, when I do was low enough. I said, "Well, when I do was low enough. I said, "Well, when I do that, my glucose goes up." And that's that, my glucose goes up." And that's that, my glucose goes up." And that's very textbook, by the way. Uh and I and very textbook, by the way. Uh and I and very textbook, by the way. Uh and I and I finally called him. I said, 'Look, I finally called him. I said, 'Look, I finally called him. I said, 'Look, your job is stop me from getting a heart your job is stop me from getting a heart your job is stop me from getting a heart attack, but you don't care if I have all attack, but you don't care if I have all attack, but you don't care if I have all these other complications, right? And I these other complications, right? And I these other complications, right? And I would say the same to the diabetes would say the same to the diabetes would say the same to the diabetes people. I'd say, well, you know, you're people. I'd say, well, you know, you're people. I'd say, well, you know, you're trying to control my glucose, but you trying to control my glucose, but you trying to control my glucose, but you some of these other things. And I just some of these other things. And I just some of these other things. And I just don't think that's the right way you don't think that's the right way you don't think that's the right way you want to look at people. We need to bring want to look at people. We need to bring want to look at people. We need to bring in all the data, all these things. We've in all the data, all these things. We've in all the data, all these things. We've touched on these points about genetics touched on these points about genetics touched on these points about genetics and epigenetics and lifestyle and I and epigenetics and lifestyle and I and epigenetics and lifestyle and I think the whole you know communication think the whole you know communication think the whole you know communication side the whole socialization very side the whole socialization very side the whole socialization very underststudied also like it from the underststudied also like it from the underststudied also like it from the academic side because when you go into academic side because when you go into academic side because when you go into these areas where you don't know these areas where you don't know these areas where you don't know anything you're even when you stumble anything you're even when you stumble anything you're even when you stumble around you're going to learn something. around you're going to learn something. around you're going to learn something. So that's kind of how I view our work So that's kind of how I view our work So that's kind of how I view our work and mental health and now socialization and mental health and now socialization and mental health and now socialization I hope. Uh so I just hope that we can I hope. Uh so I just hope that we can I hope. Uh so I just hope that we can learn some kind of cool stuff that will learn some kind of cool stuff that will learn some kind of cool stuff that will be useful and then I think now we're in be useful and then I think now we're in be useful and then I think now we're in an amazing position right where we the an amazing position right where we the an amazing position right where we the tools with AI because no one person can tools with AI because no one person can tools with AI because no one person can do this right you don't want a doctor do this right you don't want a doctor do this right you don't want a doctor who doesn't use AI now that you want who doesn't use AI now that you want who doesn't use AI now that you want someone who can pull in all that someone who can pull in all that someone who can pull in all that information and this is what the information and this is what the information and this is what the companies are really good at again it's companies are really good at again it's companies are really good at again it's one of the reasons we spin these things one of the reasons we spin these things one of the reasons we spin these things off like January has this they call it off like January has this they call it off like January has this they call it mirror that builds kind of like it'll mirror that builds kind of like it'll mirror that builds kind of like it'll take all your data your genomics data take all your data your genomics data take all your data your genomics data data, all your reports, all these data, all your reports, all these data, all your reports, all these various things, and runs an AI engine, various things, and runs an AI engine, various things, and runs an AI engine, obviously trained in a certain fashion, obviously trained in a certain fashion, obviously trained in a certain fashion, and gives you back a incredibly long and gives you back a incredibly long and gives you back a incredibly long report, but although you do get a report, but although you do get a report, but although you do get a summary so you can decipher it, and then summary so you can decipher it, and then summary so you can decipher it, and then it pulls all the stuff together to make it pulls all the stuff together to make it pulls all the stuff together to make insights. And so, for example, I didn't insights. And so, for example, I didn't insights. And so, for example, I didn't realize I knew my CD8T cells. Again, realize I knew my CD8T cells. Again, realize I knew my CD8T cells. Again, this gets a little specialized, but they this gets a little specialized, but they this gets a little specialized, but they were low. Uh, which I did see on the were low. Uh, which I did see on the were low. Uh, which I did see on the report, but it has this whole zinc report, but it has this whole zinc report, but it has this whole zinc recommendation thing. I don't know if recommendation thing. I don't know if recommendation thing. I don't know if that's right, but I'm going to look into that's right, but I'm going to look into that's right, but I'm going to look into it more. It can make suggestions that no it more. It can make suggestions that no it more. It can make suggestions that no doctor is going to figure out with all doctor is going to figure out with all doctor is going to figure out with all this stuff. So, you do need these new this stuff. So, you do need these new this stuff. So, you do need these new systems, and that is the future. We're systems, and that is the future. We're systems, and that is the future. We're all going to have our own personalized all going to have our own personalized all going to have our own personalized systems pulling data. I mentioned systems pulling data. I mentioned systems pulling data. I mentioned earlier about iolo. same thing about earlier about iolo. same thing about earlier about iolo. same thing about your metabolic profile, pulling other your metabolic profile, pulling other your metabolic profile, pulling other information to give you recommendations. information to give you recommendations. information to give you recommendations. That's going to be true. Again, those That's going to be true. Again, those That's going to be true. Again, those are specific examples for me. But I are specific examples for me. But I are specific examples for me. But I think that's you're every one of your think that's you're every one of your think that's you're every one of your doctors of the future is going to have doctors of the future is going to have doctors of the future is going to have to do this stuff. Otherwise, you're not to do this stuff. Otherwise, you're not to do this stuff. Otherwise, you're not going to get full value out of all these going to get full value out of all these going to get full value out of all these measurements, which we should be doing measurements, which we should be doing measurements, which we should be doing that will better improve our health. that will better improve our health. that will better improve our health. &gt;&gt; I love it. It's a it's a beautiful &gt;&gt; I love it. It's a it's a beautiful &gt;&gt; I love it. It's a it's a beautiful vision. And I can see a day not too far vision. And I can see a day not too far vision. And I can see a day not too far from now where if somebody has a whole from now where if somebody has a whole from now where if somebody has a whole body scan data set, uh some blood tests, body scan data set, uh some blood tests, body scan data set, uh some blood tests, maybe they have some tracking data, they maybe they have some tracking data, they maybe they have some tracking data, they just upload it to a website and their just upload it to a website and their just upload it to a website and their physician runs it through AI and makes physician runs it through AI and makes physician runs it through AI and makes of it what they can. Um it certainly of it what they can. Um it certainly of it what they can. Um it certainly won't be everything that's possible, but won't be everything that's possible, but won't be everything that's possible, but that's certainly better than not taking that's certainly better than not taking that's certainly better than not taking those data into account. Correct. And of those data into account. Correct. And of those data into account. Correct. And of course, physicians can also still choose course, physicians can also still choose course, physicians can also still choose to ignore it all. most of them do now by to ignore it all. most of them do now by to ignore it all. most of them do now by being totally unaware that it exists or being totally unaware that it exists or being totally unaware that it exists or saying, "Oh yeah, you said your heart saying, "Oh yeah, you said your heart saying, "Oh yeah, you said your heart rate variability was reduced for a week, rate variability was reduced for a week, rate variability was reduced for a week, but what does that mean to me?" It could but what does that mean to me?" It could but what does that mean to me?" It could be any number of things, right? But now be any number of things, right? But now be any number of things, right? But now that they can start to make sense of it that they can start to make sense of it that they can start to make sense of it if they choose to, I think um it's if they choose to, I think um it's if they choose to, I think um it's important uh important because after important uh important because after important uh important because after all, people can't forget the physicians all, people can't forget the physicians all, people can't forget the physicians work for you, not the other way around. work for you, not the other way around. work for you, not the other way around. So &gt;&gt; 100% agree. Yeah. &gt;&gt; 100% agree. Yeah. &gt;&gt; 100% agree. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Well, thanks so much for the work that &gt;&gt; Well, thanks so much for the work that &gt;&gt; Well, thanks so much for the work that you're doing. I I've been told and I you're doing. I I've been told and I you're doing. I I've been told and I strongly believe that in the world of strongly believe that in the world of strongly believe that in the world of science there are map makers and there science there are map makers and there science there are map makers and there are explorers and the explorers are the are explorers and the explorers are the are explorers and the explorers are the ones that really uh make the discoveries ones that really uh make the discoveries ones that really uh make the discoveries that matter and you're clearly an that matter and you're clearly an that matter and you're clearly an explorer and I'm grateful for the work explorer and I'm grateful for the work explorer and I'm grateful for the work you're doing. I'm also grateful that you you're doing. I'm also grateful that you you're doing. I'm also grateful that you took the time to come talk to us today. took the time to come talk to us today. took the time to come talk to us today. So I'd love to get updates in the in the So I'd love to get updates in the in the So I'd love to get updates in the in the not too distant future. Meanwhile, I'll not too distant future. Meanwhile, I'll not too distant future. Meanwhile, I'll see you back at the farm. see you back at the farm. see you back at the farm. &gt;&gt; Thanks so much for having me here. It's &gt;&gt; Thanks so much for having me here. It's &gt;&gt; Thanks so much for having me here. It's been a blast. Thank you for joining me been a blast. Thank you for joining me been a blast. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Michael for today's discussion with Dr. Michael for today's discussion with Dr. Michael Snyder. To learn more about his research Snyder. To learn more about his research Snyder. To learn more about his research and to find links to the various things and to find links to the various things and to find links to the various things discussed during today's episode, please discussed during today's episode, please discussed during today's episode, please see the show note captions. If you're see the show note captions. If you're see the show note captions. If you're learning from andor enjoying this learning from andor enjoying this learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. Another terrific zerocost to support us. Another terrific zerocost to support us. Another terrific zerocost way to support us is to click the follow way to support us is to click the follow way to support us is to click the follow button on Apple or Spotify Podcasts or button on Apple or Spotify Podcasts or button on Apple or Spotify Podcasts or both. And on YouTube, Apple and Spotify, both. And on YouTube, Apple and Spotify, both. And on YouTube, Apple and Spotify, you can leave us comments. So, if you can leave us comments. So, if you can leave us comments. So, if you have comments for me about today's have comments for me about today's have comments for me about today's episode, or you have guests or topics episode, or you have guests or topics episode, or you have guests or topics you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab episode, please put those Huberman Lab episode, please put those Huberman Lab episode, please put those in the comment section on YouTube, in the comment section on YouTube, in the comment section on YouTube, Apple, or Spotify. I do read all the Apple, or Spotify. I do read all the Apple, or Spotify. I do read all the comments. Please also check out the comments. Please also check out the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. And I best way to support this podcast. And I best way to support this podcast. And I should mention that I only work with should mention that I only work with should mention that I only work with sponsors whose products I absolutely sponsors whose products I absolutely sponsors whose products I absolutely love and personally use. And if you're love and personally use. And if you're love and personally use. And if you're not already following me on social not already following me on social not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram X, media platforms. So that's Instagram X, media platforms. So that's Instagram X, formerly known as Twitter, LinkedIn, formerly known as Twitter, LinkedIn, formerly known as Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook, and threads. And on all those Facebook, and threads. And on all those Facebook, and threads. And on all those platforms, I discuss science and science platforms, I discuss science and science platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which overlaps related tools, some of which overlaps related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab with the content of the Hubberman Lab with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct podcast, but much of which is distinct podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the from the content covered on the from the content covered on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes protocols, newsletter that includes protocols, newsletter that includes protocols, brief 1 to three-page PDFs that explain brief 1 to three-page PDFs that explain brief 1 to three-page PDFs that explain the critical to-dos to, for instance, the critical to-dos to, for instance, the critical to-dos to, for instance, improve your resistance training, your improve your resistance training, your improve your resistance training, your strength, that is your cardiovascular strength, that is your cardiovascular strength, that is your cardiovascular fitness, nutrition, dopamine regulation, fitness, nutrition, dopamine regulation, fitness, nutrition, dopamine regulation, how to optimize your sleep, learning, how to optimize your sleep, learning, how to optimize your sleep, learning, plasticity, and on and on. Again, all plasticity, and on and on. Again, all plasticity, and on and on. Again, all available completely zero cost, all in available completely zero cost, all in available completely zero cost, all in the form of brief 1 to three page PDFs. the form of brief 1 to three page PDFs. the form of brief 1 to three page PDFs. To sign up, you simply go to To sign up, you simply go to To sign up, you simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the top right hubermanlab.com, go to the top right hubermanlab.com, go to the top right corner menu, scroll down to newsletter, corner menu, scroll down to newsletter, corner menu, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should and enter your email. And I should and enter your email. And I should mention that we do not share your email mention that we do not share your email mention that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for with anybody. Thank you once again for with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Michael Snyder. And last, but Dr. Michael Snyder. And last, but Dr. Michael Snyder. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]