Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based [music] tools for mental science-based [music] tools for mental science-based [music] tools for mental health, physical health, and health, physical health, and health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss salt, also referred are going to discuss salt, also referred are going to discuss salt, also referred to as sodium. Salt has many, many to as sodium. Salt has many, many to as sodium. Salt has many, many important functions in the brain and important functions in the brain and important functions in the brain and body. For instance, it regulates fluid body. For instance, it regulates fluid body. For instance, it regulates fluid balance, how much fluid you desire and balance, how much fluid you desire and balance, how much fluid you desire and how much fluid you excrete. Salt also how much fluid you excrete. Salt also how much fluid you excrete. Salt also regulates your appetite for other regulates your appetite for other regulates your appetite for other nutrients, things like sugar, things nutrients, things like sugar, things nutrients, things like sugar, things like carbohydrates. We all harbor small like carbohydrates. We all harbor small like carbohydrates. We all harbor small sets of neurons. We call these sets of sets of neurons. We call these sets of sets of neurons. We call these sets of neurons nuclei, meaning little clusters neurons nuclei, meaning little clusters neurons nuclei, meaning little clusters of neurons, of neurons, of neurons, that sense the levels of salt in our that sense the levels of salt in our that sense the levels of salt in our brain and body. brain and body. brain and body. There are a couple brain regions that do There are a couple brain regions that do There are a couple brain regions that do this, and these brain regions are very, this, and these brain regions are very, this, and these brain regions are very, very special. Special because they lack very special. Special because they lack very special. Special because they lack biological fences around them that other biological fences around them that other biological fences around them that other brain areas have. And that those fences, brain areas have. And that those fences, brain areas have. And that those fences, or I should say that fence, goes by a or I should say that fence, goes by a or I should say that fence, goes by a particular name, and that name is the particular name, and that name is the particular name, and that name is the blood-brain barrier, or BBB. blood-brain barrier, or BBB. blood-brain barrier, or BBB. Most substances that are circulating Most substances that are circulating Most substances that are circulating around in your body do not have access around in your body do not have access around in your body do not have access to the brain. In particular, large to the brain. In particular, large to the brain. In particular, large molecules can't just pass into the molecules can't just pass into the molecules can't just pass into the brain. The brain is a privileged organ in this The brain is a privileged organ in this The brain is a privileged organ in this sense. However, there are a couple of sense. However, there are a couple of sense. However, there are a couple of regions in the brain that have a fence regions in the brain that have a fence regions in the brain that have a fence around them, but that fence is weaker. around them, but that fence is weaker. around them, but that fence is weaker. And it turns out that the areas of the And it turns out that the areas of the And it turns out that the areas of the brain that monitor salt balance and brain that monitor salt balance and brain that monitor salt balance and other features of what's happening in other features of what's happening in other features of what's happening in the body at the level of what we call the body at the level of what we call the body at the level of what we call osmolarity, at the concentration of osmolarity, at the concentration of osmolarity, at the concentration of salt, reside in these little sets of neurons reside in these little sets of neurons reside in these little sets of neurons that sit just on the other side of these that sit just on the other side of these that sit just on the other side of these weak fences. And the most important and weak fences. And the most important and weak fences. And the most important and famous of these, for the sake of today's famous of these, for the sake of today's famous of these, for the sake of today's conversation, is one called OVLT. OVLT conversation, is one called OVLT. OVLT conversation, is one called OVLT. OVLT stands for the organum vasculosum of the stands for the organum vasculosum of the stands for the organum vasculosum of the lateral terminalis. The neurons in that lateral terminalis. The neurons in that lateral terminalis. The neurons in that region are able to pay attention to region are able to pay attention to region are able to pay attention to what's passing through in the what's passing through in the what's passing through in the bloodstream and can detect, for bloodstream and can detect, for bloodstream and can detect, for instance, if the levels of sodium in the instance, if the levels of sodium in the instance, if the levels of sodium in the bloodstream are too low, if the level of bloodstream are too low, if the level of bloodstream are too low, if the level of blood pressure in the body is too low or blood pressure in the body is too low or blood pressure in the body is too low or too high, and then the OVLT can send too high, and then the OVLT can send too high, and then the OVLT can send signals to other brain areas, and then signals to other brain areas, and then signals to other brain areas, and then those other brain areas can do things those other brain areas can do things those other brain areas can do things like release hormones that can go and like release hormones that can go and like release hormones that can go and act on tissues in what we call the act on tissues in what we call the act on tissues in what we call the periphery, in the body, for instance, periphery, in the body, for instance, periphery, in the body, for instance, have the kidneys secrete more urine to have the kidneys secrete more urine to have the kidneys secrete more urine to get rid of salt that's excessive salt in get rid of salt that's excessive salt in get rid of salt that's excessive salt in the body. So, let's talk about the body. So, let's talk about the body. So, let's talk about the function of the OVLT and flesh out some function of the OVLT and flesh out some function of the OVLT and flesh out some of the other aspects of its circuitry, of the other aspects of its circuitry, of the other aspects of its circuitry, of its communication with other brain of its communication with other brain of its communication with other brain areas and with the body, in the context areas and with the body, in the context areas and with the body, in the context of something that we are all familiar of something that we are all familiar of something that we are all familiar with, which is thirst. Have you ever with, which is thirst. Have you ever with, which is thirst. Have you ever wondered just why you get thirsty? Well, wondered just why you get thirsty? Well, wondered just why you get thirsty? Well, it's because neurons in your OVLT are it's because neurons in your OVLT are it's because neurons in your OVLT are detecting changes in your bloodstream, detecting changes in your bloodstream, detecting changes in your bloodstream, which detect global changes within your which detect global changes within your which detect global changes within your body, and in response to that, your OVLT body, and in response to that, your OVLT body, and in response to that, your OVLT sets off certain events within your sets off certain events within your sets off certain events within your brain and body that make you either want brain and body that make you either want brain and body that make you either want to drink more fluid or to stop drinking to drink more fluid or to stop drinking to drink more fluid or to stop drinking fluid. There two main kinds of thirst. The There two main kinds of thirst. The There two main kinds of thirst. The first one is called osmotic thirst, and first one is called osmotic thirst, and first one is called osmotic thirst, and the second is called hypovolemic thirst. the second is called hypovolemic thirst. the second is called hypovolemic thirst. Osmotic thirst has to do with the Osmotic thirst has to do with the Osmotic thirst has to do with the concentration of salt in your concentration of salt in your concentration of salt in your bloodstream. So, let's say you ingest bloodstream. So, let's say you ingest bloodstream. So, let's say you ingest something very, very salty. Let's say something very, very salty. Let's say something very, very salty. Let's say you ingest, you know, a big bag of, you ingest, you know, a big bag of, you ingest, you know, a big bag of, you know, I confess I don't eat these know, I confess I don't eat these know, I confess I don't eat these very often, but I really like those very often, but I really like those very often, but I really like those kettle potato chips, and I don't have kettle potato chips, and I don't have kettle potato chips, and I don't have too much shame about that because I too much shame about that because I too much shame about that because I think I have a pretty healthy think I have a pretty healthy think I have a pretty healthy relationship to food, and I enjoy them, relationship to food, and I enjoy them, relationship to food, and I enjoy them, and I understand that it will drive salt and I understand that it will drive salt and I understand that it will drive salt levels up in my bloodstream, and that levels up in my bloodstream, and that levels up in my bloodstream, and that will cause me to be thirsty. But why? will cause me to be thirsty. But why? will cause me to be thirsty. But why? Why? Because neurons in the OVLT come in Why? Because neurons in the OVLT come in Why? Because neurons in the OVLT come in two main varieties. One variety senses two main varieties. One variety senses two main varieties. One variety senses the osmolarity of the blood and when the osmolarity of the blood and when the osmolarity of the blood and when the osmolarity, meaning the salt osmolarity, meaning the salt osmolarity, meaning the salt concentration in the blood is high, concentration in the blood is high, concentration in the blood is high, it activates these specific neurons in it activates these specific neurons in it activates these specific neurons in the OVT and by activates, I mean it the OVT and by activates, I mean it the OVT and by activates, I mean it causes them to send electrical causes them to send electrical causes them to send electrical potentials. Literally, send electrical signals to Literally, send electrical signals to Literally, send electrical signals to other brain areas and those other brain other brain areas and those other brain other brain areas and those other brain areas inspire a number of different areas inspire a number of different areas inspire a number of different downstream events. The downstream events. The downstream events. The consequence of the that communication is consequence of the that communication is consequence of the that communication is that a particular hormone is eventually that a particular hormone is eventually that a particular hormone is eventually released from released from released from the posterior pituitary. So, from the posterior pituitary. So, from the posterior pituitary. So, from the pituitary, there's a hormonal signal pituitary, there's a hormonal signal pituitary, there's a hormonal signal that's released called vasopressin. that's released called vasopressin. that's released called vasopressin. Vasopressin also goes by the name Vasopressin also goes by the name Vasopressin also goes by the name antidiuretic hormone antidiuretic hormone antidiuretic hormone and antidiuretic hormone has the capacity to antidiuretic hormone has the capacity to antidiuretic hormone has the capacity to either restrict the amount of urine that either restrict the amount of urine that either restrict the amount of urine that we secrete or when that system is turned we secrete or when that system is turned we secrete or when that system is turned off to increase the amount of urine that off to increase the amount of urine that off to increase the amount of urine that we secrete. we secrete. we secrete. So, there's a complicated set of cascades there's a complicated set of cascades there's a complicated set of cascades that's evoked by having high salt that's evoked by having high salt that's evoked by having high salt concentration in the blood. There's also concentration in the blood. There's also concentration in the blood. There's also a complicated set of cascades that are a complicated set of cascades that are a complicated set of cascades that are evoked by having low concentrations of evoked by having low concentrations of evoked by having low concentrations of sodium in the blood. But, the pathway is sodium in the blood. But, the pathway is sodium in the blood. But, the pathway is nonetheless the same. It's OVT is nonetheless the same. It's OVT is nonetheless the same. It's OVT is detecting those osmolarity changes, detecting those osmolarity changes, detecting those osmolarity changes, communicating to the supraoptic nucleus. communicating to the supraoptic nucleus. communicating to the supraoptic nucleus. Supraoptic nucleus is Supraoptic nucleus is Supraoptic nucleus is either causing the release of or is either causing the release of or is either causing the release of or is releasing vasopressin antidiuretic releasing vasopressin antidiuretic releasing vasopressin antidiuretic hormone or that system is shut off so hormone or that system is shut off so hormone or that system is shut off so that the antidiuretic hormone is not that the antidiuretic hormone is not that the antidiuretic hormone is not secreted, which would allow urine to secreted, which would allow urine to secreted, which would allow urine to flow more freely, right? Antidiuretic flow more freely, right? Antidiuretic flow more freely, right? Antidiuretic means anti release of urine and anti release of urine and anti release of urine and by shutting that off, you are going to by shutting that off, you are going to by shutting that off, you are going to cause the release of urine. You're sort cause the release of urine. You're sort cause the release of urine. You're sort of allowing a system to flow, so to of allowing a system to flow, so to of allowing a system to flow, so to speak. The second category of thirst speak. The second category of thirst speak. The second category of thirst is hypovolemic thirst. Hypovolemic is hypovolemic thirst. Hypovolemic is hypovolemic thirst. Hypovolemic thirst occurs when there's a drop in thirst occurs when there's a drop in thirst occurs when there's a drop in blood pressure, okay? So, the OVT, as I blood pressure, okay? So, the OVT, as I blood pressure, okay? So, the OVT, as I mentioned before, can sense osmolality mentioned before, can sense osmolality mentioned before, can sense osmolality based on the fact that it has these based on the fact that it has these based on the fact that it has these neurons that can detect how much salt is neurons that can detect how much salt is neurons that can detect how much salt is in the bloodstream, but the OVLTI also in the bloodstream, but the OVLTI also in the bloodstream, but the OVLTI also harbors neurons that are of the harbors neurons that are of the harbors neurons that are of the baroreceptor mechanoreceptor baroreceptor mechanoreceptor baroreceptor mechanoreceptor category. Now, more category. Now, more category. Now, more on baroreceptors and mechanoreceptors on baroreceptors and mechanoreceptors on baroreceptors and mechanoreceptors later, but later, but later, but baroreceptors are essentially a baroreceptors are essentially a baroreceptors are essentially a receptor, a meaning a protein that's in receptor, a meaning a protein that's in receptor, a meaning a protein that's in a cell that responds to changes in blood a cell that responds to changes in blood a cell that responds to changes in blood pressure. So, there are a number of things that So, there are a number of things that So, there are a number of things that can cause decreases in blood pressure. can cause decreases in blood pressure. can cause decreases in blood pressure. Some of those include, for instance, if Some of those include, for instance, if Some of those include, for instance, if you lose a lot of blood, right? If you lose a lot of blood, right? If you lose a lot of blood, right? If you're bleeding quite a lot. Or in some you're bleeding quite a lot. Or in some you're bleeding quite a lot. Or in some cases, if you vomit quite a lot. Or if cases, if you vomit quite a lot. Or if cases, if you vomit quite a lot. Or if you have extensive diarrhea. Or any you have extensive diarrhea. Or any you have extensive diarrhea. Or any combination of those. Both types of combination of those. Both types of combination of those. Both types of thirst, osm- thirst, osm- thirst, osm- osmotic thirst and hypovolemic thirst, osmotic thirst and hypovolemic thirst, osmotic thirst and hypovolemic thirst, are not just about seeking water, but are not just about seeking water, but are not just about seeking water, but they also are about seeking salt. In they also are about seeking salt. In they also are about seeking salt. In very general terms, very general terms, very general terms, salt, aka sodium, salt, aka sodium, salt, aka sodium, can help retain water. But, sodium and can help retain water. But, sodium and can help retain water. But, sodium and water work together in order to generate water work together in order to generate water work together in order to generate what we call thirst. Sodium water work what we call thirst. Sodium water work what we call thirst. Sodium water work together in order to either retain water together in order to either retain water together in order to either retain water or inspire us to let go of water, to or inspire us to let go of water, to or inspire us to let go of water, to urinate. So, before we can dive into the urinate. So, before we can dive into the urinate. So, before we can dive into the specifics around salt and how to use specifics around salt and how to use specifics around salt and how to use salt for performance and various salt for performance and various salt for performance and various recommendations and things to avoid, recommendations and things to avoid, recommendations and things to avoid, we need to drill a little bit deeper we need to drill a little bit deeper we need to drill a little bit deeper into this fluid balance mechanism in the into this fluid balance mechanism in the into this fluid balance mechanism in the body. And for that reason, we have to body. And for that reason, we have to body. And for that reason, we have to pay at least a little bit of attention pay at least a little bit of attention pay at least a little bit of attention to the kidney. The kidney is an to the kidney. The kidney is an to the kidney. The kidney is an incredible organ. And one of the reasons incredible organ. And one of the reasons incredible organ. And one of the reasons the kidney is so amazing is that it's the kidney is so amazing is that it's the kidney is so amazing is that it's responsible for both retaining, holding responsible for both retaining, holding responsible for both retaining, holding on to, or allowing the release of on to, or allowing the release of on to, or allowing the release of various substances from the body. various substances from the body. various substances from the body. Basically, blood enters the kidney Basically, blood enters the kidney Basically, blood enters the kidney and it goes through a series of tubes, which it goes through a series of tubes, which it goes through a series of tubes, which are arranged into loops. If you want to are arranged into loops. If you want to are arranged into loops. If you want to look more into this, there's the look more into this, there's the look more into this, there's the beautiful loop of Henle and other beautiful loop of Henle and other beautiful loop of Henle and other aspects of the kidney design that allow aspects of the kidney design that allow aspects of the kidney design that allow certain substances to be retained and other substances to be retained and other substances to be retained and other substances to be released depending on substances to be released depending on substances to be released depending on how concentrated those substances are in how concentrated those substances are in how concentrated those substances are in the blood. The kidney responds to a number of The kidney responds to a number of The kidney responds to a number of hormonal signals including vasopressin hormonal signals including vasopressin hormonal signals including vasopressin in order to, for instance, antidiuretic in order to, for instance, antidiuretic in order to, for instance, antidiuretic hormone in order to hold on to more hormone in order to hold on to more hormone in order to hold on to more fluid if that's what your brain and body fluid if that's what your brain and body fluid if that's what your brain and body need. And it responds to other hormonal need. And it responds to other hormonal need. And it responds to other hormonal signals as well. So, it's a pretty signals as well. So, it's a pretty signals as well. So, it's a pretty complex organ. So, complex organ. So, complex organ. So, the way the kidney is designed is that the way the kidney is designed is that the way the kidney is designed is that about 90% of the stuff that's absorbed about 90% of the stuff that's absorbed about 90% of the stuff that's absorbed from the blood is going to be absorbed from the blood is going to be absorbed from the blood is going to be absorbed early in this series of tubes. So, just early in this series of tubes. So, just early in this series of tubes. So, just to give a really simple example, let's to give a really simple example, let's to give a really simple example, let's say that you are very low on fluid. You say that you are very low on fluid. You say that you are very low on fluid. You haven't had much to drink in a while, haven't had much to drink in a while, haven't had much to drink in a while, maybe you're walking around on a hot maybe you're walking around on a hot maybe you're walking around on a hot day. Chances are that the neurons in your Chances are that the neurons in your Chances are that the neurons in your OVLT will sense the increase in osmolarity, will sense the increase in osmolarity, will sense the increase in osmolarity, right? The concentration of salt is right? The concentration of salt is right? The concentration of salt is going to be increased relative to the going to be increased relative to the going to be increased relative to the fluid volume that's circulating. fluid volume that's circulating. fluid volume that's circulating. This, of course, assumes that you This, of course, assumes that you This, of course, assumes that you haven't excreted a lot of sodium for one haven't excreted a lot of sodium for one haven't excreted a lot of sodium for one reason or another. But, reason or another. But, reason or another. But, that increase in osmolarity is detected that increase in osmolarity is detected that increase in osmolarity is detected by the OVLT. The OVLT is going to signal by the OVLT. The OVLT is going to signal by the OVLT. The OVLT is going to signal a bunch of different cascades through a bunch of different cascades through a bunch of different cascades through the supraoptic nucleus, et cetera. And the supraoptic nucleus, et cetera. And the supraoptic nucleus, et cetera. And then vasopressin is going to be released then vasopressin is going to be released then vasopressin is going to be released into the bloodstream, and vasopressin, into the bloodstream, and vasopressin, into the bloodstream, and vasopressin, again, also called antidiuretic hormone, again, also called antidiuretic hormone, again, also called antidiuretic hormone, is going to act on the kidney is going to act on the kidney is going to act on the kidney and change the kidney's function and change the kidney's function and change the kidney's function in a couple of different ways, some in a couple of different ways, some in a couple of different ways, some mechanical, some chemical, okay? In mechanical, some chemical, okay? In mechanical, some chemical, okay? In order to make sure that your kidney does order to make sure that your kidney does order to make sure that your kidney does not release much water, doesn't make you not release much water, doesn't make you not release much water, doesn't make you want to urinate, and in fact, even if want to urinate, and in fact, even if want to urinate, and in fact, even if you would try to urinate, your body's you would try to urinate, your body's you would try to urinate, your body's going to tend to hold on to its fluid going to tend to hold on to its fluid going to tend to hold on to its fluid stores. Okay? So, very simple, stores. Okay? So, very simple, stores. Okay? So, very simple, straightforward example. We can also straightforward example. We can also straightforward example. We can also give the other example whereby if you're give the other example whereby if you're give the other example whereby if you're ingesting a lot, a lot, a lot of water, ingesting a lot, a lot, a lot of water, ingesting a lot, a lot, a lot of water, and it's not a particularly hot day, and it's not a particularly hot day, and it's not a particularly hot day, and you're not sweating very much. Let's you're not sweating very much. Let's you're not sweating very much. Let's assume your salt intake is constant or assume your salt intake is constant or assume your salt intake is constant or is low for whatever reason. Well, or is low for whatever reason. Well, or is low for whatever reason. Well, then the osmolarity, the salt then the osmolarity, the salt then the osmolarity, the salt concentration in your blood is going to concentration in your blood is going to concentration in your blood is going to be lower. Your OVL T will detect that be lower. Your OVL T will detect that be lower. Your OVL T will detect that because of these osmo sensing neurons in because of these osmo sensing neurons in because of these osmo sensing neurons in your OVL T. Your your OVL T. Your your OVL T. Your OVL T will fail to signal to the super OVL T will fail to signal to the super OVL T will fail to signal to the super optic nucleus, and there will not be the optic nucleus, and there will not be the optic nucleus, and there will not be the release of vasopressin antidiuretic release of vasopressin antidiuretic release of vasopressin antidiuretic hormone, and you can excrete all the hormone, and you can excrete all the hormone, and you can excrete all the water that your body wants to excrete. water that your body wants to excrete. water that your body wants to excrete. Meaning, you'll be able to urinate. Meaning, you'll be able to urinate. Meaning, you'll be able to urinate. There's no holding on to water at the There's no holding on to water at the There's no holding on to water at the level of the kidney. Okay. So, how much level of the kidney. Okay. So, how much level of the kidney. Okay. So, how much salt do we need? And what can we trust salt do we need? And what can we trust salt do we need? And what can we trust in terms of trying to guide our in terms of trying to guide our in terms of trying to guide our ingestion of salt? First of all, I want ingestion of salt? First of all, I want ingestion of salt? First of all, I want to be very, very clear that there are a to be very, very clear that there are a to be very, very clear that there are a number of people out there that have number of people out there that have number of people out there that have prehypertension or hypertension. You prehypertension or hypertension. You prehypertension or hypertension. You need to know if you have prehypertension need to know if you have prehypertension need to know if you have prehypertension or hypertension. You need to know if you or hypertension. You need to know if you or hypertension. You need to know if you have normal have normal have normal tension, meaning normal blood pressure. tension, meaning normal blood pressure. tension, meaning normal blood pressure. Everyone should know their blood Everyone should know their blood Everyone should know their blood pressure. It's an absolutely crucial pressure. It's an absolutely crucial pressure. It's an absolutely crucial measurement that has a lot of impact on measurement that has a lot of impact on measurement that has a lot of impact on your immediate and long-term health your immediate and long-term health your immediate and long-term health outcomes. It informs a lot about what outcomes. It informs a lot about what outcomes. It informs a lot about what you should do. Should you be doing more you should do. Should you be doing more you should do. Should you be doing more cardiovascular exercise? Should you be cardiovascular exercise? Should you be cardiovascular exercise? Should you be ingesting more or less salt? And without ingesting more or less salt? And without ingesting more or less salt? And without knowing what your blood pressure is, I knowing what your blood pressure is, I knowing what your blood pressure is, I can't give a one-size-fits-all can't give a one-size-fits-all can't give a one-size-fits-all recommendation. And indeed, I'm not recommendation. And indeed, I'm not recommendation. And indeed, I'm not going to give medical recommendations. going to give medical recommendations. going to give medical recommendations. I'm simply going to spell out what I I'm simply going to spell out what I I'm simply going to spell out what I know about the research, which hopefully know about the research, which hopefully know about the research, which hopefully will point you in the direction of will point you in the direction of will point you in the direction of figuring out what's right for you in figuring out what's right for you in figuring out what's right for you in terms of salt and indeed fluid intake. terms of salt and indeed fluid intake. terms of salt and indeed fluid intake. There is a school of thought that There is a school of thought that There is a school of thought that everybody is consuming too much salt. everybody is consuming too much salt. everybody is consuming too much salt. And I do want to highlight the fact that And I do want to highlight the fact that And I do want to highlight the fact that there are dozens, if not hundreds, of there are dozens, if not hundreds, of there are dozens, if not hundreds, of quality papers that point to the fact quality papers that point to the fact quality papers that point to the fact that a {quote} {end quote} high salt that a {quote} {end quote} high salt that a {quote} {end quote} high salt diet can be bad for various organs and diet can be bad for various organs and diet can be bad for various organs and tissues in the body, including the tissues in the body, including the tissues in the body, including the brain. It just so happens that because fluid It just so happens that because fluid It just so happens that because fluid balance both inside and outside of cells balance both inside and outside of cells balance both inside and outside of cells is crucial not just for your heart and is crucial not just for your heart and is crucial not just for your heart and for your lungs and for your liver and for your lungs and for your liver and for your lungs and for your liver and for all the organs of your body, but for all the organs of your body, but for all the organs of your body, but also for your brain, that if the salt also for your brain, that if the salt also for your brain, that if the salt concentration inside of cells in your concentration inside of cells in your concentration inside of cells in your brain go becomes too high, neurons brain go becomes too high, neurons brain go becomes too high, neurons suffer. Right? They will draw fluid into those Right? They will draw fluid into those Right? They will draw fluid into those cells because water tends to follow cells because water tends to follow cells because water tends to follow salt, as I mentioned before, salt, as I mentioned before, salt, as I mentioned before, and those cells can swell. You can and those cells can swell. You can and those cells can swell. You can literally get swelling of brain tissue. literally get swelling of brain tissue. literally get swelling of brain tissue. Conversely, if salt levels are too low Conversely, if salt levels are too low Conversely, if salt levels are too low inside of cells in any tissue of the inside of cells in any tissue of the inside of cells in any tissue of the body, but body, but body, but in the brain included, then in the brain included, then in the brain included, then the cells of the body and brain can the cells of the body and brain can the cells of the body and brain can shrink because water is pulled into the shrink because water is pulled into the shrink because water is pulled into the extracellular space away from cells. And extracellular space away from cells. And extracellular space away from cells. And indeed, under those conditions, brain indeed, under those conditions, brain indeed, under those conditions, brain function can suffer. And indeed, the function can suffer. And indeed, the function can suffer. And indeed, the overall health of the brain can suffer. overall health of the brain can suffer. overall health of the brain can suffer. At very low levels of sodium, At very low levels of sodium, At very low levels of sodium, meaning at about 2 g per day, meaning at about 2 g per day, meaning at about 2 g per day, you run fewer health risks, but the you run fewer health risks, but the you run fewer health risks, but the number of risk continues to decline as number of risk continues to decline as number of risk continues to decline as you move towards 4 and 5 g per day. And you move towards 4 and 5 g per day. And you move towards 4 and 5 g per day. And then as you increase your salt intake then as you increase your salt intake then as you increase your salt intake further, then the risk dramatically increases. Most the risk dramatically increases. Most the risk dramatically increases. Most people are probably consuming more than people are probably consuming more than people are probably consuming more than that because of the fact that they are that because of the fact that they are that because of the fact that they are ingesting processed foods and processed ingesting processed foods and processed ingesting processed foods and processed foods tend to have more salt in them foods tend to have more salt in them foods tend to have more salt in them than non-processed foods. But if we were than non-processed foods. But if we were than non-processed foods. But if we were to take this number of 2.3 g, that's the to take this number of 2.3 g, that's the to take this number of 2.3 g, that's the recommended cutoff for ingestion of recommended cutoff for ingestion of recommended cutoff for ingestion of sodium, that indeed is associated with sodium, that indeed is associated with sodium, that indeed is associated with low incidence of hazardous outcomes, low incidence of hazardous outcomes, low incidence of hazardous outcomes, cardiovascular events, stroke, et cardiovascular events, stroke, et cardiovascular events, stroke, et cetera. So again, I want to be very, cetera. So again, I want to be very, cetera. So again, I want to be very, very clear that you need to know your very clear that you need to know your very clear that you need to know your blood pressure. If you have high blood pressure. If you have high blood pressure. If you have high blood pressure or you're prehypertensive, you pressure or you're prehypertensive, you pressure or you're prehypertensive, you should be especially cautious about should be especially cautious about should be especially cautious about doing anything that increases your blood doing anything that increases your blood doing anything that increases your blood pressure. And as always, you want to, of pressure. And as always, you want to, of pressure. And as always, you want to, of course, talk to your doctor about doing course, talk to your doctor about doing course, talk to your doctor about doing anything that could adjust your health anything that could adjust your health anything that could adjust your health in any direction. But, there are a in any direction. But, there are a in any direction. But, there are a number of people out there that have low number of people out there that have low number of people out there that have low blood pressure, right? People that get blood pressure, right? People that get blood pressure, right? People that get dizzy when they stand up. People that dizzy when they stand up. People that dizzy when they stand up. People that are feeling chronically fatigued. And in are feeling chronically fatigued. And in are feeling chronically fatigued. And in some cases, not all, those groups can some cases, not all, those groups can some cases, not all, those groups can actually benefit from increasing their actually benefit from increasing their actually benefit from increasing their sodium intake. Why? Well, because of the sodium intake. Why? Well, because of the sodium intake. Why? Well, because of the osmolarity of blood that we talked about osmolarity of blood that we talked about osmolarity of blood that we talked about before, where before, where before, where if you have a certain concentration of if you have a certain concentration of if you have a certain concentration of sodium, meaning sufficient sodium in sodium, meaning sufficient sodium in sodium, meaning sufficient sodium in your bloodstream, that will tend to draw your bloodstream, that will tend to draw your bloodstream, that will tend to draw water into the bloodstream. And water into the bloodstream. And water into the bloodstream. And essentially, the pipes that are your essentially, the pipes that are your essentially, the pipes that are your capillaries, arteries, and veins capillaries, arteries, and veins capillaries, arteries, and veins will be full. The blood pressure will be full. The blood pressure will be full. The blood pressure will get up to your head. Whereas, some get up to your head. Whereas, some get up to your head. Whereas, some people their blood pressure is low people their blood pressure is low people their blood pressure is low because the osmolarity of their blood is because the osmolarity of their blood is because the osmolarity of their blood is low. And that can have a number of low. And that can have a number of low. And that can have a number of downstream consequences. I should also downstream consequences. I should also downstream consequences. I should also mention it can be the consequence itself mention it can be the consequence itself mention it can be the consequence itself of challenges or even deficits in kidney challenges or even deficits in kidney challenges or even deficits in kidney function. But, all of these organs are function. But, all of these organs are function. But, all of these organs are working together. So, the encouragement working together. So, the encouragement working together. So, the encouragement here is not necessarily to ingest more here is not necessarily to ingest more here is not necessarily to ingest more sodium. It's to know your blood pressure sodium. It's to know your blood pressure sodium. It's to know your blood pressure and to address whether or not an and to address whether or not an and to address whether or not an increase in sodium intake would actually increase in sodium intake would actually increase in sodium intake would actually benefit your blood pressure in a way benefit your blood pressure in a way benefit your blood pressure in a way that could relieve some of the dizziness that could relieve some of the dizziness that could relieve some of the dizziness and other symptoms and other symptoms and other symptoms of things like orthostatic disorders. of things like orthostatic disorders. of things like orthostatic disorders. Let's look at what the current Let's look at what the current Let's look at what the current recommendations are for people that recommendations are for people that recommendations are for people that suffer from orthostatic disorders like suffer from orthostatic disorders like suffer from orthostatic disorders like orthostatic hypo, meaning too low orthostatic hypo, meaning too low orthostatic hypo, meaning too low tension, orthostatic hypotension, tension, orthostatic hypotension, tension, orthostatic hypotension, postural tachycardia syndrome, sometimes postural tachycardia syndrome, sometimes postural tachycardia syndrome, sometimes referred to as POTS, P.O.T.S., or referred to as POTS, P.O.T.S., or referred to as POTS, P.O.T.S., or idiopathic orthostatic tachycardia and idiopathic orthostatic tachycardia and idiopathic orthostatic tachycardia and syncope. Those groups are often told to syncope. Those groups are often told to syncope. Those groups are often told to increase their salt intake in order to increase their salt intake in order to increase their salt intake in order to combat their symptoms. The American combat their symptoms. The American combat their symptoms. The American Society of Hypertension recommends Society of Hypertension recommends Society of Hypertension recommends anywhere from 6,000 to 10,000. These are anywhere from 6,000 to 10,000. These are anywhere from 6,000 to 10,000. These are very high levels. So, this is 6 g to 10 very high levels. So, this is 6 g to 10 very high levels. So, this is 6 g to 10 g of salt per day. Keeping in mind, g of salt per day. Keeping in mind, g of salt per day. Keeping in mind, again, that salt again, that salt again, that salt is not the same as sodium. So, that is not the same as sodium. So, that is not the same as sodium. So, that equates to about 2,400 to 4,000 mg of equates to about 2,400 to 4,000 mg of equates to about 2,400 to 4,000 mg of sodium per day. sodium per day. sodium per day. I point out this paper and I point out I point out this paper and I point out I point out this paper and I point out these higher salt recommendations these higher salt recommendations these higher salt recommendations to emphasize again that context is to emphasize again that context is to emphasize again that context is vital, right? That people with high vital, right? That people with high vital, right? That people with high blood pressure are going to need certain blood pressure are going to need certain blood pressure are going to need certain amounts of salt intake. People with amounts of salt intake. People with amounts of salt intake. People with lower blood lower blood lower blood pressure are going to need higher pressure are going to need higher pressure are going to need higher amounts of salt. And for most people out amounts of salt. And for most people out amounts of salt. And for most people out there, you're going to need to evaluate how you're going to need to evaluate how you're going to need to evaluate how much salt intake is going to allow your much salt intake is going to allow your much salt intake is going to allow your brain and body to function optimally. brain and body to function optimally. brain and body to function optimally. So, if you're exercising a lot, if So, if you're exercising a lot, if So, if you're exercising a lot, if you're in a particular cold, dry you're in a particular cold, dry you're in a particular cold, dry environment, or a particular hot environment, or a particular hot environment, or a particular hot environment, you ought to be ingesting environment, you ought to be ingesting environment, you ought to be ingesting sufficient amounts of salt and fluid. A sufficient amounts of salt and fluid. A sufficient amounts of salt and fluid. A rule of thumb for exercise-based rule of thumb for exercise-based rule of thumb for exercise-based replenishment of fluid comes from what I replenishment of fluid comes from what I replenishment of fluid comes from what I some episodes back referred to as the some episodes back referred to as the some episodes back referred to as the Galpin equation. Galpin equation. Galpin equation. The Galpin equation I named it after The Galpin equation I named it after The Galpin equation I named it after Andy Galpin, and I think that is the Andy Galpin, and I think that is the Andy Galpin, and I think that is the appropriate attribution there. Andy appropriate attribution there. Andy appropriate attribution there. Andy Galpin is an exercise physiologist. So, Galpin is an exercise physiologist. So, Galpin is an exercise physiologist. So, the Galpin equation is based on the fact the Galpin equation is based on the fact the Galpin equation is based on the fact that we lose about 1 to 5 lb of water that we lose about 1 to 5 lb of water that we lose about 1 to 5 lb of water per hour, per hour, per hour, which can definitely impact our mental which can definitely impact our mental which can definitely impact our mental capacity and our physical performance. capacity and our physical performance. capacity and our physical performance. And the reason And the reason And the reason that loss of water from our system that loss of water from our system that loss of water from our system impacts mental capacity and physical impacts mental capacity and physical impacts mental capacity and physical performance has a lot to do with performance has a lot to do with performance has a lot to do with literally the changes in the volume of literally the changes in the volume of literally the changes in the volume of those cells, the size of those cells, those cells, the size of those cells, those cells, the size of those cells, based on how much sodium is contained in based on how much sodium is contained in based on how much sodium is contained in or outside those cells. And the formula or outside those cells. And the formula or outside those cells. And the formula for hydration, for hydration, for hydration, the so-called Galpin equation, is your the so-called Galpin equation, is your the so-called Galpin equation, is your body weight in pounds divided by 30 body weight in pounds divided by 30 body weight in pounds divided by 30 equals the ounces of fluid you should equals the ounces of fluid you should equals the ounces of fluid you should drink every 15 minutes. Now, drink every 15 minutes. Now, drink every 15 minutes. Now, the Galpin equation is the Galpin equation is the Galpin equation is mainly designed for exercise, but I mainly designed for exercise, but I mainly designed for exercise, but I think is actually a very good rule of think is actually a very good rule of think is actually a very good rule of thumb for anytime that you need to thumb for anytime that you need to thumb for anytime that you need to engage mental capacity, not just engage mental capacity, not just engage mental capacity, not just physical performance. The idea is to physical performance. The idea is to physical performance. The idea is to make sure that you're entering the make sure that you're entering the make sure that you're entering the activity, cognitive or physical, activity, cognitive or physical, activity, cognitive or physical, sufficiently hydrated. sufficiently hydrated. sufficiently hydrated. And that throughout that activity you're And that throughout that activity you're And that throughout that activity you're hydrating regularly. And it points to hydrating regularly. And it points to hydrating regularly. And it points to the fact that most people are probably the fact that most people are probably the fact that most people are probably under hydrating, but not just under hydrating, but not just under hydrating, but not just under hydrating from the perspective of not hydrating from the perspective of not hydrating from the perspective of not ingesting enough water, that they're ingesting enough water, that they're ingesting enough water, that they're probably not getting enough electrolytes probably not getting enough electrolytes probably not getting enough electrolytes as well, sodium, potassium, and as well, sodium, potassium, and as well, sodium, potassium, and magnesium. So, we've all heard about how magnesium. So, we've all heard about how magnesium. So, we've all heard about how excess salt it's bad for blood pressure, excess salt it's bad for blood pressure, excess salt it's bad for blood pressure, damage the heart, the brain, etc. damage the heart, the brain, etc. damage the heart, the brain, etc. I do want to give some voice to I do want to give some voice to I do want to give some voice to situations where situations where situations where too little salt can actually cause too little salt can actually cause too little salt can actually cause problems. And this has everything to do problems. And this has everything to do problems. And this has everything to do with the nervous system. with the nervous system. with the nervous system. So, without getting into excessive So, without getting into excessive So, without getting into excessive amounts of detail, amounts of detail, amounts of detail, the kidneys, as we talked about before, are kidneys, as we talked about before, are kidneys, as we talked about before, are going to regulate salt and fluid going to regulate salt and fluid going to regulate salt and fluid balance. The adrenal glands, which ride atop the adrenal glands, which ride atop the adrenal glands, which ride atop the kidneys, are going to make kidneys, are going to make kidneys, are going to make glucocorticoids like aldosterone, and glucocorticoids like aldosterone, and glucocorticoids like aldosterone, and those are going to directly impact those are going to directly impact those are going to directly impact things like things like things like fluid balance, and in part they do that fluid balance, and in part they do that fluid balance, and in part they do that by regulating how much craving for and by regulating how much craving for and by regulating how much craving for and tolerance of salty solutions uh we have. tolerance of salty solutions uh we have. tolerance of salty solutions uh we have. The whole basis for a relationship The whole basis for a relationship The whole basis for a relationship between the adrenal system, these between the adrenal system, these between the adrenal system, these glucocorticoids, things like glucocorticoids, things like glucocorticoids, things like aldosterone, and the craving for sodium, aldosterone, and the craving for sodium, aldosterone, and the craving for sodium, is that is that is that the stress system is a generic system the stress system is a generic system the stress system is a generic system designed to deal with various challenges designed to deal with various challenges designed to deal with various challenges to the organism, to you, or to me, or to the organism, to you, or to me, or to the organism, to you, or to me, or to an animal. an animal. an animal. And those challenges can arise in many those challenges can arise in many those challenges can arise in many different forms. different forms. different forms. They can be an infection, it can be They can be an infection, it can be They can be an infection, it can be famine, it can be lack of water, and so famine, it can be lack of water, and so famine, it can be lack of water, and so on. But, in general, the stress response is But, in general, the stress response is But, in general, the stress response is one of elevated heart rate, elevated one of elevated heart rate, elevated one of elevated heart rate, elevated blood pressure, and an inability to blood pressure, and an inability to blood pressure, and an inability to maintain movement and resistance to that maintain movement and resistance to that maintain movement and resistance to that challenge, okay? It's clear from a challenge, okay? It's clear from a challenge, okay? It's clear from a number of studies that if sodium levels number of studies that if sodium levels number of studies that if sodium levels are too low, are too low, are too low, that our ability to meet stress that our ability to meet stress that our ability to meet stress challenges is impaired. challenges is impaired. challenges is impaired. There are conditions, such as when we There are conditions, such as when we There are conditions, such as when we are under stress challenge, when there are under stress challenge, when there are under stress challenge, when there is a natural craving for more sodium, is a natural craving for more sodium, is a natural craving for more sodium, and that natural craving for more sodium and that natural craving for more sodium and that natural craving for more sodium is hardwired into us as a way to meet is hardwired into us as a way to meet is hardwired into us as a way to meet that challenge. Now, we can't have a that challenge. Now, we can't have a that challenge. Now, we can't have a discussion about sodium without having a discussion about sodium without having a discussion about sodium without having a discussion about the other electrolytes, discussion about the other electrolytes, discussion about the other electrolytes, magnesium and potassium. I want to magnesium and potassium. I want to magnesium and potassium. I want to emphasize that many people are probably emphasize that many people are probably emphasize that many people are probably getting enough magnesium in their diet getting enough magnesium in their diet getting enough magnesium in their diet that they don't need to supplement that they don't need to supplement that they don't need to supplement magnesium. Some people, however, opt to magnesium. Some people, however, opt to magnesium. Some people, however, opt to supplement magnesium in ways that can supplement magnesium in ways that can supplement magnesium in ways that can support them, and there are many support them, and there are many support them, and there are many different forms of magnesium and just in different forms of magnesium and just in different forms of magnesium and just in very brief very brief very brief passing, I'll just say that passing, I'll just say that passing, I'll just say that there is some evidence that there is some evidence that there is some evidence that you can reduce muscle soreness from you can reduce muscle soreness from you can reduce muscle soreness from exercise by ingestion of magnesium exercise by ingestion of magnesium exercise by ingestion of magnesium malate, m a l a t e. malate, m a l a t e. malate, m a l a t e. I've talked before I've talked before I've talked before about magnesium threonate, t h r e n o a about magnesium threonate, t h r e n o a about magnesium threonate, t h r e n o a t e, magnesium threonate, t e, magnesium threonate, t e, magnesium threonate, for sake of promoting the transition for sake of promoting the transition for sake of promoting the transition into sleep and for depth of sleep. And into sleep and for depth of sleep. And into sleep and for depth of sleep. And then there are other forms of magnesium, then there are other forms of magnesium, then there are other forms of magnesium, magnesium bisglycinate, which it seems magnesium bisglycinate, which it seems magnesium bisglycinate, which it seems at least on par with magnesium threonate at least on par with magnesium threonate at least on par with magnesium threonate in terms of promoting transition into in terms of promoting transition into in terms of promoting transition into and depth of sleep, and so on. and depth of sleep, and so on. and depth of sleep, and so on. There are other forms of magnesium, There are other forms of magnesium, There are other forms of magnesium, magnesium citrate, which um has other magnesium citrate, which um has other magnesium citrate, which um has other functions. Actually, magnesium citrate functions. Actually, magnesium citrate functions. Actually, magnesium citrate huh is uh is a fairly effective uh huh is uh is a fairly effective uh huh is uh is a fairly effective uh laxative. Um uh not known to promote laxative. Um uh not known to promote laxative. Um uh not known to promote sleep and things of that sort. So, a lot sleep and things of that sort. So, a lot sleep and things of that sort. So, a lot of different forms of magnesium, and of different forms of magnesium, and of different forms of magnesium, and there's still other forms out there. there's still other forms out there. there's still other forms out there. Many people are not getting enough Many people are not getting enough Many people are not getting enough magnesium. Many people are. Okay, so magnesium. Many people are. Okay, so magnesium. Many people are. Okay, so that's magnesium. that's magnesium. that's magnesium. Anytime we're talking about sodium Anytime we're talking about sodium Anytime we're talking about sodium balance, we have to take into balance, we have to take into balance, we have to take into consideration potassium because the way consideration potassium because the way consideration potassium because the way that the kidney works and the way that the kidney works and the way that the kidney works and the way that sodium balance is regulated both in the sodium balance is regulated both in the sodium balance is regulated both in the body and the brain is that sodium and body and the brain is that sodium and body and the brain is that sodium and potassium are working in close concert potassium are working in close concert potassium are working in close concert with one another. with one another. with one another. There are a lot of different There are a lot of different There are a lot of different recommendations about ratios out there, recommendations about ratios out there, recommendations about ratios out there, and they range widely from two to one and they range widely from two to one and they range widely from two to one ratio of potassium to sodium. ratio of potassium to sodium. ratio of potassium to sodium. Uh I've heard it in the other direction, Uh I've heard it in the other direction, Uh I've heard it in the other direction, too. I've heard a two to one sodium to too. I've heard a two to one sodium to too. I've heard a two to one sodium to potassium. Um the recommendations vary. Now, for Um the recommendations vary. Now, for Um the recommendations vary. Now, for people that are following people that are following people that are following low-carbohydrate diets, one of the low-carbohydrate diets, one of the low-carbohydrate diets, one of the most immediate effects of a most immediate effects of a most immediate effects of a low-carbohydrate diet is that you're low-carbohydrate diet is that you're low-carbohydrate diet is that you're going to excrete more water. And so, going to excrete more water. And so, going to excrete more water. And so, under those conditions, you're also under those conditions, you're also under those conditions, you're also going to lose not just water, but you'll going to lose not just water, but you'll going to lose not just water, but you'll probably also lose sodium and potassium. probably also lose sodium and potassium. probably also lose sodium and potassium. And so, And so, And so, some people, many people in fact, find some people, many people in fact, find some people, many people in fact, find that when they are on a lower or that when they are on a lower or that when they are on a lower or low-carbohydrate diet, then they need to low-carbohydrate diet, then they need to low-carbohydrate diet, then they need to make sure that they're getting enough make sure that they're getting enough make sure that they're getting enough sodium and enough potassium. And of sodium and enough potassium. And of sodium and enough potassium. And of course, some people who are on course, some people who are on course, some people who are on low-carbohydrate diets do ingest low-carbohydrate diets do ingest low-carbohydrate diets do ingest vegetables at, you know, or other forms vegetables at, you know, or other forms vegetables at, you know, or other forms of food that carry along with of food that carry along with of food that carry along with them potassium. So, it's them potassium. So, it's them potassium. So, it's quite variable from person to person. I quite variable from person to person. I quite variable from person to person. I mean, you can imagine if carbohydrate mean, you can imagine if carbohydrate mean, you can imagine if carbohydrate holds water, water and salt balance and holds water, water and salt balance and holds water, water and salt balance and potassium go hand in hand and hand, that potassium go hand in hand and hand, that potassium go hand in hand and hand, that if you're on a low-carbohydrate diet, if you're on a low-carbohydrate diet, if you're on a low-carbohydrate diet, that you might need to adjust your salt that you might need to adjust your salt that you might need to adjust your salt intake and potassium. And conversely, intake and potassium. And conversely, intake and potassium. And conversely, that if you're on a carbohydrate-rich that if you're on a carbohydrate-rich that if you're on a carbohydrate-rich diet or a moderate-carbohydrate diet, diet or a moderate-carbohydrate diet, diet or a moderate-carbohydrate diet, then you may need to ingest less sodium then you may need to ingest less sodium then you may need to ingest less sodium and less potassium. So, up until now, and less potassium. So, up until now, and less potassium. So, up until now, we've been talking about salt as a we've been talking about salt as a we've been talking about salt as a substance and a way to regulate fluid substance and a way to regulate fluid substance and a way to regulate fluid balance and blood volume and so on. We balance and blood volume and so on. We balance and blood volume and so on. We haven't talked a lot about salt as a haven't talked a lot about salt as a haven't talked a lot about salt as a taste or taste of things that are salty. taste or taste of things that are salty. taste or taste of things that are salty. And yet, we know that we have salt And yet, we know that we have salt And yet, we know that we have salt receptors, meaning neurons that fire receptors, meaning neurons that fire receptors, meaning neurons that fire action potentials when salty substances action potentials when salty substances action potentials when salty substances are detected, much in the same way that are detected, much in the same way that are detected, much in the same way that we have sweet detectors and bitter we have sweet detectors and bitter we have sweet detectors and bitter detectors, and we have detectors of detectors, and we have detectors of detectors, and we have detectors of umami, the savory flavor, on our tongue. umami, the savory flavor, on our tongue. umami, the savory flavor, on our tongue. Well, we also have salt sensors at Well, we also have salt sensors at Well, we also have salt sensors at various locations throughout our various locations throughout our various locations throughout our digestive tract. Although that the digestive tract. Although that the digestive tract. Although that the sensation and the taste of salt actually sensation and the taste of salt actually sensation and the taste of salt actually exerts a very robust effect on certain exerts a very robust effect on certain exerts a very robust effect on certain areas of the brain that can either make areas of the brain that can either make areas of the brain that can either make us crave more or sate, meaning fulfill, us crave more or sate, meaning fulfill, us crave more or sate, meaning fulfill, our desire for salt. And you can imagine our desire for salt. And you can imagine our desire for salt. And you can imagine why this would be important. Your brain why this would be important. Your brain why this would be important. Your brain actually has to register whether or not actually has to register whether or not actually has to register whether or not you're bringing in salt you're bringing in salt you're bringing in salt in order to know whether or not you are in order to know whether or not you are in order to know whether or not you are going to crave salt more or not. And going to crave salt more or not. And going to crave salt more or not. And beautiful work that's been done by the beautiful work that's been done by the beautiful work that's been done by the Zuker lab, z u k e r, Zuker lab at Zuker lab, z u k e r, Zuker lab at Zuker lab, z u k e r, Zuker lab at Columbia University as well as many Columbia University as well as many Columbia University as well as many other labs have used imaging techniques other labs have used imaging techniques other labs have used imaging techniques and other techniques such as molecular and other techniques such as molecular and other techniques such as molecular biology to define these so-called biology to define these so-called biology to define these so-called parallel pathways. Parallel meaning parallel pathways. Parallel meaning parallel pathways. Parallel meaning pathways that represent sweet or the pathways that represent sweet or the pathways that represent sweet or the presence of sweet taste in the mouth and presence of sweet taste in the mouth and presence of sweet taste in the mouth and gut. Parallel pathways meaning neural Parallel pathways meaning neural Parallel pathways meaning neural circuits that represent the presence of circuits that represent the presence of circuits that represent the presence of salty tastes in the mouth and gut and so salty tastes in the mouth and gut and so salty tastes in the mouth and gut and so on. And then those go into the brain, on. And then those go into the brain, on. And then those go into the brain, move up through brainstem centers and up move up through brainstem centers and up move up through brainstem centers and up to the neocortex, indeed where our seat to the neocortex, indeed where our seat to the neocortex, indeed where our seat of our conscious perception is, to give of our conscious perception is, to give of our conscious perception is, to give us a sense and a perception of us a sense and a perception of us a sense and a perception of the components of the foods that we the components of the foods that we the components of the foods that we happen to be ingesting. The pathways, happen to be ingesting. The pathways, happen to be ingesting. The pathways, the parallel pathways for salty and the parallel pathways for salty and the parallel pathways for salty and the parallel pathways for sweet and bitter parallel pathways for sweet and bitter parallel pathways for sweet and bitter and so on can actually interact. And and so on can actually interact. And and so on can actually interact. And this has important relevance in the this has important relevance in the this has important relevance in the context of food choices and sugar context of food choices and sugar context of food choices and sugar craving. One of the things that's commonplace One of the things that's commonplace One of the things that's commonplace nowadays is in many processed foods nowadays is in many processed foods nowadays is in many processed foods there is a business, literally, a there is a business, literally, a there is a business, literally, a business of putting so-called hidden business of putting so-called hidden business of putting so-called hidden sugars. And these hidden sugars are not sugars. And these hidden sugars are not sugars. And these hidden sugars are not always in the form of caloric sugars. always in the form of caloric sugars. always in the form of caloric sugars. They're sometimes in the form of They're sometimes in the form of They're sometimes in the form of artificial sweeteners into various artificial sweeteners into various artificial sweeteners into various foods. And you might say, "Well, why foods. And you might say, "Well, why foods. And you might say, "Well, why would they put more sugar into a food would they put more sugar into a food would they put more sugar into a food and then disguise the sugary taste given and then disguise the sugary taste given and then disguise the sugary taste given that sweet tastes often compel people to that sweet tastes often compel people to that sweet tastes often compel people to eat more of these things?" Well, it's a eat more of these things?" Well, it's a eat more of these things?" Well, it's a way actually of bypassing some of the way actually of bypassing some of the way actually of bypassing some of the homeostatic mechanisms for sweet. You homeostatic mechanisms for sweet. You homeostatic mechanisms for sweet. You know, even though we might think that know, even though we might think that know, even though we might think that the more sweet stuff we eat, the more the more sweet stuff we eat, the more the more sweet stuff we eat, the more sweet stuff we crave, in general people sweet stuff we crave, in general people sweet stuff we crave, in general people have a threshold whereby they say, have a threshold whereby they say, have a threshold whereby they say, "Okay, I've had enough sugary stuff." "Okay, I've had enough sugary stuff." "Okay, I've had enough sugary stuff." So, these sensory systems interact in So, these sensory systems interact in So, these sensory systems interact in this way this way this way by putting sugars into foods and hiding by putting sugars into foods and hiding by putting sugars into foods and hiding the sugary taste of those foods, those the sugary taste of those foods, those the sugary taste of those foods, those foods, even if they contain artificial foods, even if they contain artificial foods, even if they contain artificial sweeteners that will then signal to the sweeteners that will then signal to the sweeteners that will then signal to the brain to release more dopamine and make brain to release more dopamine and make brain to release more dopamine and make you crave more of that food. Whereas, you crave more of that food. Whereas, you crave more of that food. Whereas, had you been able to perceive the true had you been able to perceive the true had you been able to perceive the true sweetness of that food, you might have sweetness of that food, you might have sweetness of that food, you might have consumed less. And indeed, that's what consumed less. And indeed, that's what consumed less. And indeed, that's what happens. So, these hidden sugars are happens. So, these hidden sugars are happens. So, these hidden sugars are kind of diabolical. kind of diabolical. kind of diabolical. Why am I talking about all of this in Why am I talking about all of this in Why am I talking about all of this in the context of an episode on salt? the context of an episode on salt? the context of an episode on salt? Well, as many of you have probably noticed, a as many of you have probably noticed, a as many of you have probably noticed, a lot of foods out there contain a lot of foods out there contain a lot of foods out there contain a salty-sweet combination. And it is it's salty-sweet combination. And it is it's salty-sweet combination. And it is it's that combination of salty and sweet that combination of salty and sweet that combination of salty and sweet which can actually lead you to consume which can actually lead you to consume which can actually lead you to consume more of the more of the more of the salty-sweet food than you would have if salty-sweet food than you would have if salty-sweet food than you would have if it had just been sweet or it had if it had just been sweet or it had if it had just been sweet or it had just been salty. And that's because just been salty. And that's because just been salty. And that's because both sweet taste and salty taste have a both sweet taste and salty taste have a both sweet taste and salty taste have a homeostatic balance. So, if you ingest homeostatic balance. So, if you ingest homeostatic balance. So, if you ingest something that's very salty, pretty something that's very salty, pretty something that's very salty, pretty soon your appetite for salty foods will soon your appetite for salty foods will soon your appetite for salty foods will be reduced. But if you mask some of that be reduced. But if you mask some of that be reduced. But if you mask some of that with sweet, well, because of the uh with sweet, well, because of the uh with sweet, well, because of the uh interactions of these parallel pathways, interactions of these parallel pathways, interactions of these parallel pathways, you somewhat shut down your perception you somewhat shut down your perception you somewhat shut down your perception of how much salt you're ingesting. of how much salt you're ingesting. of how much salt you're ingesting. Or conversely, by ingesting some salt Or conversely, by ingesting some salt Or conversely, by ingesting some salt with sweet foods, you mask some of the with sweet foods, you mask some of the with sweet foods, you mask some of the sweetness of the sweet foods that you're sweetness of the sweet foods that you're sweetness of the sweet foods that you're tasting, and you will continue to tasting, and you will continue to tasting, and you will continue to indulge in those foods. So, salty-sweet indulge in those foods. So, salty-sweet indulge in those foods. So, salty-sweet interactions uh can be very diabolical. interactions uh can be very diabolical. interactions uh can be very diabolical. They can also be very tasty, but they They can also be very tasty, but they They can also be very tasty, but they can be very diabolical in terms of can be very diabolical in terms of can be very diabolical in terms of inspiring you to eat more of a inspiring you to eat more of a inspiring you to eat more of a particular food than you would otherwise particular food than you would otherwise particular food than you would otherwise if you were just following your if you were just following your if you were just following your homeostatic salt or your homeostatic salt or your homeostatic salt or your homeostatic sugar balance systems. So, your brain sugar balance systems. So, your brain sugar balance systems. So, your brain has a way of representing the pure form has a way of representing the pure form has a way of representing the pure form of taste, salty, sweet, bitter, etc., of taste, salty, sweet, bitter, etc., of taste, salty, sweet, bitter, etc., and has a way of representing their and has a way of representing their and has a way of representing their combinations. And food manufacturers combinations. And food manufacturers combinations. And food manufacturers have exploited this um to large have exploited this um to large have exploited this um to large degree. I mention all of this because if degree. I mention all of this because if degree. I mention all of this because if you're somebody who's looking to you're somebody who's looking to you're somebody who's looking to explore either increasing or decreasing explore either increasing or decreasing explore either increasing or decreasing your sodium intake for health benefits, your sodium intake for health benefits, your sodium intake for health benefits, for performance benefits, for performance benefits, for performance benefits, in many ways, it is useful to do that in many ways, it is useful to do that in many ways, it is useful to do that in the context of a fairly pure, meaning the context of a fairly pure, meaning the context of a fairly pure, meaning unprocessed, food intake background, unprocessed, food intake background, unprocessed, food intake background, whether or not that's keto, carnivore, whether or not that's keto, carnivore, whether or not that's keto, carnivore, omnivore, uh intermittent fasting, or what have you. intermittent fasting, or what have you. intermittent fasting, or what have you. It doesn't really matter, but the closer It doesn't really matter, but the closer It doesn't really matter, but the closer that foods are to their basic form and that foods are to their basic form and that foods are to their basic form and taste, meaning not com- large taste, meaning not com- large taste, meaning not com- large combinations of large amounts of combinations of large amounts of combinations of large amounts of ingredients, and certainly avoiding ingredients, and certainly avoiding ingredients, and certainly avoiding highly processed foods, the more quickly highly processed foods, the more quickly highly processed foods, the more quickly you're going to be able to hone in on you're going to be able to hone in on you're going to be able to hone in on your specific salt appetite and salt your specific salt appetite and salt your specific salt appetite and salt needs, which as I've pointed out needs, which as I've pointed out needs, which as I've pointed out numerous times throughout this episode numerous times throughout this episode numerous times throughout this episode are going to vary from person to person are going to vary from person to person are going to vary from person to person depending on nutrition, depending on depending on nutrition, depending on depending on nutrition, depending on activity, depending on hormone status. activity, depending on hormone status. activity, depending on hormone status. So, if you want to home in on the if you want to home in on the if you want to home in on the appropriate amount of sodium for you, appropriate amount of sodium for you, appropriate amount of sodium for you, yes, blood pressure is going to be an yes, blood pressure is going to be an yes, blood pressure is going to be an important metric to pay attention to as important metric to pay attention to as important metric to pay attention to as you go along. But, in determining you go along. But, in determining you go along. But, in determining whether or not whether or not whether or not increasing your salt intake might be increasing your salt intake might be increasing your salt intake might be beneficial for uh for instance, for beneficial for uh for instance, for beneficial for uh for instance, for reducing anxiety a bit, or for reducing anxiety a bit, or for reducing anxiety a bit, or for increasing blood pressure to offset some increasing blood pressure to offset some increasing blood pressure to offset some of these postural syndromes where you of these postural syndromes where you of these postural syndromes where you get dizzy, etc., for improving sports get dizzy, etc., for improving sports get dizzy, etc., for improving sports performance, or cognitive performance, or cognitive performance, or cognitive performance, and indeed many people find, and it's a and indeed many people find, and it's a and indeed many people find, and it's a reviewed a bit, and some of the data are reviewed a bit, and some of the data are reviewed a bit, and some of the data are reviewed in the book The Salt Fix, reviewed in the book The Salt Fix, reviewed in the book The Salt Fix, that when people increase their salt that when people increase their salt that when people increase their salt intake in a backdrop of relatively intake in a backdrop of relatively intake in a backdrop of relatively unprocessed foods, that sugar cravings unprocessed foods, that sugar cravings unprocessed foods, that sugar cravings can indeed be vastly reduced, and that can indeed be vastly reduced, and that can indeed be vastly reduced, and that makes sense given the way that these makes sense given the way that these makes sense given the way that these neural pathways for salty and sweet neural pathways for salty and sweet neural pathways for salty and sweet interact. Now, thus far, I've already interact. Now, thus far, I've already interact. Now, thus far, I've already covered quite a lot of material, but I would be quite a lot of material, but I would be quite a lot of material, but I would be completely remiss if I didn't emphasize completely remiss if I didn't emphasize completely remiss if I didn't emphasize the crucial role that sodium plays in the crucial role that sodium plays in the crucial role that sodium plays in the way that neurons function. In fact, the way that neurons function. In fact, the way that neurons function. In fact, sodium is one of the key elements that sodium is one of the key elements that sodium is one of the key elements that allows neurons to function at all. allows neurons to function at all. allows neurons to function at all. And that's by way of engaging what we And that's by way of engaging what we And that's by way of engaging what we call the action potential. The action call the action potential. The action call the action potential. The action potential is the fundamental way in potential is the fundamental way in potential is the fundamental way in which neurons communicate with one which neurons communicate with one which neurons communicate with one another. The point I'd like to make, at another. The point I'd like to make, at another. The point I'd like to make, at least as it relates to this episode on least as it relates to this episode on least as it relates to this episode on salt, is that salt, is that salt, is that having sufficient levels of salt in your having sufficient levels of salt in your having sufficient levels of salt in your system allows your brain to function, system allows your brain to function, system allows your brain to function, allows your nervous system to function allows your nervous system to function allows your nervous system to function at all. Again, this is the most basic at all. Again, this is the most basic at all. Again, this is the most basic aspect of nervous system function. And aspect of nervous system function. And aspect of nervous system function. And there are cases where this whole system there are cases where this whole system there are cases where this whole system gets disrupted, and that brings us to gets disrupted, and that brings us to gets disrupted, and that brings us to the topic of sodium and water balance. the topic of sodium and water balance. the topic of sodium and water balance. As many of you have probably heard, but As many of you have probably heard, but As many of you have probably heard, but hopefully, uh, if you haven't, you'll hopefully, uh, if you haven't, you'll hopefully, uh, if you haven't, you'll take this message seriously, if you take this message seriously, if you take this message seriously, if you drink too much water, drink too much water, drink too much water, especially in a short amount of time, especially in a short amount of time, especially in a short amount of time, you can actually kill yourself. you can actually kill yourself. you can actually kill yourself. All right? And we certainly don't want All right? And we certainly don't want All right? And we certainly don't want that to happen. that to happen. that to happen. If you ingest a lot of water in a very If you ingest a lot of water in a very If you ingest a lot of water in a very short period of time, something called short period of time, something called short period of time, something called hyponatremia, you will excrete a lot of sodium very you will excrete a lot of sodium very you will excrete a lot of sodium very quickly, and your ability to regulate quickly, and your ability to regulate quickly, and your ability to regulate kidney function will be disrupted, but kidney function will be disrupted, but kidney function will be disrupted, but in addition to that, your brain can in addition to that, your brain can in addition to that, your brain can actually stop functioning. And I've actually stop functioning. And I've actually stop functioning. And I've talked about this a bit in the episode talked about this a bit in the episode talked about this a bit in the episode on endurance, but there are instances in on endurance, but there are instances in on endurance, but there are instances in which, you know, competitive athletes which, you know, competitive athletes which, you know, competitive athletes have come into the stadium to finish a have come into the stadium to finish a have come into the stadium to finish a final lap of a long endurance race, and final lap of a long endurance race, and final lap of a long endurance race, and are completely disoriented, and actually are completely disoriented, and actually are completely disoriented, and actually can't find their way to the finish line. can't find their way to the finish line. can't find their way to the finish line. You know, it might sound like kind of a You know, it might sound like kind of a You know, it might sound like kind of a silly, kind of crazy example, but there silly, kind of crazy example, but there silly, kind of crazy example, but there are examples of people having severe are examples of people having severe are examples of people having severe mental issues and physical issues mental issues and physical issues mental issues and physical issues post-exercise when that exercise post-exercise when that exercise post-exercise when that exercise involved a ton of sweating, or hot involved a ton of sweating, or hot involved a ton of sweating, or hot environments, or insufficient ingestion environments, or insufficient ingestion environments, or insufficient ingestion of fluids and electrolytes, because of fluids and electrolytes, because of fluids and electrolytes, because included in that electrolyte formula, of included in that electrolyte formula, of included in that electrolyte formula, of course, is sodium. And as you just course, is sodium. And as you just course, is sodium. And as you just learned, sodium is absolutely crucial learned, sodium is absolutely crucial learned, sodium is absolutely crucial for neurons to function. So, to briefly for neurons to function. So, to briefly for neurons to function. So, to briefly recap some of what I've talked about recap some of what I've talked about recap some of what I've talked about today, we talked about how the brain monitors we talked about how the brain monitors we talked about how the brain monitors the amount of salt in your brain and the amount of salt in your brain and the amount of salt in your brain and body, and how that relates to thirst, body, and how that relates to thirst, body, and how that relates to thirst, and the drive to consume more fluid and the drive to consume more fluid and the drive to consume more fluid and or salty fluids. We also talked a little or salty fluids. We also talked a little or salty fluids. We also talked a little bit about the hormones that come from bit about the hormones that come from bit about the hormones that come from the brain and operate at the level of the brain and operate at the level of the brain and operate at the level of the kidney the kidney the kidney in order to either retain or allow water in order to either retain or allow water in order to either retain or allow water to leave your system. to leave your system. to leave your system. Talked a little bit about the function Talked a little bit about the function Talked a little bit about the function of the kidney itself, a beautiful organ. of the kidney itself, a beautiful organ. of the kidney itself, a beautiful organ. We talked about We talked about We talked about the relationship between salt intake and the relationship between salt intake and the relationship between salt intake and various health parameters and how a various health parameters and how a various health parameters and how a particular range of salt intake might be particular range of salt intake might be particular range of salt intake might be optimal depending on the context in which that depending on the context in which that depending on the context in which that range has been consumed. Meaning, range has been consumed. Meaning, range has been consumed. Meaning, depending on whether or not you're depending on whether or not you're depending on whether or not you're hypertensive, pre-hypertensive, or hypertensive, pre-hypertensive, or hypertensive, pre-hypertensive, or normal tension. normal tension. normal tension. We talked about fluid intake and We talked about fluid intake and We talked about fluid intake and electrolyte intake, so sodium, electrolyte intake, so sodium, electrolyte intake, so sodium, potassium, magnesium in the context of potassium, magnesium in the context of potassium, magnesium in the context of athletic or sports performance, but also athletic or sports performance, but also athletic or sports performance, but also in terms of maintaining cognitive in terms of maintaining cognitive in terms of maintaining cognitive function. Talked about the Galpin function. Talked about the Galpin function. Talked about the Galpin equation, which you could easily adapt equation, which you could easily adapt equation, which you could easily adapt to your body weight and to your to your body weight and to your to your body weight and to your circumstances. Of course, adjusting the circumstances. Of course, adjusting the circumstances. Of course, adjusting the amount of fluid and electrolyte intake amount of fluid and electrolyte intake amount of fluid and electrolyte intake upwards if you're exercising or working upwards if you're exercising or working upwards if you're exercising or working in very hot environments, downwards in very hot environments, downwards in very hot environments, downwards maybe if you're in less maybe if you're in less maybe if you're in less hot environments where you're sweating hot environments where you're sweating hot environments where you're sweating less and so on. We also talked about the less and so on. We also talked about the less and so on. We also talked about the relationship between the stress system relationship between the stress system relationship between the stress system and the salt craving system and why and the salt craving system and why and the salt craving system and why those two systems interact and why for those two systems interact and why for those two systems interact and why for some people who may suffer a bit from some people who may suffer a bit from some people who may suffer a bit from anxiety or under conditions of stress, anxiety or under conditions of stress, anxiety or under conditions of stress, increasing salt intake, provided it's increasing salt intake, provided it's increasing salt intake, provided it's done through healthy means, might done through healthy means, might done through healthy means, might actually be beneficial. actually be beneficial. actually be beneficial. We also talked about conditions in which We also talked about conditions in which We also talked about conditions in which increasing salt intake might be increasing salt intake might be increasing salt intake might be beneficial for offsetting low blood beneficial for offsetting low blood beneficial for offsetting low blood pressure and some of these postural pressure and some of these postural pressure and some of these postural syndromes that can lead people to syndromes that can lead people to syndromes that can lead people to dizziness and so forth. These are things dizziness and so forth. These are things dizziness and so forth. These are things that have to be explored on an that have to be explored on an that have to be explored on an individual basis and of course have to individual basis and of course have to individual basis and of course have to be explored with the support of your be explored with the support of your be explored with the support of your doctor. We also talked about the doctor. We also talked about the doctor. We also talked about the perception of salt, meaning the perception of salt, meaning the perception of salt, meaning the perception of salty taste and how the perception of salty taste and how the perception of salty taste and how the perception of salty taste and the perception of salty taste and the perception of salty taste and the perception of other tastes like sweet perception of other tastes like sweet perception of other tastes like sweet can interact with one another to drive can interact with one another to drive can interact with one another to drive things like increased sugar intake when things like increased sugar intake when things like increased sugar intake when you're not even aware of it and indeed you're not even aware of it and indeed you're not even aware of it and indeed how the combination of salty and sweet how the combination of salty and sweet how the combination of salty and sweet taste can bias you towards craving more, taste can bias you towards craving more, taste can bias you towards craving more, for instance, processed foods and why for instance, processed foods and why for instance, processed foods and why that might be a good thing to avoid. And that might be a good thing to avoid. And that might be a good thing to avoid. And of course, we talked about salt and its of course, we talked about salt and its of course, we talked about salt and its critical role in the action potential, critical role in the action potential, critical role in the action potential, the fundamental way in which the nervous the fundamental way in which the nervous the fundamental way in which the nervous system functions at all. So, my hope for system functions at all. So, my hope for system functions at all. So, my hope for you in listening to this episode is that you in listening to this episode is that you in listening to this episode is that you consider a question. And that you consider a question. And that you consider a question. And that question is, what salt intake is best question is, what salt intake is best question is, what salt intake is best for you? And that you place that for you? And that you place that for you? And that you place that question in the context of your fluid question in the context of your fluid question in the context of your fluid intake and crucially that you place that intake and crucially that you place that intake and crucially that you place that in the context of the electrolytes more in the context of the electrolytes more in the context of the electrolytes more generally, meaning sodium, potassium, generally, meaning sodium, potassium, generally, meaning sodium, potassium, and magnesium. And I hope I've been able and magnesium. And I hope I've been able and magnesium. And I hope I've been able to illuminate some of the beautiful ways to illuminate some of the beautiful ways to illuminate some of the beautiful ways in which the brain and the bodily organs in which the brain and the bodily organs in which the brain and the bodily organs interact in order to help us regulate interact in order to help us regulate interact in order to help us regulate this thing that we call sodium balance. this thing that we call sodium balance. this thing that we call sodium balance. And the fact that we have neurons in our And the fact that we have neurons in our And the fact that we have neurons in our brain that are both tuned to the levels brain that are both tuned to the levels brain that are both tuned to the levels of salt in our body and positioned in a of salt in our body and positioned in a of salt in our body and positioned in a location in the brain that allows location in the brain that allows location in the brain that allows them to detect the levels of salt in our them to detect the levels of salt in our them to detect the levels of salt in our body and to drive the intake of more or body and to drive the intake of more or body and to drive the intake of more or less salt and more or less fluid and less salt and more or less fluid and less salt and more or less fluid and other electrolytes, really just points other electrolytes, really just points other electrolytes, really just points to the beauty of the system that we've to the beauty of the system that we've to the beauty of the system that we've all evolved that allows us to interact all evolved that allows us to interact all evolved that allows us to interact with our environment and make with our environment and make with our environment and make adjustments according to the context of adjustments according to the context of adjustments according to the context of our daily and ongoing life. And last but our daily and ongoing life. And last but our daily and ongoing life. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.