There's lots of data now showing that There's lots of data now showing that There's lots of data now showing that people that are doing these like short people that are doing these like short people that are doing these like short bursts at least a minute long, but bursts at least a minute long, but bursts at least a minute long, but [clears throat] up to 3 minutes. They're [clears throat] up to 3 minutes. They're [clears throat] up to 3 minutes. They're moving faster with intent and it's moving faster with intent and it's moving faster with intent and it's having outsize effects on health having outsize effects on health having outsize effects on health outcomes. So, for example, individuals outcomes. So, for example, individuals outcomes. So, for example, individuals that do on the high end, so they're that do on the high end, so they're that do on the high end, so they're doing, you know, 3 minutes of this short doing, you know, 3 minutes of this short doing, you know, 3 minutes of this short burst of an unstructured type of burst of an unstructured type of burst of an unstructured type of exercise snack, and they do it three exercise snack, and they do it three exercise snack, and they do it three times a day. So, it's a total of 9 times a day. So, it's a total of 9 times a day. So, it's a total of 9 minutes a day. Okay? That's associated minutes a day. Okay? That's associated minutes a day. Okay? That's associated with a 40% reduction in all-cause with a 40% reduction in all-cause with a 40% reduction in all-cause mortality, 40% reduction in mortality, 40% reduction in mortality, 40% reduction in cancer-related mortality, a 50% cancer-related mortality, a 50% cancer-related mortality, a 50% reduction in cardiovascular-related reduction in cardiovascular-related reduction in cardiovascular-related mortality. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; 9 minutes a day. &gt;&gt; 9 minutes a day. &gt;&gt; 9 minutes a day. &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools [music] for everyday science-based tools [music] for everyday science-based tools [music] for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Rhonda Patrick, a today is Dr. Rhonda Patrick, a today is Dr. Rhonda Patrick, a biomedical scientist and leading public biomedical scientist and leading public biomedical scientist and leading public health educator. For over a decade, health educator. For over a decade, health educator. For over a decade, Rhonda has been one of the most trusted Rhonda has been one of the most trusted Rhonda has been one of the most trusted voices in building science-based health voices in building science-based health voices in building science-based health protocols. Today, we discuss what the protocols. Today, we discuss what the protocols. Today, we discuss what the latest and best research says we should latest and best research says we should latest and best research says we should all be doing to improve our health and all be doing to improve our health and all be doing to improve our health and vitality and avoid disease. Rhonda vitality and avoid disease. Rhonda vitality and avoid disease. Rhonda shares with us her exact exercise, shares with us her exact exercise, shares with us her exact exercise, nutrition, supplementation, and sauna nutrition, supplementation, and sauna nutrition, supplementation, and sauna protocols, and we get really detailed protocols, and we get really detailed protocols, and we get really detailed about the mechanisms and logic behind about the mechanisms and logic behind about the mechanisms and logic behind each one. We also discuss the things each one. We also discuss the things each one. We also discuss the things that science say you can do to that science say you can do to that science say you can do to significantly reduce your cancer and significantly reduce your cancer and significantly reduce your cancer and cardiovascular risk, including how to cardiovascular risk, including how to cardiovascular risk, including how to reduce visceral fat and arterial plaque. reduce visceral fat and arterial plaque. reduce visceral fat and arterial plaque. Today's discussion truly leaves no stone Today's discussion truly leaves no stone Today's discussion truly leaves no stone unturned. We discuss how eating can unturned. We discuss how eating can unturned. We discuss how eating can increase inflammation, believe it or increase inflammation, believe it or increase inflammation, believe it or not, ways to support your gut health, not, ways to support your gut health, not, ways to support your gut health, creatine, vitamin D, why broad vitamin creatine, vitamin D, why broad vitamin creatine, vitamin D, why broad vitamin and mineral and fiber support is and mineral and fiber support is and mineral and fiber support is crucial, as well as the different forms crucial, as well as the different forms crucial, as well as the different forms of magnesium and each of their unique of magnesium and each of their unique of magnesium and each of their unique effects. We also discuss omega-3s and effects. We also discuss omega-3s and effects. We also discuss omega-3s and why prescription sources of omega-3s may why prescription sources of omega-3s may why prescription sources of omega-3s may be the cleanest and most cost-efficient be the cleanest and most cost-efficient be the cleanest and most cost-efficient way to obtain sufficient omega-3 intake. way to obtain sufficient omega-3 intake. way to obtain sufficient omega-3 intake. We also discuss the importance of We also discuss the importance of We also discuss the importance of prioritizing regular resistance training prioritizing regular resistance training prioritizing regular resistance training and hit workouts over protein. You still and hit workouts over protein. You still and hit workouts over protein. You still need protein, but emphasizing the need protein, but emphasizing the need protein, but emphasizing the exercise component is crucial. And we exercise component is crucial. And we exercise component is crucial. And we discuss fiber, micronutrients, and why discuss fiber, micronutrients, and why discuss fiber, micronutrients, and why short-term fasting can be beneficial. short-term fasting can be beneficial. short-term fasting can be beneficial. Dr. Rhonda Patrick is a true wealth of Dr. Rhonda Patrick is a true wealth of Dr. Rhonda Patrick is a true wealth of knowledge, and today she generously knowledge, and today she generously knowledge, and today she generously provides us a masterclass on how you can provides us a masterclass on how you can provides us a masterclass on how you can design and adjust the exact health design and adjust the exact health design and adjust the exact health protocols to meet your specific needs. protocols to meet your specific needs. protocols to meet your specific needs. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. And now for my discussion with Dr. And now for my discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick. Welcome back, Dr. Rhonda Patrick. Welcome back, Dr. Rhonda Patrick. Welcome back, Dr. Rhonda Patrick. &gt;&gt; Excited to be here. &gt;&gt; Excited to be here. &gt;&gt; Excited to be here. &gt;&gt; It's been a while. I'm so excited. &gt;&gt; It's been a while. I'm so excited. &gt;&gt; It's been a while. I'm so excited. There's so much to go into. There's so much to go into. There's so much to go into. And I'll start off the same way I And I'll start off the same way I And I'll start off the same way I started last time because it's started last time because it's started last time because it's even more true. Thank you for being even more true. Thank you for being even more true. Thank you for being first person into this public science first person into this public science first person into this public science health education business. I don't know health education business. I don't know health education business. I don't know if everyone's aware of it, but you were if everyone's aware of it, but you were if everyone's aware of it, but you were the first person in, which is why I the first person in, which is why I the first person in, which is why I didn't say first man in, because the didn't say first man in, because the didn't say first man in, because the first person in first person in first person in was and is a woman, and you've done a was and is a woman, and you've done a was and is a woman, and you've done a marvelous job of educating people on marvelous job of educating people on marvelous job of educating people on science, how to parse papers and data, science, how to parse papers and data, science, how to parse papers and data, health practices, health practices, health practices, and um and um and um you know, the rest of us are just trying you know, the rest of us are just trying you know, the rest of us are just trying to follow in your wake. So, thank you very follow in your wake. So, thank you very follow in your wake. So, thank you very much. I just want to thank you for being much. I just want to thank you for being much. I just want to thank you for being first. &gt;&gt; Oh man, thank you so much for that. And &gt;&gt; Oh man, thank you so much for that. And &gt;&gt; Oh man, thank you so much for that. And also thank you for doing what you do. I also thank you for doing what you do. I also thank you for doing what you do. I mean, you really do a great service for mean, you really do a great service for mean, you really do a great service for science communication, science communication, science communication, um you know, education, um you know, education, um you know, education, helping people love science and get helping people love science and get helping people love science and get healthier. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Well, uh &gt;&gt; Thank you. Well, uh &gt;&gt; Thank you. Well, uh you're the pioneer. It's not always easy you're the pioneer. It's not always easy you're the pioneer. It's not always easy being a pioneer, but we all benefit, so being a pioneer, but we all benefit, so being a pioneer, but we all benefit, so let's jump in at exercise because um let's jump in at exercise because um let's jump in at exercise because um lately you've actually been posting your lately you've actually been posting your lately you've actually been posting your workouts, which is awesome. And uh workouts, which is awesome. And uh workouts, which is awesome. And uh you're clearly very fit. I learned you're clearly very fit. I learned you're clearly very fit. I learned before talking to you today that uh you before talking to you today that uh you before talking to you today that uh you were a competitive athlete. You were a were a competitive athlete. You were a were a competitive athlete. You were a long jumper or a triple jumper. long jumper or a triple jumper. long jumper or a triple jumper. &gt;&gt; I was a long jumper, but I would say my &gt;&gt; I was a long jumper, but I would say my &gt;&gt; I was a long jumper, but I would say my real competitive athleteness comes from real competitive athleteness comes from real competitive athleteness comes from my jump roping. my jump roping. my jump roping. &gt;&gt; Okay. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Okay. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Okay. [laughter] All right. All right. All right. &gt;&gt; I'm on a professional jump roping team. &gt;&gt; I'm on a professional jump roping team. &gt;&gt; I'm on a professional jump roping team. &gt;&gt; Professional? &gt;&gt; Professional? &gt;&gt; Professional? &gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. It was It was we would &gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. It was It was we would &gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. It was It was we would compete. So, I my friend and I started compete. So, I my friend and I started compete. So, I my friend and I started the team when we were in second grade. the team when we were in second grade. the team when we were in second grade. And it was called the San Diego Sand And it was called the San Diego Sand And it was called the San Diego Sand Skippers. It was part of the Skippers. It was part of the Skippers. It was part of the International Rope Skipping International Rope Skipping International Rope Skipping Organization, which was actually started Organization, which was actually started Organization, which was actually started by her uncle, but by her uncle, but by her uncle, but there's jump rope teams all around the there's jump rope teams all around the there's jump rope teams all around the world and you know, now I think there's world and you know, now I think there's world and you know, now I think there's a new name, but like it got taken over a new name, but like it got taken over a new name, but like it got taken over by the Universal Jump Rope Team or by the Universal Jump Rope Team or by the Universal Jump Rope Team or something like that. I don't know something like that. I don't know something like that. I don't know exactly what it is, but um so, I was on exactly what it is, but um so, I was on exactly what it is, but um so, I was on a team and every year we would compete a team and every year we would compete a team and every year we would compete in Boulder, Colorado. There was in Boulder, Colorado. There was in Boulder, Colorado. There was competitions for all kinds of you know, competitions for all kinds of you know, competitions for all kinds of you know, jumping rope and um I would perform and jumping rope and um I would perform and jumping rope and um I would perform and start jump rope teams around the school start jump rope teams around the school start jump rope teams around the school around different schools in San Diego. around different schools in San Diego. around different schools in San Diego. So, I used to get out of school um you So, I used to get out of school um you So, I used to get out of school um you know, get out of school free card and uh know, get out of school free card and uh know, get out of school free card and uh my partner and I would go and start my partner and I would go and start my partner and I would go and start um do workshops at other schools and help do workshops at other schools and help do workshops at other schools and help them start jump rope teams. And the idea them start jump rope teams. And the idea them start jump rope teams. And the idea was cardiovascular health, healthy was cardiovascular health, healthy was cardiovascular health, healthy heart, and uh yeah. So, so that's really heart, and uh yeah. So, so that's really heart, and uh yeah. So, so that's really I would say my roots with uh being I would say my roots with uh being I would say my roots with uh being a competitive athlete. a competitive athlete. a competitive athlete. &gt;&gt; Awesome. I love skipping rope. Is it &gt;&gt; Awesome. I love skipping rope. Is it &gt;&gt; Awesome. I love skipping rope. Is it okay to say skipping rope or is it okay to say skipping rope or is it okay to say skipping rope or is it jumping rope? Okay. jumping rope? Okay. jumping rope? Okay. &gt;&gt; rope, jumping rope. &gt;&gt; rope, jumping rope. &gt;&gt; rope, jumping rope. &gt;&gt; And actually, it's a great opportunity &gt;&gt; And actually, it's a great opportunity &gt;&gt; And actually, it's a great opportunity for me to ask you what your thoughts are for me to ask you what your thoughts are for me to ask you what your thoughts are about um about um about um exercise that isn't just linear, right? exercise that isn't just linear, right? exercise that isn't just linear, right? I know like real jump ropers can do I know like real jump ropers can do I know like real jump ropers can do crossovers and um and these days I'm crossovers and um and these days I'm crossovers and um and these days I'm seeing a lot more about rope flow. I seeing a lot more about rope flow. I seeing a lot more about rope flow. I think it's David Weck and others online think it's David Weck and others online think it's David Weck and others online or you know, stuff that's getting people or you know, stuff that's getting people or you know, stuff that's getting people out of the standard, you know, curls, out of the standard, you know, curls, out of the standard, you know, curls, bench presses, lunges, you know, and bench presses, lunges, you know, and bench presses, lunges, you know, and getting movements that are more just for getting movements that are more just for getting movements that are more just for lack of a better term, across the body. lack of a better term, across the body. lack of a better term, across the body. Do you think there's something to that Do you think there's something to that Do you think there's something to that in terms of in terms of in terms of real physical benefits? I mean, I real physical benefits? I mean, I real physical benefits? I mean, I imagine there is. imagine there is. imagine there is. &gt;&gt; Sure. I mean, I wouldn't be the expert &gt;&gt; Sure. I mean, I wouldn't be the expert &gt;&gt; Sure. I mean, I wouldn't be the expert to be able to give you a good answer on to be able to give you a good answer on to be able to give you a good answer on that, but I do think that jumping rope that, but I do think that jumping rope that, but I do think that jumping rope in general has unique benefits in general has unique benefits in general has unique benefits in addition to obviously it's a great addition to obviously it's a great addition to obviously it's a great cardiovascular exercise. You're getting cardiovascular exercise. You're getting cardiovascular exercise. You're getting the weight-bearing aspects as well for the weight-bearing aspects as well for the weight-bearing aspects as well for building bone density and I think that building bone density and I think that building bone density and I think that earlier for me, you know, I was doing it earlier for me, you know, I was doing it earlier for me, you know, I was doing it as a young girl. So important, right? as a young girl. So important, right? as a young girl. So important, right? Cuz you're kind of banking that Cuz you're kind of banking that Cuz you're kind of banking that bone density early on, which is bone density early on, which is bone density early on, which is important cuz at some point, you know, important cuz at some point, you know, important cuz at some point, you know, menopause will hit and estrogen goes menopause will hit and estrogen goes menopause will hit and estrogen goes down and so you start to lose more down and so you start to lose more down and so you start to lose more bone. But yeah, I'm sure there's a lot of But yeah, I'm sure there's a lot of But yeah, I'm sure there's a lot of benefits to jumping rope beyond what I'm benefits to jumping rope beyond what I'm benefits to jumping rope beyond what I'm describing as cardiovascular describing as cardiovascular describing as cardiovascular someone else could answer. someone else could answer. someone else could answer. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I'm certainly going to get back to &gt;&gt; I'm certainly going to get back to &gt;&gt; I'm certainly going to get back to jumping rope now that we jumping rope now that we jumping rope now that we you know, resurrected it in this you know, resurrected it in this you know, resurrected it in this conversation. And I have to say conversation. And I have to say conversation. And I have to say uh bone density measurements aside, you uh bone density measurements aside, you uh bone density measurements aside, you have awesome posture. I notice people's have awesome posture. I notice people's have awesome posture. I notice people's posture. Yeah, I didn't mean to posture. Yeah, I didn't mean to posture. Yeah, I didn't mean to put you on the spot here, but yeah, when put you on the spot here, but yeah, when put you on the spot here, but yeah, when I walked in I was like, if you've ever I walked in I was like, if you've ever I walked in I was like, if you've ever interacted with Ronda in person, which I interacted with Ronda in person, which I interacted with Ronda in person, which I have, you have amazing posture. And I have, you have amazing posture. And I have, you have amazing posture. And these days these days these days good posture is rare, so you know, it's good posture is rare, so you know, it's good posture is rare, so you know, it's maybe the things maybe the things maybe the things are related. I imagine they probably are related. I imagine they probably are related. I imagine they probably are, bone health and posture and so are, bone health and posture and so are, bone health and posture and so forth. In terms of the sorts of exercise that In terms of the sorts of exercise that In terms of the sorts of exercise that people are more familiar with, what's people are more familiar with, what's people are more familiar with, what's your routine look like? And what sorts your routine look like? And what sorts your routine look like? And what sorts of things in your routine are of things in your routine are of things in your routine are non-negotiables? And where's the place for And where's the place for And where's the place for experimentation and kind of what you're experimentation and kind of what you're experimentation and kind of what you're exploring now? exploring now? exploring now? &gt;&gt; So for me, exercise is part of my &gt;&gt; So for me, exercise is part of my &gt;&gt; So for me, exercise is part of my personal hygiene as you and I were personal hygiene as you and I were personal hygiene as you and I were discussing. It it really is a discussing. It it really is a discussing. It it really is a non-negotiable. I absolutely have to do non-negotiable. I absolutely have to do non-negotiable. I absolutely have to do exercise just like I have to brush my exercise just like I have to brush my exercise just like I have to brush my teeth. And teeth. And teeth. And you know, I kind of got that from Dr. you know, I kind of got that from Dr. you know, I kind of got that from Dr. Ben Levine, who is a Ben Levine, who is a Ben Levine, who is a probably one of the world leading probably one of the world leading probably one of the world leading cardiovascular exercise physiologist. cardiovascular exercise physiologist. cardiovascular exercise physiologist. He's at UT Southwestern in Dallas. So I He's at UT Southwestern in Dallas. So I He's at UT Southwestern in Dallas. So I want to shout out his name because I want to shout out his name because I want to shout out his name because I really learned a lot from him, but the really learned a lot from him, but the really learned a lot from him, but the non-negotiables for me really are non-negotiables for me really are non-negotiables for me really are getting cardiovascular exercise and getting my cardiovascular exercise and getting my cardiovascular exercise and getting my resistance training. So building my resistance training. So building my resistance training. So building muscle, maintaining muscle strength as muscle, maintaining muscle strength as muscle, maintaining muscle strength as well. So my routine for me, I work out well. So my routine for me, I work out well. So my routine for me, I work out probably about 5 to 6 hours a week and probably about 5 to 6 hours a week and probably about 5 to 6 hours a week and those workouts I largely am doing a those workouts I largely am doing a those workouts I largely am doing a combination of combination of combination of high-intensity interval training that's high-intensity interval training that's high-intensity interval training that's not necessarily like the Norwegian 4 by not necessarily like the Norwegian 4 by not necessarily like the Norwegian 4 by 4 where I'm going as hard as I can for 1 4 where I'm going as hard as I can for 1 4 where I'm going as hard as I can for 1 minute or 4 minutes and then recovering minute or 4 minutes and then recovering minute or 4 minutes and then recovering for 3 minutes and doing that four times. for 3 minutes and doing that four times. for 3 minutes and doing that four times. It's really, you know, the Norwegian 4 It's really, you know, the Norwegian 4 It's really, you know, the Norwegian 4 by 4 is a hard workout. Um it's really by 4 is a hard workout. Um it's really by 4 is a hard workout. Um it's really good for good for good for improving your cardiorespiratory improving your cardiorespiratory improving your cardiorespiratory fitness, which I think is one of the fitness, which I think is one of the fitness, which I think is one of the best markers for longevity. We can talk best markers for longevity. We can talk best markers for longevity. We can talk about that. about that. about that. Um I do a lot of, you know, it's a it's Um I do a lot of, you know, it's a it's Um I do a lot of, you know, it's a it's a mixture of a mixture of a mixture of doing, you know, rowing machine, getting on the you know, rowing machine, getting on the you know, rowing machine, getting on the assault bike, and then doing mix it in assault bike, and then doing mix it in assault bike, and then doing mix it in mixing it in with lifting weights, doing mixing it in with lifting weights, doing mixing it in with lifting weights, doing some deadlifts, you know, doing squats. some deadlifts, you know, doing squats. some deadlifts, you know, doing squats. Um so, it's really for me a Um so, it's really for me a Um so, it's really for me a non-negotiable to do my non-negotiable to do my non-negotiable to do my vigorous-intensity exercise is what I vigorous-intensity exercise is what I vigorous-intensity exercise is what I would call it. So, you're really kind of would call it. So, you're really kind of would call it. So, you're really kind of getting your heart rate up to, you know, 80% max your heart rate up to, you know, 80% max your heart rate up to, you know, 80% max heart rate at points, not always, but heart rate at points, not always, but heart rate at points, not always, but especially during the intervals. I would especially during the intervals. I would especially during the intervals. I would say that's a non-negotiable for me. say that's a non-negotiable for me. say that's a non-negotiable for me. &gt;&gt; How many days a week are you doing that? &gt;&gt; How many days a week are you doing that? &gt;&gt; How many days a week are you doing that? &gt;&gt; I do my longer hit workouts. So, I &gt;&gt; I do my longer hit workouts. So, I &gt;&gt; I do my longer hit workouts. So, I have four days a week where I'm doing at have four days a week where I'm doing at have four days a week where I'm doing at least an hour. least an hour. least an hour. So, two of those two of those sessions So, two of those two of those sessions So, two of those two of those sessions are more of a CrossFit type of training are more of a CrossFit type of training are more of a CrossFit type of training where I'll do the first 30 minutes will where I'll do the first 30 minutes will where I'll do the first 30 minutes will be strength training. So, I'll just be strength training. So, I'll just be strength training. So, I'll just be lifting heavier with like, you know, lifting heavier with like, you know, lifting heavier with like, you know, fewer reps. fewer reps. fewer reps. &gt;&gt; What's the rest between sets? Sorry to &gt;&gt; What's the rest between sets? Sorry to &gt;&gt; What's the rest between sets? Sorry to get granular, but people will wonder. get granular, but people will wonder. get granular, but people will wonder. &gt;&gt; what's funny is I typically rest about 2 &gt;&gt; what's funny is I typically rest about 2 &gt;&gt; what's funny is I typically rest about 2 minutes between my sets. I recover minutes between my sets. I recover minutes between my sets. I recover pretty quick um and my I do it with a pretty quick um and my I do it with a pretty quick um and my I do it with a coach and my coach usually tells me that coach and my coach usually tells me that coach and my coach usually tells me that I'm spot-on. I'm like ready to go and I'm spot-on. I'm like ready to go and I'm spot-on. I'm like ready to go and it's been about 2 minutes. So, I it's been about 2 minutes. So, I it's been about 2 minutes. So, I usually that's my recovery time. usually that's my recovery time. usually that's my recovery time. And so, the first 30 minutes of strength And so, the first 30 minutes of strength And so, the first 30 minutes of strength training and that'll be like deadlifts, training and that'll be like deadlifts, training and that'll be like deadlifts, it'll be, you know, squats, I'll be it'll be, you know, squats, I'll be it'll be, you know, squats, I'll be cleaning, I'll be doing front squats. cleaning, I'll be doing front squats. cleaning, I'll be doing front squats. Sometimes I do the barbell or back Sometimes I do the barbell or back Sometimes I do the barbell or back squats, right? Like it's a mixture of squats, right? Like it's a mixture of squats, right? Like it's a mixture of different types of strength training. different types of strength training. different types of strength training. And then the last 30 minutes is more of And then the last 30 minutes is more of And then the last 30 minutes is more of a high-intensity interval training a high-intensity interval training a high-intensity interval training session session. So, it'll be like session session. So, it'll be like session session. So, it'll be like you know, where I'm getting my heart you know, where I'm getting my heart you know, where I'm getting my heart rate up. So, I'm mixing in the row rate up. So, I'm mixing in the row rate up. So, I'm mixing in the row machine and then I have like maybe I'm machine and then I have like maybe I'm machine and then I have like maybe I'm doing cleans, but they're lighter, doing cleans, but they're lighter, doing cleans, but they're lighter, right? So, it's like more reps, but right? So, it's like more reps, but right? So, it's like more reps, but lighter load, right? So, um that's I do lighter load, right? So, um that's I do lighter load, right? So, um that's I do that twice a week and that each is an that twice a week and that each is an that twice a week and that each is an hour session. And then I do also twice a hour session. And then I do also twice a hour session. And then I do also twice a week about an hour and 20 minutes of week about an hour and 20 minutes of week about an hour and 20 minutes of it's also more high intensity, but I it's also more high intensity, but I it's also more high intensity, but I have more recovery time cuz I'm doing have more recovery time cuz I'm doing have more recovery time cuz I'm doing with my girlfriends and we kind of with my girlfriends and we kind of with my girlfriends and we kind of chit-chat a little bit and so, chit-chat a little bit and so, chit-chat a little bit and so, um but it's a very similar. We do, you um but it's a very similar. We do, you um but it's a very similar. We do, you know, rowing machine, assault bikes, we know, rowing machine, assault bikes, we know, rowing machine, assault bikes, we do the skier, you know, Rogue has that do the skier, you know, Rogue has that do the skier, you know, Rogue has that skier. And then we mix it in with, you know, And then we mix it in with, you know, And then we mix it in with, you know, chest presses and we do, you know, chest presses and we do, you know, chest presses and we do, you know, assisted pull-ups and we do, you know, assisted pull-ups and we do, you know, assisted pull-ups and we do, you know, lighter squats with like larger, you lighter squats with like larger, you lighter squats with like larger, you know, more reps. know, more reps. know, more reps. So, that's another, you know, 2 hours a So, that's another, you know, 2 hours a So, that's another, you know, 2 hours a week. So, I have 4 hours a week of just week. So, I have 4 hours a week of just week. So, I have 4 hours a week of just doing a lot of that sort of doing a lot of that sort of doing a lot of that sort of CrossFit HIIT type of training and then CrossFit HIIT type of training and then CrossFit HIIT type of training and then I mix that in with my more like runs I mix that in with my more like runs I mix that in with my more like runs that I do, which I would say are that I do, which I would say are that I do, which I would say are still they're still considered vigorous still they're still considered vigorous still they're still considered vigorous intensity. They're just not quite as intensity. They're just not quite as intensity. They're just not quite as high intensity. And I do probably I high intensity. And I do probably I high intensity. And I do probably I run in like run in like run in like maybe 6 miles a week, so maybe at maybe 6 miles a week, so maybe at maybe 6 miles a week, so maybe at a at my max, but these days I'm mostly a at my max, but these days I'm mostly a at my max, but these days I'm mostly running probably for like 4 miles a running probably for like 4 miles a running probably for like 4 miles a week. So, um those runs tend to be like So, um those runs tend to be like So, um those runs tend to be like sometimes they're 2 miles, sometimes they're 2 miles, sometimes they're 2 miles, sometimes they're 3 miles and, you know, they're 3 miles and, you know, they're 3 miles and, you know, &gt;&gt; enjoy running? &gt;&gt; enjoy running? &gt;&gt; enjoy running? &gt;&gt; I do. I do. And I think it's important &gt;&gt; I do. I do. And I think it's important &gt;&gt; I do. I do. And I think it's important as well and sometimes I'll run with my as well and sometimes I'll run with my as well and sometimes I'll run with my husband and we just kind of like chill husband and we just kind of like chill husband and we just kind of like chill out and talk and, you know, it's a out and talk and, you know, it's a out and talk and, you know, it's a nice time for me as well just to kind of do time for me as well just to kind of do time for me as well just to kind of do that with him. that with him. that with him. Um and then on weekends I'll probably do and then on weekends I'll probably do and then on weekends I'll probably do like a hike with my family. like a hike with my family. like a hike with my family. And sometimes we'll do like a sprint up And sometimes we'll do like a sprint up And sometimes we'll do like a sprint up the hill and, you know, but it's more the hill and, you know, but it's more the hill and, you know, but it's more just enjoyable time in nature. just enjoyable time in nature. just enjoyable time in nature. Um still moving, but you know, it's Um still moving, but you know, it's Um still moving, but you know, it's kind of family time, too. kind of family time, too. kind of family time, too. &gt;&gt; Weight vests on the run or hike? &gt;&gt; Weight vests on the run or hike? &gt;&gt; Weight vests on the run or hike? &gt;&gt; No, I don't not I I'm kind of wanting &gt;&gt; No, I don't not I I'm kind of wanting &gt;&gt; No, I don't not I I'm kind of wanting to experiment with that, but to experiment with that, but to experiment with that, but not really. I'm just kind of sometimes not really. I'm just kind of sometimes not really. I'm just kind of sometimes we bring our puppy and we bring our puppy and we bring our puppy and you know, so it's more about the you know, so it's more about the you know, so it's more about the experience, I think, than like I'm like experience, I think, than like I'm like experience, I think, than like I'm like I get I get a lot of work out throughout I get I get a lot of work out throughout I get I get a lot of work out throughout the week. the week. the week. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; But it's like you said, it's &gt;&gt; But it's like you said, it's &gt;&gt; But it's like you said, it's non-negotiable for me. And and times non-negotiable for me. And and times non-negotiable for me. And and times when I'm like today, so I you know, when I'm like today, so I you know, when I'm like today, so I you know, I had a long drive and so I got on my I had a long drive and so I got on my I had a long drive and so I got on my Peloton and I did a 10-minute Peloton and I did a 10-minute Peloton and I did a 10-minute you know, I did a 10-minute Tabata you know, I did a 10-minute Tabata you know, I did a 10-minute Tabata back-to-back. So it was like two back-to-back. So it was like two back-to-back. So it was like two back-to-back Tabatas. Right? So it was back-to-back Tabatas. Right? So it was back-to-back Tabatas. Right? So it was it ended up being 10 minutes. It was it ended up being 10 minutes. It was it ended up being 10 minutes. It was like 30-second recovery in between the like 30-second recovery in between the like 30-second recovery in between the two Tabata sessions. two Tabata sessions. two Tabata sessions. Two to one ratio, 20 seconds on, 10 Two to one ratio, 20 seconds on, 10 Two to one ratio, 20 seconds on, 10 seconds off. But like I have to do seconds off. But like I have to do seconds off. But like I have to do something every day. And if I'm something every day. And if I'm something every day. And if I'm traveling or I have like an early traveling or I have like an early traveling or I have like an early podcast or something, I'll just podcast or something, I'll just podcast or something, I'll just jump on the bike and I have to get that jump on the bike and I have to get that jump on the bike and I have to get that blood flow. Sometimes I'm in my hotel blood flow. Sometimes I'm in my hotel blood flow. Sometimes I'm in my hotel room and I don't want to go to the gym, room and I don't want to go to the gym, room and I don't want to go to the gym, I don't have time, and I just in my I don't have time, and I just in my I don't have time, and I just in my room, you know, I do I do the air room, you know, I do I do the air room, you know, I do I do the air squats, I'll do high knees, jumping squats, I'll do high knees, jumping squats, I'll do high knees, jumping jacks, and I either repeat for 10 jacks, and I either repeat for 10 jacks, and I either repeat for 10 minutes. I'm getting my heart rate up minutes. I'm getting my heart rate up minutes. I'm getting my heart rate up and I'm you know, I've got sweat on my and I'm you know, I've got sweat on my and I'm you know, I've got sweat on my brow. Like I'm not it's not like the brow. Like I'm not it's not like the brow. Like I'm not it's not like the most intense workout, but it's so most intense workout, but it's so most intense workout, but it's so important for me. You know, it there's important for me. You know, it there's important for me. You know, it there's a variety of brain benefits that there's a variety of brain benefits that there's a variety of brain benefits that have been shown with even just 10 have been shown with even just 10 have been shown with even just 10 minutes of with this vigorous type of minutes of with this vigorous type of minutes of with this vigorous type of intensity of workout you do, you know, intensity of workout you do, you know, intensity of workout you do, you know, where you're where you're where you're I mean, you probably have seen this I mean, you probably have seen this I mean, you probably have seen this data where it's like just 10 minutes of data where it's like just 10 minutes of data where it's like just 10 minutes of this vigorous type of exercise, you're this vigorous type of exercise, you're this vigorous type of exercise, you're immediately increasing neuronal immediately increasing neuronal immediately increasing neuronal connections. Um there's been studies connections. Um there's been studies connections. Um there's been studies showing that you have an improvement in showing that you have an improvement in showing that you have an improvement in executive function by like 14%, which is executive function by like 14%, which is executive function by like 14%, which is pretty big. I think it was like a pretty big. I think it was like a pretty big. I think it was like a 50-millisecond improvement processing 50-millisecond improvement processing 50-millisecond improvement processing speed or something which doesn't sound a speed or something which doesn't sound a speed or something which doesn't sound a lot, but actually translates to a big lot, but actually translates to a big lot, but actually translates to a big improvement in executive function. So my improvement in executive function. So my improvement in executive function. So my brain works better, I feel better, you brain works better, I feel better, you brain works better, I feel better, you know, better mood. Um there's even know, better mood. Um there's even know, better mood. Um there's even studies that have compared studies that have compared studies that have compared impulse control after various types of impulse control after various types of impulse control after various types of intensity of workout. So like intensity of workout. So like intensity of workout. So like there was one study that compared a more there was one study that compared a more there was one study that compared a more low intensity low intensity low intensity versus moderate intensity versus high versus moderate intensity versus high versus moderate intensity versus high intensity. So you're talking about like intensity. So you're talking about like intensity. So you're talking about like walking versus maybe, you know, jogging walking versus maybe, you know, jogging walking versus maybe, you know, jogging slowly where you can still have a slowly where you can still have a slowly where you can still have a conversation versus like you're doing a conversation versus like you're doing a conversation versus like you're doing a hit workout, right? You're on. When hit workout, right? You're on. When hit workout, right? You're on. When you're on, you're not really talking cuz you're on, you're not really talking cuz you're on, you're not really talking cuz you're going as hard as you can during you're going as hard as you can during you're going as hard as you can during that interval. that interval. that interval. And it was the high intensity, you know, And it was the high intensity, you know, And it was the high intensity, you know, vigorous intensity exercise that really vigorous intensity exercise that really vigorous intensity exercise that really increased plasma serotonin, which has increased plasma serotonin, which has increased plasma serotonin, which has been shown to associate with brain been shown to associate with brain been shown to associate with brain serotonin. The studies have been done. serotonin. The studies have been done. serotonin. The studies have been done. And serotonin is very important for, as And serotonin is very important for, as And serotonin is very important for, as you know, for impulse control. I mean, a you know, for impulse control. I mean, a you know, for impulse control. I mean, a lot of people think about serotonin with lot of people think about serotonin with lot of people think about serotonin with respect to mood because we have these respect to mood because we have these respect to mood because we have these selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, SSRIs, that are used to treat, you know, SSRIs, that are used to treat, you know, SSRIs, that are used to treat, you know, depression, major depressive disorder. depression, major depressive disorder. depression, major depressive disorder. But serotonin, as you know, does so much But serotonin, as you know, does so much But serotonin, as you know, does so much more than that. And impulse control more than that. And impulse control more than that. And impulse control is one of the is one of the is one of the big things that serotonin plays the big things that serotonin plays the big things that serotonin plays a role in. And so the studies showed a role in. And so the studies showed a role in. And so the studies showed that plasma serotonin increased in the that plasma serotonin increased in the that plasma serotonin increased in the higher intensity group and that higher intensity group and that higher intensity group and that correlated with improved impulse correlated with improved impulse correlated with improved impulse control. So, of course, for us now in control. So, of course, for us now in control. So, of course, for us now in the modern-day society that we live in, the modern-day society that we live in, the modern-day society that we live in, we're constantly being bombarded with, we're constantly being bombarded with, we're constantly being bombarded with, you know, social media and all these you know, social media and all these you know, social media and all these things. And like, you have to be able to things. And like, you have to be able to things. And like, you have to be able to kind of like kind of like kind of like filter that out and not like just go filter that out and not like just go filter that out and not like just go with the impulse. Like, check my social with the impulse. Like, check my social with the impulse. Like, check my social media, check my, you know, and how many media, check my, you know, and how many media, check my, you know, and how many likes did I get or whatever. You need to likes did I get or whatever. You need to likes did I get or whatever. You need to just be able to focus. And so that, for just be able to focus. And so that, for just be able to focus. And so that, for me, you know, serotonin is important. me, you know, serotonin is important. me, you know, serotonin is important. And so I like to get that vigorous And so I like to get that vigorous And so I like to get that vigorous intensity exercise as well. intensity exercise as well. intensity exercise as well. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PFASes, or forever chemicals, are still PFASes, or forever chemicals, are still PFASes, or forever chemicals, are still found in 80% of nonstick pans, as well found in 80% of nonstick pans, as well found in 80% of nonstick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these PFASes, or forever chemicals like PFASes, or forever chemicals like PFASes, or forever chemicals like Teflon, have been linked to major health Teflon, have been linked to major health Teflon, have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of Our Place. Our why I'm a huge fan of Our Place. Our why I'm a huge fan of Our Place. Our Place products are made with the highest Place products are made with the highest Place products are made with the highest quality materials and are all PFAS- and quality materials and are all PFAS- and quality materials and are all PFAS- and toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first nonstick pan made with zero chemicals nonstick pan made with zero chemicals nonstick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. That means it has no harmful titanium. That means it has no harmful titanium. That means it has no harmful forever chemicals and it does not forever chemicals and it does not forever chemicals and it does not degrade or lose its nonstick effect over degrade or lose its nonstick effect over degrade or lose its nonstick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I time. It's also beautiful to look at. I time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook my eggs in my titanium always pan cook my eggs in my titanium always pan cook my eggs in my titanium always pan pro almost every morning. The design pro almost every morning. The design pro almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly allows for the eggs to cook perfectly allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. Right now, without sticking to the pan. Right now, without sticking to the pan. Right now, Our Place is having their biggest sale Our Place is having their biggest sale Our Place is having their biggest sale of the season. You can save up to 40% of the season. You can save up to 40% of the season. You can save up to 40% sitewide now through April 12th. Just sitewide now through April 12th. Just sitewide now through April 12th. Just head to fromourplace.com/ head to fromourplace.com/ head to fromourplace.com/ Huberman. Again, that's Huberman. Again, that's Huberman. Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman to save up to 40%. Today's episode is to save up to 40%. Today's episode is to save up to 40%. Today's episode is also brought to us by Lingo. One of the also brought to us by Lingo. One of the also brought to us by Lingo. One of the most important factors in your short-and most important factors in your short-and most important factors in your short-and long-term health is your body's ability long-term health is your body's ability long-term health is your body's ability to manage glucose over time. Glucose to manage glucose over time. Glucose to manage glucose over time. Glucose directly impacts our brain function, directly impacts our brain function, directly impacts our brain function, mood, and energy. You want your glucose mood, and energy. You want your glucose mood, and energy. You want your glucose relatively stable across the day without relatively stable across the day without relatively stable across the day without big peaks or valleys. This is why I use big peaks or valleys. This is why I use big peaks or valleys. This is why I use the continuous glucose monitor and app the continuous glucose monitor and app the continuous glucose monitor and app from Lingo by Abbott. Lingo provides from Lingo by Abbott. Lingo provides from Lingo by Abbott. Lingo provides minute-by-minute glucose data directly minute-by-minute glucose data directly minute-by-minute glucose data directly within the app, showing you how your within the app, showing you how your within the app, showing you how your glucose responds to food, exercise, and glucose responds to food, exercise, and glucose responds to food, exercise, and stress. This information can help you stress. This information can help you stress. This information can help you make smarter choices to support your make smarter choices to support your make smarter choices to support your health both now and in the long term. health both now and in the long term. health both now and in the long term. The CDC estimates that more than one in The CDC estimates that more than one in The CDC estimates that more than one in three American adults has prediabetes three American adults has prediabetes three American adults has prediabetes and that many of these people don't know and that many of these people don't know and that many of these people don't know they are living with prediabetes. they are living with prediabetes. they are living with prediabetes. Visibility about how your diet and Visibility about how your diet and Visibility about how your diet and activity affect your glucose can be the activity affect your glucose can be the activity affect your glucose can be the first step toward informed conversations first step toward informed conversations first step toward informed conversations with your doctor and making smarter with your doctor and making smarter with your doctor and making smarter daily choices. If you'd like to try daily choices. If you'd like to try daily choices. If you'd like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman lab Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman lab Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman lab listeners in the US and UK 10% off a listeners in the US and UK 10% off a listeners in the US and UK 10% off a four-week plan. Just visit four-week plan. Just visit four-week plan. Just visit hellolingo.com/huberman for more information. Terms and for more information. Terms and for more information. Terms and conditions apply. Again, that's conditions apply. Again, that's conditions apply. Again, that's hellolingo.com/huberman. I love that you mentioned other I love that you mentioned other I love that you mentioned other functions of serotonin because as you functions of serotonin because as you functions of serotonin because as you point out, it is so heavily associated point out, it is so heavily associated point out, it is so heavily associated with this mood aspect and certainly has with this mood aspect and certainly has with this mood aspect and certainly has a role there, but um the impulse control a role there, but um the impulse control a role there, but um the impulse control piece is I think is a non-trivial aspect piece is I think is a non-trivial aspect piece is I think is a non-trivial aspect to uh the effects of exercise and just to uh the effects of exercise and just to uh the effects of exercise and just generally. I'm curious do you generally. I'm curious do you generally. I'm curious do you bring your phone or feel compelled to bring your phone or feel compelled to bring your phone or feel compelled to check your phone during workouts or are check your phone during workouts or are check your phone during workouts or are you able to just say, "I'm you able to just say, "I'm you able to just say, "I'm compartmentalizing now. This is the compartmentalizing now. This is the compartmentalizing now. This is the workout." You might put on music or workout." You might put on music or workout." You might put on music or maybe text here or there if you need to, maybe text here or there if you need to, maybe text here or there if you need to, but are you able to compartmentalize or but are you able to compartmentalize or but are you able to compartmentalize or do you struggle with the phone during do you struggle with the phone during do you struggle with the phone during workouts? &gt;&gt; Oh, I don't bring my phone to my workout &gt;&gt; Oh, I don't bring my phone to my workout &gt;&gt; Oh, I don't bring my phone to my workout at all. Like I don't Now, I do have a at all. Like I don't Now, I do have a at all. Like I don't Now, I do have a watch that I wear that you know, if watch that I wear that you know, if watch that I wear that you know, if there's like an emergency I'll get a there's like an emergency I'll get a there's like an emergency I'll get a text message. Often times I put it on text message. Often times I put it on text message. Often times I put it on silent like I on no notifications silent like I on no notifications silent like I on no notifications because I don't want to be bothered, but because I don't want to be bothered, but because I don't want to be bothered, but I don't I don't really check my phone. I don't I don't really check my phone. I don't I don't really check my phone. Um I don't really like checking things I don't really like checking things I don't really like checking things like social media. For me it's just a like social media. For me it's just a like social media. For me it's just a distraction and distraction and distraction and frankly, I think it's pretty terrible frankly, I think it's pretty terrible frankly, I think it's pretty terrible for people's brains even though like you for people's brains even though like you for people's brains even though like you know, my business kind of depends on it know, my business kind of depends on it know, my business kind of depends on it somewhat. I think I think social media somewhat. I think I think social media somewhat. I think I think social media is not really good for people to be is not really good for people to be is not really good for people to be honest. So, I don't really check my phone or So, I don't really check my phone or So, I don't really check my phone or bring my phone to my workouts. My bring my phone to my workouts. My bring my phone to my workouts. My workouts are I like to chat with my workouts are I like to chat with my workouts are I like to chat with my friends when I'm working out with them friends when I'm working out with them friends when I'm working out with them and that's fun. That's in real life. and that's fun. That's in real life. and that's fun. That's in real life. &gt;&gt; Yes, that's in that's in that's in real &gt;&gt; Yes, that's in that's in that's in real &gt;&gt; Yes, that's in that's in that's in real life as the kids say. life as the kids say. life as the kids say. That's in real life and yeah, phones That's in real life and yeah, phones That's in real life and yeah, phones for me are not something that I phones for me are not something that I phones for me are not something that I bring to my workout. bring to my workout. bring to my workout. &gt;&gt; Great. Yeah, I've been experimenting &gt;&gt; Great. Yeah, I've been experimenting &gt;&gt; Great. Yeah, I've been experimenting with not allowing the phone in my gym with not allowing the phone in my gym with not allowing the phone in my gym and just the workouts go so much better and just the workouts go so much better and just the workouts go so much better and I find that the mental and physical and I find that the mental and physical and I find that the mental and physical resetting aspect of working out just resetting aspect of working out just resetting aspect of working out just seems to be enhanced, but sounds like seems to be enhanced, but sounds like seems to be enhanced, but sounds like you were already there and I'm just you were already there and I'm just you were already there and I'm just arriving. So, I have a couple other arriving. So, I have a couple other arriving. So, I have a couple other specific about your workouts because for specific about your workouts because for specific about your workouts because for my own interest and I know many people my own interest and I know many people my own interest and I know many people will wonder for the dedicated weight will wonder for the dedicated weight will wonder for the dedicated weight workouts, are these whole body workouts? And you are these whole body workouts? And you are these whole body workouts? And you said low reps. Maybe you could just tell said low reps. Maybe you could just tell said low reps. Maybe you could just tell us what low reps is for you and then the us what low reps is for you and then the us what low reps is for you and then the seems like the ever present question seems like the ever present question seems like the ever present question is to failure close to failure. I mean, is to failure close to failure. I mean, is to failure close to failure. I mean, just to you know, round out that just to you know, round out that just to you know, round out that portion of the workout picture. portion of the workout picture. portion of the workout picture. &gt;&gt; The workouts that I'm doing with my &gt;&gt; The workouts that I'm doing with my &gt;&gt; The workouts that I'm doing with my strength training workouts with my strength training workouts with my strength training workouts with my coach, you know, it really depends. coach, you know, it really depends. coach, you know, it really depends. Most of those workouts Most of those workouts Most of those workouts are they're multi-joint are they're multi-joint are they're multi-joint workouts. So, I am most of the time workouts. So, I am most of the time workouts. So, I am most of the time doing, you know, some either front squat, back you know, some either front squat, back you know, some either front squat, back squat, or I'm cleaning it as well, squat, or I'm cleaning it as well, squat, or I'm cleaning it as well, right? Which obviously the weight right? Which obviously the weight right? Which obviously the weight goes down if I'm doing if I'm cleaning goes down if I'm doing if I'm cleaning goes down if I'm doing if I'm cleaning it cuz it's hard to clean. It's also the it cuz it's hard to clean. It's also the it cuz it's hard to clean. It's also the hard like it's the thing that I hate hard like it's the thing that I hate hard like it's the thing that I hate doing the most. doing the most. doing the most. &gt;&gt; Cleans. &gt;&gt; Cleans. &gt;&gt; Cleans. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Cleans with front squat &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Cleans with front squat &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Cleans with front squat because it's really hard. because it's really hard. because it's really hard. And for me. I mean, for others who've And for me. I mean, for others who've And for me. I mean, for others who've been doing it for years, I'm sure it's been doing it for years, I'm sure it's been doing it for years, I'm sure it's like, you know, they love it. But for like, you know, they love it. But for like, you know, they love it. But for me, it's very hard. I've only been doing me, it's very hard. I've only been doing me, it's very hard. I've only been doing clean since, you know, February 2024. clean since, you know, February 2024. clean since, you know, February 2024. So, I'm pretty new to it. And so, it's So, I'm pretty new to it. And so, it's So, I'm pretty new to it. And so, it's mentally like I have to overcome that mentally like I have to overcome that mentally like I have to overcome that challenge. Which by the way, once I challenge. Which by the way, once I challenge. Which by the way, once I started doing all this sort of weight started doing all this sort of weight started doing all this sort of weight training, I've always been an endurance junkie. I've always been an endurance junkie. I've always been an endurance junkie. Like I like I used to like go long runs Like I like I used to like go long runs Like I like I used to like go long runs and, you know, races and stuff like and, you know, races and stuff like and, you know, races and stuff like that. So, for me, that's like my safe that. So, for me, that's like my safe that. So, for me, that's like my safe spot, right? That's what comes easy to spot, right? That's what comes easy to spot, right? That's what comes easy to me. Weight training and resistance training, Weight training and resistance training, Weight training and resistance training, strength training, definitely not strength training, definitely not strength training, definitely not something that I've done my whole life. something that I've done my whole life. something that I've done my whole life. I'm so glad that I started doing it, but I'm so glad that I started doing it, but I'm so glad that I started doing it, but very challenging for me. And so, very challenging for me. And so, very challenging for me. And so, I would say the biggest effect was on my I would say the biggest effect was on my I would say the biggest effect was on my brain and the ability to handle stress brain and the ability to handle stress brain and the ability to handle stress better. Where it was like unbelievable better. Where it was like unbelievable better. Where it was like unbelievable cuz it was so hard. And I just didn't cuz it was so hard. And I just didn't cuz it was so hard. And I just didn't want to do these cleans, you know, and want to do these cleans, you know, and want to do these cleans, you know, and these front squats. Um and then and these front squats. Um and then and these front squats. Um and then the rest of my day was not as hard. And the rest of my day was not as hard. And the rest of my day was not as hard. And that to me was like the biggest surprise that to me was like the biggest surprise that to me was like the biggest surprise for this type of training. But anyway, for this type of training. But anyway, for this type of training. But anyway, so um I do a variety of um if I'm doing so um I do a variety of um if I'm doing so um I do a variety of um if I'm doing if I'm going heavier, then it, you know, if I'm going heavier, then it, you know, if I'm going heavier, then it, you know, depends. Sometimes I'll start off as depends. Sometimes I'll start off as depends. Sometimes I'll start off as like, "Okay, we start off. We do five like, "Okay, we start off. We do five like, "Okay, we start off. We do five reps." And then we go down to four. And reps." And then we go down to four. And reps." And then we go down to four. And then we go down to three. And then we go then we go down to three. And then we go then we go down to three. And then we go down to one, down to one, down to one, &gt;&gt; Are you doing singles? &gt;&gt; Are you doing singles? &gt;&gt; Are you doing singles? &gt;&gt; We do. Mhm. I know Yeah. And &gt;&gt; We do. Mhm. I know Yeah. And &gt;&gt; We do. Mhm. I know Yeah. And that's the hardest. It's the hardest. that's the hardest. It's the hardest. that's the hardest. It's the hardest. But then there's like my coach But then there's like my coach But then there's like my coach will be like, "It's just one. It's just will be like, "It's just one. It's just will be like, "It's just one. It's just one." You know, sometimes we'll do like one." You know, sometimes we'll do like one." You know, sometimes we'll do like six, five, and then we do four twice, six, five, and then we do four twice, six, five, and then we do four twice, and then we do three twice, right? And and then we do three twice, right? And and then we do three twice, right? And so, it all depends, you know, also on so, it all depends, you know, also on so, it all depends, you know, also on the day. There's some days where the day. There's some days where the day. There's some days where I'm just like, you know, can we do lower I'm just like, you know, can we do lower I'm just like, you know, can we do lower reps and like lighter weight, right? reps and like lighter weight, right? reps and like lighter weight, right? Where I'm just like, it's this is the Where I'm just like, it's this is the Where I'm just like, it's this is the day for me. I I'm stressed. I'm not day for me. I I'm stressed. I'm not day for me. I I'm stressed. I'm not I'm not here. Like I'm not here. Like I'm not here. Like So, you kind of have to modify your So, you kind of have to modify your So, you kind of have to modify your workout, right? According to how you workout, right? According to how you workout, right? According to how you feel that day. feel that day. feel that day. Um but I would say that those the majority but I would say that those the majority but I would say that those the majority of my strength training workouts are or of my strength training workouts are or of my strength training workouts are or deadlifting, you know, I love deadlift deadlifting, you know, I love deadlift deadlifting, you know, I love deadlift deadlifting. I think I'm pretty good at deadlifting. I think I'm pretty good at deadlifting. I think I'm pretty good at pulling that weight up, lifting that at pulling that weight up, lifting that at pulling that weight up, lifting that weight up. weight up. weight up. &gt;&gt; straight bar, hex bar? &gt;&gt; straight bar, hex bar? &gt;&gt; straight bar, hex bar? &gt;&gt; I do straight bar. &gt;&gt; I do straight bar. &gt;&gt; I do straight bar. &gt;&gt; there's so many variables, but &gt;&gt; there's so many variables, but &gt;&gt; there's so many variables, but yeah. &gt;&gt; bar, and um &gt;&gt; bar, and um &gt;&gt; bar, and um it's the same deal with that. Like most it's the same deal with that. Like most it's the same deal with that. Like most of the time with strength training we'll of the time with strength training we'll of the time with strength training we'll do, you know, we start off at like five do, you know, we start off at like five do, you know, we start off at like five or six, and then work our way down. or six, and then work our way down. or six, and then work our way down. And then I usually do a drop set And then I usually do a drop set And then I usually do a drop set after, you know, any of those sessions where you know, any of those sessions where you know, any of those sessions where I'll do 10, and then it's like a lot I'll do 10, and then it's like a lot I'll do 10, and then it's like a lot lighter, right? lighter, right? lighter, right? So, those are typically my So, those are typically my So, those are typically my strength training sessions are strength training sessions are strength training sessions are multi-joint. Sometimes I'll do accessory multi-joint. Sometimes I'll do accessory multi-joint. Sometimes I'll do accessory sessions, you know, where I'm working I sessions, you know, where I'm working I sessions, you know, where I'm working I do, you know, the dips do, you know, the dips do, you know, the dips um or um or um or the Bulgarian, you know, the Bulgarian the Bulgarian, you know, the Bulgarian the Bulgarian, you know, the Bulgarian split squats. I mean, just the accessory split squats. I mean, just the accessory split squats. I mean, just the accessory stuff that you're working the like stuff that you're working the like stuff that you're working the like smaller stabilization muscles and stuff smaller stabilization muscles and stuff smaller stabilization muscles and stuff like that. like that. like that. &gt;&gt; I love that you call Bulgarian split &gt;&gt; I love that you call Bulgarian split &gt;&gt; I love that you call Bulgarian split squats accessory smaller muscles. For a squats accessory smaller muscles. For a squats accessory smaller muscles. For a lot of people, that's the compound work. lot of people, that's the compound work. lot of people, that's the compound work. &gt;&gt; Which is just I have to say I am &gt;&gt; Which is just I have to say I am &gt;&gt; Which is just I have to say I am inside I'm just like so delighted inside I'm just like so delighted inside I'm just like so delighted because I mean because I mean because I mean obviously weight training is something obviously weight training is something obviously weight training is something that's caught on broadly for men and that's caught on broadly for men and that's caught on broadly for men and women now, but I don't know many women, women now, but I don't know many women, women now, but I don't know many women, and I know they're out there, but I and I know they're out there, but I and I know they're out there, but I don't know many women who are don't know many women who are don't know many women who are uh working down to singles on uh working down to singles on uh working down to singles on multi-joint, like real multi-joint, like real multi-joint, like real multi-joint, like, you know, like, you know, like, you know, deadlifts, cleans. I know they're out deadlifts, cleans. I know they're out deadlifts, cleans. I know they're out there, but it's not that common to see there, but it's not that common to see there, but it's not that common to see in gyms, and uh this is going to no in gyms, and uh this is going to no in gyms, and uh this is going to no doubt spark a debate because you know, doubt spark a debate because you know, doubt spark a debate because you know, some of the some of the some of the older, slightly ornery, but very older, slightly ornery, but very older, slightly ornery, but very credentialed strength training folks credentialed strength training folks credentialed strength training folks have been online recently saying that as have been online recently saying that as have been online recently saying that as people um pass 35, that they shouldn't people um pass 35, that they shouldn't people um pass 35, that they shouldn't do squats, that they shouldn't do squats, that they shouldn't do squats, that they shouldn't do deadlifts, and certainly shouldn't do deadlifts, and certainly shouldn't do deadlifts, and certainly shouldn't do them heavy because it because of this them heavy because it because of this them heavy because it because of this whole thing of, you know, you can do whole thing of, you know, you can do whole thing of, you know, you can do higher reps and you can go to failure higher reps and you can go to failure higher reps and you can go to failure and still get hypertrophy. But what I and still get hypertrophy. But what I and still get hypertrophy. But what I love is that you're not necessarily love is that you're not necessarily love is that you're not necessarily talking about hypertrophy, maybe some talking about hypertrophy, maybe some talking about hypertrophy, maybe some hypertrophy, but this is about strength. hypertrophy, but this is about strength. hypertrophy, but this is about strength. This is about building more strength. This is about building more strength. This is about building more strength. And triples and doubles and singles, And triples and doubles and singles, And triples and doubles and singles, that's awesome. that's awesome. that's awesome. &gt;&gt; It's hard. &gt;&gt; It's hard. &gt;&gt; It's hard. &gt;&gt; It's so hard, and it's the part that I &gt;&gt; It's so hard, and it's the part that I &gt;&gt; It's so hard, and it's the part that I I'm like all about let's like the last I'm like all about let's like the last I'm like all about let's like the last 30 minutes when it's hit, and then 30 minutes when it's hit, and then 30 minutes when it's hit, and then that's hard it's a different kind of that's hard it's a different kind of that's hard it's a different kind of hard. But for me, the strength training hard. But for me, the strength training hard. But for me, the strength training is the hardest, and there's definitely a is the hardest, and there's definitely a is the hardest, and there's definitely a mental component, right? Where I do not mental component, right? Where I do not mental component, right? Where I do not want to do it. It's like you talk about want to do it. It's like you talk about want to do it. It's like you talk about with cold plunging, right? Like you with cold plunging, right? Like you with cold plunging, right? Like you just it's so unpleasant, and you don't just it's so unpleasant, and you don't just it's so unpleasant, and you don't want to do it, and like you do it, and want to do it, and like you do it, and want to do it, and like you do it, and it's like that mental toughness that it's like that mental toughness that it's like that mental toughness that you're building, right? I that's what I you're building, right? I that's what I you're building, right? I that's what I experience when I'm doing these, you experience when I'm doing these, you experience when I'm doing these, you know, strength training exercises that know, strength training exercises that know, strength training exercises that I'm doing. And and I don't know if it's I'm doing. And and I don't know if it's I'm doing. And and I don't know if it's going to get easier, maybe it will. going to get easier, maybe it will. going to get easier, maybe it will. It's hasn't yet. I still I still dread It's hasn't yet. I still I still dread It's hasn't yet. I still I still dread it, but I do it, and I'm proud of myself it, but I do it, and I'm proud of myself it, but I do it, and I'm proud of myself for doing it, but it is definitely for doing it, but it is definitely for doing it, but it is definitely hard, and I am getting stronger, I think hard, and I am getting stronger, I think hard, and I am getting stronger, I think mentally and obviously physically as mentally and obviously physically as mentally and obviously physically as well. But um well. But um well. But um I have to add in the aerobic as well, I have to add in the aerobic as well, I have to add in the aerobic as well, though. I think that's really important. though. I think that's really important. though. I think that's really important. That's your base. Yeah, for sure. You That's your base. Yeah, for sure. You That's your base. Yeah, for sure. You love it. love it. love it. &gt;&gt; I love it, and I do think &gt;&gt; I love it, and I do think &gt;&gt; I love it, and I do think cardiorespiratory fitness is very cardiorespiratory fitness is very cardiorespiratory fitness is very important, you know, for long-term important, you know, for long-term important, you know, for long-term health as well as, you know, obviously health as well as, you know, obviously health as well as, you know, obviously building muscle and strength. building muscle and strength. building muscle and strength. &gt;&gt; Well, on the one hand, I want for you as &gt;&gt; Well, on the one hand, I want for you as &gt;&gt; Well, on the one hand, I want for you as a friend to for you to hate the heavy a friend to for you to hate the heavy a friend to for you to hate the heavy work less. On the other hand, I don't work less. On the other hand, I don't work less. On the other hand, I don't because of this literature, I'm sure because of this literature, I'm sure because of this literature, I'm sure you're familiar with it, but uh the you're familiar with it, but uh the you're familiar with it, but uh the anterior midcingulate cortex is the anterior midcingulate cortex is the anterior midcingulate cortex is the brain area that is hyperplastic brain area that is hyperplastic brain area that is hyperplastic throughout the lifespan, which is rare throughout the lifespan, which is rare throughout the lifespan, which is rare for a brain area, and it enlarges for a brain area, and it enlarges for a brain area, and it enlarges um when we do things we don't want to um when we do things we don't want to um when we do things we don't want to do. I mean, it's so clear. It's not just do. I mean, it's so clear. It's not just do. I mean, it's so clear. It's not just about doing hard things. It's about It's about doing hard things. It's about It's about doing hard things. It's about It's about doing the hard thing you hate. about doing the hard thing you hate. about doing the hard thing you hate. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; And for you, that sounds like the &gt;&gt; And for you, that sounds like the &gt;&gt; And for you, that sounds like the heavy compound movements. For me, yeah, heavy compound movements. For me, yeah, heavy compound movements. For me, yeah, I don't like the cold plunge, which is I don't like the cold plunge, which is I don't like the cold plunge, which is why I do it. I don't think it's magic. I why I do it. I don't think it's magic. I why I do it. I don't think it's magic. I just think it's a It's a sure fire just think it's a It's a sure fire just think it's a It's a sure fire stimulus that I hate to make get stimulus that I hate to make get stimulus that I hate to make get mentally stronger. And I think mentally stronger. And I think mentally stronger. And I think having something that you really despise having something that you really despise having something that you really despise that you know is good for you that you know is good for you that you know is good for you seems to keep this anterior seems to keep this anterior seems to keep this anterior mid-cingulate cortex volume either mid-cingulate cortex volume either mid-cingulate cortex volume either increasing or the same. And that's increasing or the same. And that's increasing or the same. And that's actually the thing in these so-called actually the thing in these so-called actually the thing in these so-called super agers that is the strongest super agers that is the strongest super agers that is the strongest anatomical correlate that we have. So, anatomical correlate that we have. So, anatomical correlate that we have. So, on the one hand, I hope it gets easier. on the one hand, I hope it gets easier. on the one hand, I hope it gets easier. On the other hand, for your sake, I hope On the other hand, for your sake, I hope On the other hand, for your sake, I hope it doesn't get it easier well, cuz it's it doesn't get it easier well, cuz it's it doesn't get it easier well, cuz it's still It's going to be so much more still It's going to be so much more still It's going to be so much more beneficial. &gt;&gt; a coach who can tell when it's getting &gt;&gt; a coach who can tell when it's getting &gt;&gt; a coach who can tell when it's getting easier, and she will definitely up the easier, and she will definitely up the easier, and she will definitely up the weight. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I mean, it keeps I mean, it keeps &gt;&gt; I mean, it keeps I mean, it keeps &gt;&gt; I mean, it keeps I mean, it keeps going up. And so, it doesn't It gets going up. And so, it doesn't It gets going up. And so, it doesn't It gets easier in a sense, but it doesn't, easier in a sense, but it doesn't, easier in a sense, but it doesn't, right? So, I mean, I think that's right? So, I mean, I think that's right? So, I mean, I think that's the whole point is you're building the whole point is you're building the whole point is you're building strength, and you keep strength, and you keep strength, and you keep making it heavier, and it becomes harder making it heavier, and it becomes harder making it heavier, and it becomes harder again because now it's heavier. again because now it's heavier. again because now it's heavier. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; But, um and I haven't gotten injured, so &gt;&gt; But, um and I haven't gotten injured, so &gt;&gt; But, um and I haven't gotten injured, so that's also, you know, knock on wood. that's also, you know, knock on wood. that's also, you know, knock on wood. &gt;&gt; Yeah. [laughter] Yeah, knock on wood. I &gt;&gt; Yeah. [laughter] Yeah, knock on wood. I &gt;&gt; Yeah. [laughter] Yeah, knock on wood. I Thank you for rounding out that picture. Thank you for rounding out that picture. Thank you for rounding out that picture. It's super inspiring for men and women, It's super inspiring for men and women, It's super inspiring for men and women, you know, so you know, so you know, so &gt;&gt; It's not easy to post on social media &gt;&gt; It's not easy to post on social media &gt;&gt; It's not easy to post on social media because obviously I'm a newbie. So, I because obviously I'm a newbie. So, I because obviously I'm a newbie. So, I have all sorts of, have all sorts of, have all sorts of, you know, things that I can ways I can you know, things that I can ways I can you know, things that I can ways I can improve. But, I'm posting it, you know. improve. But, I'm posting it, you know. improve. But, I'm posting it, you know. &gt;&gt; Well, and the fact that you're working &gt;&gt; Well, and the fact that you're working &gt;&gt; Well, and the fact that you're working down into triples, doubles, and singles, down into triples, doubles, and singles, down into triples, doubles, and singles, I think is something that I'm trying to I think is something that I'm trying to I think is something that I'm trying to do more of, and I think do more of, and I think do more of, and I think this notion that you can get hypertrophy this notion that you can get hypertrophy this notion that you can get hypertrophy with higher reps if you take it to with higher reps if you take it to with higher reps if you take it to failure. Sure, I totally agree. Read failure. Sure, I totally agree. Read failure. Sure, I totally agree. Read the studies. Totally agree with the studies. Totally agree with the studies. Totally agree with the data. But, not everything is about data. But, not everything is about data. But, not everything is about hypertrophy. I think that's what people hypertrophy. I think that's what people hypertrophy. I think that's what people forget. It's not all about growing forget. It's not all about growing forget. It's not all about growing muscle. Um and VO2 max, which is great, muscle. Um and VO2 max, which is great, muscle. Um and VO2 max, which is great, but it's just It's not all about um but it's just It's not all about um but it's just It's not all about um the top contour. And I What I love about the top contour. And I What I love about the top contour. And I What I love about the way you approach everything is the way you approach everything is the way you approach everything is you're you go through multiple layers of you're you go through multiple layers of you're you go through multiple layers of the health stratus, as it were. of the health stratus, as it were. of the health stratus, as it were. This is probably a good opportunity to This is probably a good opportunity to This is probably a good opportunity to talk about protein, because I have a talk about protein, because I have a talk about protein, because I have a very specific question about protein. We very specific question about protein. We very specific question about protein. We all hear 1 g of quality protein per all hear 1 g of quality protein per all hear 1 g of quality protein per pound of body weight or lean body pound of body weight or lean body pound of body weight or lean body weight. That's sort of what we're kind weight. That's sort of what we're kind weight. That's sort of what we're kind of what's thrown at us. of what's thrown at us. of what's thrown at us. By doing the heavier weight training, do By doing the heavier weight training, do By doing the heavier weight training, do you notice that your protein appetite you notice that your protein appetite you notice that your protein appetite has increased? Like appetite has increased? Like appetite has increased? Like appetite specifically for protein foods. specifically for protein foods. specifically for protein foods. &gt;&gt; I don't know that I have. You know, I &gt;&gt; I don't know that I have. You know, I &gt;&gt; I don't know that I have. You know, I interestingly have been doing a little interestingly have been doing a little interestingly have been doing a little bit more bit more bit more intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, in which, you know, people think about in which, you know, people think about in which, you know, people think about intermittent fasting, they think about intermittent fasting, they think about intermittent fasting, they think about it as just one thing, one intervention. it as just one thing, one intervention. it as just one thing, one intervention. I think it's two. There's a behavioral I think it's two. There's a behavioral I think it's two. There's a behavioral aspect to it, where it's a tool to sort aspect to it, where it's a tool to sort aspect to it, where it's a tool to sort of lower the amount of calories you're of lower the amount of calories you're of lower the amount of calories you're taking in. The other one would be this taking in. The other one would be this taking in. The other one would be this metabolic switch, but so I've actually metabolic switch, but so I've actually metabolic switch, but so I've actually since I don't know, September, maybe since I don't know, September, maybe since I don't know, September, maybe last September of 2025, been doing last September of 2025, been doing last September of 2025, been doing more intermittent fasting, and what I more intermittent fasting, and what I more intermittent fasting, and what I mean by this is really just eating less. mean by this is really just eating less. mean by this is really just eating less. And the reason for that is because And the reason for that is because And the reason for that is because I noticed that I noticed that I noticed that everything that I was doing, which was, everything that I was doing, which was, everything that I was doing, which was, you know, I mean, I eat healthy, I you know, I mean, I eat healthy, I you know, I mean, I eat healthy, I exercise a lot, and yet I was sort of exercise a lot, and yet I was sort of exercise a lot, and yet I was sort of gaining more fat in the belly gaining more fat in the belly gaining more fat in the belly section, right? The visceral fat. And section, right? The visceral fat. And section, right? The visceral fat. And the only thing that really helped me the only thing that really helped me the only thing that really helped me stop that, put the put the brakes on, stop that, put the put the brakes on, stop that, put the put the brakes on, was getting more in a caloric deficit. was getting more in a caloric deficit. was getting more in a caloric deficit. Um, so maybe my drive to do that kind of is maybe my drive to do that kind of is maybe my drive to do that kind of is skewing whether or not my appetite for skewing whether or not my appetite for skewing whether or not my appetite for protein would go up. protein would go up. protein would go up. But I personally am on the scale of 1.2 But I personally am on the scale of 1.2 But I personally am on the scale of 1.2 to 1.6 g per kilogram body weight, which to 1.6 g per kilogram body weight, which to 1.6 g per kilogram body weight, which &gt;&gt; Per kilogram? &gt;&gt; Per kilogram? &gt;&gt; Per kilogram? &gt;&gt; Per kilogram, which is probably a little &gt;&gt; Per kilogram, which is probably a little &gt;&gt; Per kilogram, which is probably a little bit less than the pound. bit less than the pound. bit less than the pound. &gt;&gt; You know, it's a kind of a &gt;&gt; You know, it's a kind of a &gt;&gt; You know, it's a kind of a throwaway statement, a gram of quality throwaway statement, a gram of quality throwaway statement, a gram of quality protein, um, as defined as something with, you know, as defined as something with, you know, as defined as something with, you know, lots of the essential amino acids and uh lots of the essential amino acids and uh lots of the essential amino acids and uh so forth uh per pound or per lean pound so forth uh per pound or per lean pound so forth uh per pound or per lean pound of body mass. of body mass. of body mass. &gt;&gt; Yeah, so &gt;&gt; Yeah, so &gt;&gt; Yeah, so &gt;&gt; Which is something I think I and many &gt;&gt; Which is something I think I and many &gt;&gt; Which is something I think I and many other people shoot for, but I'm curious other people shoot for, but I'm curious other people shoot for, but I'm curious how religious you are about the, you how religious you are about the, you how religious you are about the, you know, getting a certain protein amount know, getting a certain protein amount know, getting a certain protein amount or per meal. or per meal. or per meal. &gt;&gt; Basically, it wasn't working for me in &gt;&gt; Basically, it wasn't working for me in &gt;&gt; Basically, it wasn't working for me in terms of like I was really trying to get terms of like I was really trying to get terms of like I was really trying to get aim for like the higher end of the for aim for like the higher end of the for aim for like the higher end of the for me, you know, 1.6 g per kilogram body me, you know, 1.6 g per kilogram body me, you know, 1.6 g per kilogram body weight or even a little bit above that. weight or even a little bit above that. weight or even a little bit above that. And what I found what was happening is And what I found what was happening is And what I found what was happening is that I was actually gaining more that I was actually gaining more that I was actually gaining more weight because I think I was consuming weight because I think I was consuming weight because I think I was consuming more calories at the same time. If if more calories at the same time. If if more calories at the same time. If if you're getting it from whole foods, you're getting it from whole foods, you're getting it from whole foods, right? Like that's just kind of right? Like that's just kind of right? Like that's just kind of naturally going to happen. naturally going to happen. naturally going to happen. Uh and so I had to slide down. Um, but Uh and so I had to slide down. Um, but Uh and so I had to slide down. Um, but I'm still I'm still like I said, I'm still I'm still like I said, I'm still I'm still like I said, I'm still getting within that range of like still getting within that range of like still getting within that range of like probably on average maybe 1.3, 1.4 g per probably on average maybe 1.3, 1.4 g per probably on average maybe 1.3, 1.4 g per kilogram body weight. And it's really kilogram body weight. And it's really kilogram body weight. And it's really it's really worked well for me, but like it's really worked well for me, but like it's really worked well for me, but like people are different and you have people are different and you have people are different and you have different goals, right? You know, like different goals, right? You know, like different goals, right? You know, like I'm gaining muscle mass and I feel like I'm gaining muscle mass and I feel like I'm gaining muscle mass and I feel like all my training is like the most all my training is like the most all my training is like the most important thing and I think that we need important thing and I think that we need important thing and I think that we need generally speaking, I think people generally speaking, I think people generally speaking, I think people should become more obsessed with should become more obsessed with should become more obsessed with training and less obsessed with protein. training and less obsessed with protein. training and less obsessed with protein. Like the protein will complement the Like the protein will complement the Like the protein will complement the training and as you mentioned, if you're training and as you mentioned, if you're training and as you mentioned, if you're training, perhaps your appetite for training, perhaps your appetite for training, perhaps your appetite for protein will increase and so you'll protein will increase and so you'll protein will increase and so you'll start to eat, you know, more protein and start to eat, you know, more protein and start to eat, you know, more protein and less refined carbohydrates. I already less refined carbohydrates. I already less refined carbohydrates. I already wasn't eating a lot of refined wasn't eating a lot of refined wasn't eating a lot of refined ultra-processed foods in the first ultra-processed foods in the first ultra-processed foods in the first place. Probably not the answer you were Probably not the answer you were Probably not the answer you were expecting, but expecting, but expecting, but it's really um for me like I just it's really um for me like I just it's really um for me like I just focusing on getting more protein was focusing on getting more protein was focusing on getting more protein was not working for my body um in terms of not working for my body um in terms of not working for my body um in terms of but then again, I'm 47 years old, you but then again, I'm 47 years old, you but then again, I'm 47 years old, you know, that perimenopause phase know, that perimenopause phase know, that perimenopause phase very different than someone who's 37, very different than someone who's 37, very different than someone who's 37, maybe. &gt;&gt; I don't know the answer to that. I um &gt;&gt; I don't know the answer to that. I um &gt;&gt; I don't know the answer to that. I um I do know that I hear from more and more I do know that I hear from more and more I do know that I hear from more and more people these days that they are having a people these days that they are having a people these days that they are having a hard time getting that 1 g of protein hard time getting that 1 g of protein hard time getting that 1 g of protein per pound of body weight. It it like a per pound of body weight. It it like a per pound of body weight. It it like a lot to them is what they're saying. They lot to them is what they're saying. They lot to them is what they're saying. They feel like they're kind of forcing feel like they're kind of forcing feel like they're kind of forcing themselves to do it. themselves to do it. themselves to do it. &gt;&gt; feel that way. &gt;&gt; feel that way. &gt;&gt; feel that way. &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, I'm actually really pleased &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, I'm actually really pleased &gt;&gt; Exactly. So, I'm actually really pleased with your answer not because I have an with your answer not because I have an with your answer not because I have an agenda here, but because I and many agenda here, but because I and many agenda here, but because I and many other people seem to feel like unless other people seem to feel like unless other people seem to feel like unless there's a lot of resistance training or there's a lot of resistance training or there's a lot of resistance training or tremendous demands like hiking, you tremendous demands like hiking, you tremendous demands like hiking, you know, while backpacking where you burn know, while backpacking where you burn know, while backpacking where you burn tons of calories. You're carrying you're tons of calories. You're carrying you're tons of calories. You're carrying you're basically walking like 9 hours a day, basically walking like 9 hours a day, basically walking like 9 hours a day, right? &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; That um &gt;&gt; That um &gt;&gt; That um they have a hard time getting that much they have a hard time getting that much they have a hard time getting that much protein down. Um and I think it that's protein down. Um and I think it that's protein down. Um and I think it that's also the case if people are eating also the case if people are eating also the case if people are eating starches. Like I eat rice and oatmeal starches. Like I eat rice and oatmeal starches. Like I eat rice and oatmeal and breads and things like that. Not a and breads and things like that. Not a and breads and things like that. Not a lot of bread, but you know, it sounds lot of bread, but you know, it sounds lot of bread, but you know, it sounds like you eat starches. like you eat starches. like you eat starches. &gt;&gt; I do eat oatmeal, too. It does satiate &gt;&gt; I do eat oatmeal, too. It does satiate &gt;&gt; I do eat oatmeal, too. It does satiate you. These days because I really kind of you. These days because I really kind of you. These days because I really kind of more focused a little bit on I did want more focused a little bit on I did want more focused a little bit on I did want to calorically restrict somewhat to calorically restrict somewhat to calorically restrict somewhat without, you know, being unhealthy. without, you know, being unhealthy. without, you know, being unhealthy. Obviously, you can take every stressor Obviously, you can take every stressor Obviously, you can take every stressor to a bad unhealthy place, right? You to a bad unhealthy place, right? You to a bad unhealthy place, right? You don't want to starve yourself. You don't want to starve yourself. You don't want to starve yourself. You don't want to like not eat enough food. But um want to like not eat enough food. But um want to like not eat enough food. But um my meals are mostly like healthy my meals are mostly like healthy my meals are mostly like healthy protein. So, I have homemade turkey protein. So, I have homemade turkey protein. So, I have homemade turkey burgers. I eat a lot of I eat a lot of burgers. I eat a lot of I eat a lot of burgers. I eat a lot of I eat a lot of those. And then I eat chicken. You know, those. And then I eat chicken. You know, those. And then I eat chicken. You know, I pasture-raised chicken. I do I do I pasture-raised chicken. I do I do I pasture-raised chicken. I do I do still eat wild Alaskan salmon. And then still eat wild Alaskan salmon. And then still eat wild Alaskan salmon. And then I'll um also mix in some like filet I'll um also mix in some like filet I'll um also mix in some like filet mignon. Like I like grass-fed steak as mignon. Like I like grass-fed steak as mignon. Like I like grass-fed steak as well. &gt;&gt; Yum. &gt;&gt; Yum. &gt;&gt; Yum. &gt;&gt; Those are my protein sources. And always &gt;&gt; Those are my protein sources. And always &gt;&gt; Those are my protein sources. And always I pair it with greens. So, or like some I pair it with greens. So, or like some I pair it with greens. So, or like some sort of sort of sort of vegetable. Most of the times it's vegetable. Most of the times it's vegetable. Most of the times it's greens cuz they're the most greens cuz they're the most greens cuz they're the most micronutrient dense. And so, these days micronutrient dense. And so, these days micronutrient dense. And so, these days I'm eating a lot of sauteed collard I'm eating a lot of sauteed collard I'm eating a lot of sauteed collard greens that are like pre-prepared. It greens that are like pre-prepared. It greens that are like pre-prepared. It has garlic and onion. And I'll put that, has garlic and onion. And I'll put that, has garlic and onion. And I'll put that, you know, have that with my meal or I'll you know, have that with my meal or I'll you know, have that with my meal or I'll have some, you know, sauteed kale. have some, you know, sauteed kale. have some, you know, sauteed kale. Sometimes I'll have a salad with it. But Sometimes I'll have a salad with it. But Sometimes I'll have a salad with it. But the portions are smaller and like I the portions are smaller and like I the portions are smaller and like I said, I also do a little bit of said, I also do a little bit of said, I also do a little bit of intermittent fasting. We can talk about intermittent fasting. We can talk about intermittent fasting. We can talk about that as well, but that's kind of these that as well, but that's kind of these that as well, but that's kind of these days what I'm doing for my meals. I days what I'm doing for my meals. I days what I'm doing for my meals. I haven't eaten as much. Sometimes I'll eat the eaten as much. Sometimes I'll eat the eaten as much. Sometimes I'll eat the high protein oats. They have this high protein oats. They have this high protein oats. They have this high protein oats that Have you Have you seen protein oats that Have you Have you seen protein oats that Have you Have you seen those? They're pretty good. those? They're pretty good. those? They're pretty good. &gt;&gt; but I like protein foods, I like &gt;&gt; but I like protein foods, I like &gt;&gt; but I like protein foods, I like vegetables, I like fruit. I feel very vegetables, I like fruit. I feel very vegetables, I like fruit. I feel very lucky to like those foods mainly. lucky to like those foods mainly. lucky to like those foods mainly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And then the starch for me has to be &gt;&gt; And then the starch for me has to be &gt;&gt; And then the starch for me has to be very clean. I like oatmeal, rice, very clean. I like oatmeal, rice, very clean. I like oatmeal, rice, homemade pastas I'll eat. Like if I go homemade pastas I'll eat. Like if I go homemade pastas I'll eat. Like if I go out, I'll have Sometimes I'll have some out, I'll have Sometimes I'll have some out, I'll have Sometimes I'll have some homemade pasta or a sourdough bread homemade pasta or a sourdough bread homemade pasta or a sourdough bread or something, but I find that most or something, but I find that most or something, but I find that most starches that are out there in the world starches that are out there in the world starches that are out there in the world have a bunch other junk in them. And I have a bunch other junk in them. And I have a bunch other junk in them. And I just feel lousy. Get kind of sleepy just feel lousy. Get kind of sleepy just feel lousy. Get kind of sleepy afterwards. I just So I afterwards. I just So I afterwards. I just So I Uh so it sounds like we eat pretty Uh so it sounds like we eat pretty Uh so it sounds like we eat pretty similarly, although I probably eat more similarly, although I probably eat more similarly, although I probably eat more starches than you do. starches than you do. starches than you do. &gt;&gt; It's the more processed types of &gt;&gt; It's the more processed types of &gt;&gt; It's the more processed types of carbohydrates that as you mentioned, carbohydrates that as you mentioned, carbohydrates that as you mentioned, it's like you typically you don't feel it's like you typically you don't feel it's like you typically you don't feel good after you eat them. And you know, good after you eat them. And you know, good after you eat them. And you know, part of that's the postprandial part of that's the postprandial part of that's the postprandial inflammatory response cuz some of those inflammatory response cuz some of those inflammatory response cuz some of those foods are a little more inflammatory. I foods are a little more inflammatory. I foods are a little more inflammatory. I mean, a lot of additives and stuff that mean, a lot of additives and stuff that mean, a lot of additives and stuff that are affecting the gut, gut are affecting the gut, gut are affecting the gut, gut permeabilization, you're leaking permeabilization, you're leaking permeabilization, you're leaking lipopolysaccharide into the bloodstream, lipopolysaccharide into the bloodstream, lipopolysaccharide into the bloodstream, right? That's activating the immune right? That's activating the immune right? That's activating the immune system. &gt;&gt; We used to inject I don't do any animal &gt;&gt; We used to inject I don't do any animal &gt;&gt; We used to inject I don't do any animal experiments anymore, and I'm actually experiments anymore, and I'm actually experiments anymore, and I'm actually grateful to not do them. So I didn't grateful to not do them. So I didn't grateful to not do them. So I didn't like working on animals, but it was what like working on animals, but it was what like working on animals, but it was what we did until I decided to work on we did until I decided to work on we did until I decided to work on humans. But we used to inject LPS humans. But we used to inject LPS humans. But we used to inject LPS um to stimulate an inflammatory response to stimulate an inflammatory response to stimulate an inflammatory response to kind of prime a regeneration response kind of prime a regeneration response kind of prime a regeneration response that you could get through macrophages that you could get through macrophages that you could get through macrophages and things like that. And so LPS is a and things like that. And so LPS is a and things like that. And so LPS is a very potent way to generate local or very potent way to generate local or very potent way to generate local or even systemic inflammation. I think um even systemic inflammation. I think um even systemic inflammation. I think um hearing that some starches will hearing that some starches will hearing that some starches will stimulate LPS, that's uh interesting. stimulate LPS, that's uh interesting. stimulate LPS, that's uh interesting. &gt;&gt; Well, let me clarify. Let me clarify. &gt;&gt; Well, let me clarify. Let me clarify. &gt;&gt; Well, let me clarify. Let me clarify. &gt;&gt; challenging. No, no, I'm not &gt;&gt; challenging. No, no, I'm not &gt;&gt; challenging. No, no, I'm not challenging. It squares with my challenging. It squares with my challenging. It squares with my experiences. I'm one of these I never experiences. I'm one of these I never experiences. I'm one of these I never get stomach aches, I never get stomach aches, I never get stomach aches, I never get headaches. If I do, something's badly headaches. If I do, something's badly headaches. If I do, something's badly wrong with my stomach or my head. But if wrong with my stomach or my head. But if wrong with my stomach or my head. But if I eat certain starches, I'll be like, I eat certain starches, I'll be like, I eat certain starches, I'll be like, "Oh, like I feel lousy." And I'm "Oh, like I feel lousy." And I'm "Oh, like I feel lousy." And I'm wondering if it's this. wondering if it's this. wondering if it's this. &gt;&gt; So we have about a gram of LPS in our &gt;&gt; So we have about a gram of LPS in our &gt;&gt; So we have about a gram of LPS in our gut. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Like that's on average cuz you know, &gt;&gt; Like that's on average cuz you know, &gt;&gt; Like that's on average cuz you know, lipopolysaccharide is the outer lipopolysaccharide is the outer lipopolysaccharide is the outer component of a cell membrane of component of a cell membrane of component of a cell membrane of gram-negative bacteria, right? gram-negative bacteria, right? gram-negative bacteria, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; We have a lot of bacteria in our gut, &gt;&gt; We have a lot of bacteria in our gut, &gt;&gt; We have a lot of bacteria in our gut, gram-negative bacteria, right? Trillions gram-negative bacteria, right? Trillions gram-negative bacteria, right? Trillions of bacteria in our gut. So um when of bacteria in our gut. So um when of bacteria in our gut. So um when we eat food, typically like our gut we eat food, typically like our gut we eat food, typically like our gut epithelial cells, they have we have a epithelial cells, they have we have a epithelial cells, they have we have a tight junction that's holding them tight junction that's holding them tight junction that's holding them together. When we eat food, they together. When we eat food, they together. When we eat food, they transiently open and then close. Like transiently open and then close. Like transiently open and then close. Like it's kind of a normal response, right? it's kind of a normal response, right? it's kind of a normal response, right? Um, the I would say the opposite end Um, the I would say the opposite end Um, the I would say the opposite end of the spectrum of that would be like of the spectrum of that would be like of the spectrum of that would be like celiac where they eat gluten or celiac where they eat gluten or celiac where they eat gluten or something, it opens up and stays open something, it opens up and stays open something, it opens up and stays open and so you get like a ton of LPS leakage and so you get like a ton of LPS leakage and so you get like a ton of LPS leakage into the system which causes massive into the system which causes massive into the system which causes massive inflammation. It just happens with meals in general. It just happens with meals in general. It just happens with meals in general. You do get somewhat of a LPS response You do get somewhat of a LPS response You do get somewhat of a LPS response from a meal. Now, the type of meal does from a meal. Now, the type of meal does from a meal. Now, the type of meal does matter. So, when I when I say matter. So, when I when I say matter. So, when I when I say refined carbohydrates, it's not refined carbohydrates, it's not refined carbohydrates, it's not necessarily like healthy, necessarily like healthy, necessarily like healthy, you know, carbohydrates like vegetables. you know, carbohydrates like vegetables. you know, carbohydrates like vegetables. It's like you're eating something that It's like you're eating something that It's like you're eating something that is refined sugar typically with is refined sugar typically with is refined sugar typically with saturated fat. saturated fat. saturated fat. So, those types of foods really cause So, those types of foods really cause So, those types of foods really cause like LPS response. like LPS response. like LPS response. You know, it's inflammation. You know, it's inflammation. You know, it's inflammation. It's bad it's hard on the gut. It's bad it's hard on the gut. It's bad it's hard on the gut. But, the postprandial inflammatory But, the postprandial inflammatory But, the postprandial inflammatory response essentially is that LPS getting response essentially is that LPS getting response essentially is that LPS getting into the system, activating the immune into the system, activating the immune into the system, activating the immune system which draws the energy. I mean, system which draws the energy. I mean, system which draws the energy. I mean, it's like it's very energy consuming to it's like it's very energy consuming to it's like it's very energy consuming to activate your immune system, right? activate your immune system, right? activate your immune system, right? Which is why That's why when you're Which is why That's why when you're Which is why That's why when you're sick, you're so sleepy, too, right? sick, you're so sleepy, too, right? sick, you're so sleepy, too, right? Well, there's also cytokines that are Well, there's also cytokines that are Well, there's also cytokines that are somnogenic and promoting sleep, but like somnogenic and promoting sleep, but like somnogenic and promoting sleep, but like activating your immune system requires a activating your immune system requires a activating your immune system requires a ton of energy. And so, when you're ton of energy. And so, when you're ton of energy. And so, when you're constantly activating the immune system, constantly activating the immune system, constantly activating the immune system, you know, that's an energy sink, right? you know, that's an energy sink, right? you know, that's an energy sink, right? And so, you do feel tired and that's why And so, you do feel tired and that's why And so, you do feel tired and that's why a lot of times after a meal, you're a lot of times after a meal, you're a lot of times after a meal, you're feeling kind of lethargic. feeling kind of lethargic. feeling kind of lethargic. &gt;&gt; Do protein foods of the sort that you &gt;&gt; Do protein foods of the sort that you &gt;&gt; Do protein foods of the sort that you listed off before, listed off before, listed off before, um, do they cause less opening of the tight do they cause less opening of the tight do they cause less opening of the tight junctions of the gut? junctions of the gut? junctions of the gut? &gt;&gt; I think that the big deal with the &gt;&gt; I think that the big deal with the &gt;&gt; I think that the big deal with the opening of the tight junctions in the opening of the tight junctions in the opening of the tight junctions in the gut is, you know, I mean, eating the gut is, you know, I mean, eating the gut is, you know, I mean, eating a big meal will do it. Eating a eating a big meal will do it. Eating a eating a big meal will do it. Eating a very like ultra-processed food meal will very like ultra-processed food meal will very like ultra-processed food meal will do it. do it. do it. Interestingly enough, just eating a Interestingly enough, just eating a Interestingly enough, just eating a bunch of saturated fat without a fiber bunch of saturated fat without a fiber bunch of saturated fat without a fiber matrix, so like butter. You're just matrix, so like butter. You're just matrix, so like butter. You're just like eating butter. Don't ever do that, like eating butter. Don't ever do that, like eating butter. Don't ever do that, but like if you just eat butter but like if you just eat butter but like if you just eat butter &gt;&gt; Got [laughter] it. &gt;&gt; Got [laughter] it. &gt;&gt; Got [laughter] it. &gt;&gt; It that's been shown. &gt;&gt; It that's been shown. &gt;&gt; It that's been shown. &gt;&gt; My niece when she was little, now she's &gt;&gt; My niece when she was little, now she's &gt;&gt; My niece when she was little, now she's all grown up, but when she was little I all grown up, but when she was little I all grown up, but when she was little I taught her how to eat like a little bit taught her how to eat like a little bit taught her how to eat like a little bit of Kerrygold butter and she loved it. So of Kerrygold butter and she loved it. So of Kerrygold butter and she loved it. So then we would do this thing where we'd then we would do this thing where we'd then we would do this thing where we'd do that. Um we won't do that, we'd do that. Um we won't do that, we'd do that. Um we won't do that, I mean. I mean. I mean. &gt;&gt; I mean a little bit's fine, but like I'm &gt;&gt; I mean a little bit's fine, but like I'm &gt;&gt; I mean a little bit's fine, but like I'm I mean there's studies showing I mean there's studies showing I mean there's studies showing that it does like saturated fat is hard that it does like saturated fat is hard that it does like saturated fat is hard on the gut. on the gut. on the gut. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like I said, it's a sliding scale. Like &gt;&gt; Like I said, it's a sliding scale. Like &gt;&gt; Like I said, it's a sliding scale. Like meals in general do it, but it's like meals in general do it, but it's like meals in general do it, but it's like you would it's like you would you would it's like you would you would it's like you would think. The healthier foods that you're think. The healthier foods that you're think. The healthier foods that you're eating like whole foods, you're getting eating like whole foods, you're getting eating like whole foods, you're getting less of that LPS response. And then of less of that LPS response. And then of less of that LPS response. And then of course there's gluten and that course there's gluten and that course there's gluten and that complicates the whole story, especially complicates the whole story, especially complicates the whole story, especially for people that are celiac, right? Cuz for people that are celiac, right? Cuz for people that are celiac, right? Cuz that's &gt;&gt; Which is a small percentage of people &gt;&gt; Which is a small percentage of people &gt;&gt; Which is a small percentage of people that are actually celiac, right? But a that are actually celiac, right? But a that are actually celiac, right? But a lot of people seem to believe and I lot of people seem to believe and I lot of people seem to believe and I believe them that when they eat gluten believe them that when they eat gluten believe them that when they eat gluten they feel worse than when they don't eat they feel worse than when they don't eat they feel worse than when they don't eat gluten. &gt;&gt; I'm sure there's some people that are &gt;&gt; I'm sure there's some people that are &gt;&gt; I'm sure there's some people that are sensitive to gluten that do feel worse. sensitive to gluten that do feel worse. sensitive to gluten that do feel worse. And then I'm sure some of that's the And then I'm sure some of that's the And then I'm sure some of that's the nocebo effect, right? That's been shown nocebo effect, right? That's been shown nocebo effect, right? That's been shown with gluten in particular. Did you with gluten in particular. Did you with gluten in particular. Did you have you seen that study? Where people have you seen that study? Where people have you seen that study? Where people there's been so there were people there's been so there were people there's been so there were people that think they're you know, glu- gluten think they're you know, glu- gluten think they're you know, glu- gluten sensitive and so sensitive and so sensitive and so they were enrolled in a study and um they were enrolled in a study and um they were enrolled in a study and um these individuals were separated into these individuals were separated into these individuals were separated into two groups. One group was getting given two groups. One group was getting given two groups. One group was getting given the gluten bread with gluten and the gluten bread with gluten and the gluten bread with gluten and the other group was given the bread without other group was given the bread without other group was given the bread without gluten and the people that were given gluten and the people that were given gluten and the people that were given the bread without gluten had a terrible the bread without gluten had a terrible the bread without gluten had a terrible you know, abdominal res- like they were you know, abdominal res- like they were you know, abdominal res- like they were bloated, they felt terrible. I mean it bloated, they felt terrible. I mean it bloated, they felt terrible. I mean it was all and there was no gluten in the was all and there was no gluten in the was all and there was no gluten in the actual bread, but they thought there actual bread, but they thought there actual bread, but they thought there was. So it was thought that this is a was. So it was thought that this is a was. So it was thought that this is a nocebo effect where it's like the nocebo effect where it's like the nocebo effect where it's like the opposite of a placebo effect where you opposite of a placebo effect where you opposite of a placebo effect where you just you're you've got just you're you've got just you're you've got that phenotype where you think things that phenotype where you think things that phenotype where you think things negative are going to happen and you can negative are going to happen and you can negative are going to happen and you can make them happen. You can change your make them happen. You can change your make them happen. You can change your immune system, you can change your brain immune system, you can change your brain immune system, you can change your brain signaling and you know, so probably a signaling and you know, so probably a signaling and you know, so probably a combination of both with that regard. In combination of both with that regard. In combination of both with that regard. In addition to like the lethargy, so we're addition to like the lethargy, so we're addition to like the lethargy, so we're talk- I was talking about in the talk- I was talking about in the talk- I was talking about in the context. That's why it my, you know, context. That's why it my, you know, context. That's why it my, you know, interest is like you were talking about interest is like you were talking about interest is like you were talking about feeling tired after a meal. And I do feeling tired after a meal. And I do feeling tired after a meal. And I do think that is part of that reason for think that is part of that reason for think that is part of that reason for feeling sleepy, but you know, what's feeling sleepy, but you know, what's feeling sleepy, but you know, what's interesting about LPS, you talked about interesting about LPS, you talked about interesting about LPS, you talked about injecting it to mice and I've also done injecting it to mice and I've also done injecting it to mice and I've also done experiments injecting LPS into mice. experiments injecting LPS into mice. experiments injecting LPS into mice. There have been studies where There have been studies where There have been studies where people have been injected with an amount people have been injected with an amount people have been injected with an amount of LPS that is, you know, similar to of LPS that is, you know, similar to of LPS that is, you know, similar to what you would find your gut releasing what you would find your gut releasing what you would find your gut releasing into your bloodstream into your bloodstream into your bloodstream or a placebo control, which in this case or a placebo control, which in this case or a placebo control, which in this case was saline. And individuals that were was saline. And individuals that were was saline. And individuals that were injected with the LPS, high amounts of injected with the LPS, high amounts of injected with the LPS, high amounts of inflammatory markers like TNF-alpha. I inflammatory markers like TNF-alpha. I inflammatory markers like TNF-alpha. I mean, we're talking like up to a 50% mean, we're talking like up to a 50% mean, we're talking like up to a 50% increase. &gt;&gt; Ooh. &gt;&gt; Ooh. &gt;&gt; Ooh. &gt;&gt; If over baseline, right? So, high &gt;&gt; If over baseline, right? So, high &gt;&gt; If over baseline, right? So, high amounts of inflammation, which makes amounts of inflammation, which makes amounts of inflammation, which makes sense. LPS is activating the immune your sense. LPS is activating the immune your sense. LPS is activating the immune your immune system is like there's a foreign immune system is like there's a foreign immune system is like there's a foreign invader, right? It's not a foreign invader, right? It's not a foreign invader, right? It's not a foreign invader, it's just the food you ate that invader, it's just the food you ate that invader, it's just the food you ate that caused transient gut permeability. caused transient gut permeability. caused transient gut permeability. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; And those individuals also feel &gt;&gt; And those individuals also feel &gt;&gt; And those individuals also feel depressive symptoms and feelings of like depressive symptoms and feelings of like depressive symptoms and feelings of like social withdrawal. So, the inflammation social withdrawal. So, the inflammation social withdrawal. So, the inflammation is affecting the brain, right? These is affecting the brain, right? These is affecting the brain, right? These inflammatory factors are getting in the inflammatory factors are getting in the inflammatory factors are getting in the brain, crossing the blood-brain barrier, brain, crossing the blood-brain barrier, brain, crossing the blood-brain barrier, and affecting the way we feel. We know and affecting the way we feel. We know and affecting the way we feel. We know now that inflammation plays a big role now that inflammation plays a big role now that inflammation plays a big role in major depressive disorder and in major depressive disorder and in major depressive disorder and depression. Not in all cases, but depression. Not in all cases, but depression. Not in all cases, but there's a subset, right? Where it's there's a subset, right? Where it's there's a subset, right? Where it's really like it does it seems to play a really like it does it seems to play a really like it does it seems to play a big role. In fact, interestingly, big role. In fact, interestingly, big role. In fact, interestingly, there's been some studies showing that there's been some studies showing that there's been some studies showing that people that are that don't respond to people that are that don't respond to people that are that don't respond to SSRIs are have very high amounts of SSRIs are have very high amounts of SSRIs are have very high amounts of C-reactive protein. So, this was the C-reactive protein. So, this was the C-reactive protein. So, this was the biomarker for a classical biomarker for biomarker for a classical biomarker for biomarker for a classical biomarker for inflammation. I would argue it's not inflammation. I would argue it's not inflammation. I would argue it's not that sensitive, but nonetheless, it is a that sensitive, but nonetheless, it is a that sensitive, but nonetheless, it is a biomarker for inflammation. And so, biomarker for inflammation. And so, biomarker for inflammation. And so, people that um don't respond to SSRIs people that um don't respond to SSRIs people that um don't respond to SSRIs have high amounts of inflammation, which have high amounts of inflammation, which have high amounts of inflammation, which kind of raises this question of is there kind of raises this question of is there kind of raises this question of is there like this subset of depression that's like this subset of depression that's like this subset of depression that's really inflammatory driven, right? Um really inflammatory driven, right? Um really inflammatory driven, right? Um interesting. So, so the LPS is affecting interesting. So, so the LPS is affecting interesting. So, so the LPS is affecting not only our energy levels, but also not only our energy levels, but also not only our energy levels, but also our mood. And then, you know, there's our mood. And then, you know, there's our mood. And then, you know, there's also evidence that there's also evidence that there's also evidence that so, we know that LPS so, we know that LPS so, we know that LPS binds to LDL particles through binds to LDL particles through binds to LDL particles through lipid-lipid interactions. And in fact, lipid-lipid interactions. And in fact, lipid-lipid interactions. And in fact, it's kind of part of the adaptive it's kind of part of the adaptive it's kind of part of the adaptive response. It's why you don't want to response. It's why you don't want to response. It's why you don't want to ever go get your cholesterol measured ever go get your cholesterol measured ever go get your cholesterol measured like after right after you're sick or like after right after you're sick or like after right after you're sick or had a very stressful event, something had a very stressful event, something had a very stressful event, something that causes inflammation cuz you will that causes inflammation cuz you will that causes inflammation cuz you will increase VLDL production increases and increase VLDL production increases and increase VLDL production increases and LDL production increases and it's sort LDL production increases and it's sort LDL production increases and it's sort of an adaptive response to bind that LPS of an adaptive response to bind that LPS of an adaptive response to bind that LPS to prevent it from, you know, causing to prevent it from, you know, causing to prevent it from, you know, causing more damage. And so it actually binds to more damage. And so it actually binds to more damage. And so it actually binds to LDL particles on the apoB protein. So LDL particles on the apoB protein. So LDL particles on the apoB protein. So apoB is a protein that is on these apoB is a protein that is on these apoB is a protein that is on these lipoproteins and it's a very important lipoproteins and it's a very important lipoproteins and it's a very important protein because that is what's used by protein because that is what's used by protein because that is what's used by the LDL receptors present on our liver the LDL receptors present on our liver the LDL receptors present on our liver to recycle LDL particles. And so what to recycle LDL particles. And so what to recycle LDL particles. And so what happens is these LPS particles are happens is these LPS particles are happens is these LPS particles are now bound to now bound to now bound to you know, our lipoproteins and our you know, our lipoproteins and our you know, our lipoproteins and our lipoproteins are still doing their lipoproteins are still doing their lipoproteins are still doing their function, right? They're going around function, right? They're going around function, right? They're going around and they're giving, you and they're giving, you and they're giving, you know, triglycerides and fatty acids know, triglycerides and fatty acids know, triglycerides and fatty acids and to some degree cholesterol to our and to some degree cholesterol to our and to some degree cholesterol to our cells that need it, right? We're cells that need it, right? We're cells that need it, right? We're constantly making new cells and constantly making new cells and constantly making new cells and repairing and we our cells need that. repairing and we our cells need that. repairing and we our cells need that. As they donate triglycerides and fatty As they donate triglycerides and fatty As they donate triglycerides and fatty acids, they get smaller in size. acids, they get smaller in size. acids, they get smaller in size. The lipoproteins, you've probably heard The lipoproteins, you've probably heard The lipoproteins, you've probably heard of small dense LDL, right? Like that's a of small dense LDL, right? Like that's a of small dense LDL, right? Like that's a very dangerous type of LDL particle. very dangerous type of LDL particle. very dangerous type of LDL particle. And that's one that's kind of been And that's one that's kind of been And that's one that's kind of been donating along, getting rid of tiger donating along, getting rid of tiger donating along, getting rid of tiger triglycerides and um whatever. If you triglycerides and um whatever. If you triglycerides and um whatever. If you think about a train with cargo, it's think about a train with cargo, it's think about a train with cargo, it's donating the, you know, dropping off the donating the, you know, dropping off the donating the, you know, dropping off the cargo. And so um when it's time to get recycled And so um when it's time to get recycled And so um when it's time to get recycled back into the liver, what do you know? back into the liver, what do you know? back into the liver, what do you know? The apoB protein's obscured by that LPS The apoB protein's obscured by that LPS The apoB protein's obscured by that LPS and it's not recycled. and it's not recycled. and it's not recycled. And so it gets lodged into the arterial And so it gets lodged into the arterial And so it gets lodged into the arterial wall. And because there's an LPS bound to And because there's an LPS bound to And because there's an LPS bound to this, you know, small dense LDL this, you know, small dense LDL this, you know, small dense LDL particle, macrophages, which are, as you particle, macrophages, which are, as you particle, macrophages, which are, as you mentioned, it's like the first line of mentioned, it's like the first line of mentioned, it's like the first line of defense against something like a defense against something like a defense against something like a bacterial invader, right? Comes and bacterial invader, right? Comes and bacterial invader, right? Comes and chews it up, right? Gets rid of the chews it up, right? Gets rid of the chews it up, right? Gets rid of the problem. So macrophages come in cuz problem. So macrophages come in cuz problem. So macrophages come in cuz they're seeing this signal of LPS and they're seeing this signal of LPS and they're seeing this signal of LPS and think it's a foreign invader when it's think it's a foreign invader when it's think it's a foreign invader when it's actually just a small dense LDL particle actually just a small dense LDL particle actually just a small dense LDL particle bound to LPS that came from the gut, bound to LPS that came from the gut, bound to LPS that came from the gut, tries to engulf it, but it can't cuz tries to engulf it, but it can't cuz tries to engulf it, but it can't cuz it's not bacteria, and you get the it's not bacteria, and you get the it's not bacteria, and you get the macrophage stuck to that macrophage stuck to that macrophage stuck to that lipoprotein LPS, you know, complex and lipoprotein LPS, you know, complex and lipoprotein LPS, you know, complex and you get the formation of a foam cell. you get the formation of a foam cell. you get the formation of a foam cell. You probably heard of a foam cell. It's You probably heard of a foam cell. It's You probably heard of a foam cell. It's the beginning of atherosclerosis. And the beginning of atherosclerosis. And the beginning of atherosclerosis. And so, this is this is this is where gut health and the food we eat is where gut health and the food we eat is where gut health and the food we eat is sort of it's linked to cardiovascular sort of it's linked to cardiovascular sort of it's linked to cardiovascular health, right? Gut permeability, getting health, right? Gut permeability, getting health, right? Gut permeability, getting that LPS into our circulation is that LPS into our circulation is that LPS into our circulation is actually not a very good thing because actually not a very good thing because actually not a very good thing because you're basically, you know, slow you're basically, you know, slow you're basically, you know, slow dripping in that infla- inflammation, dripping in that infla- inflammation, dripping in that infla- inflammation, that inflammatory signal, and it's that inflammatory signal, and it's that inflammatory signal, and it's wreaking havoc in our arteries, on our wreaking havoc in our arteries, on our wreaking havoc in our arteries, on our brain. &gt;&gt; As many of you know, I've been taking &gt;&gt; As many of you know, I've been taking &gt;&gt; As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The reason I started taking it and the reason I started taking it and the reason I started taking it and the reason I still take it is because AG1 is reason I still take it is because AG1 is reason I still take it is because AG1 is to my knowledge the highest quality and to my knowledge the highest quality and to my knowledge the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational most comprehensive of the foundational most comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to into a single scoop that's easy to into a single scoop that's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's drink, and it tastes great. It's drink, and it tastes great. It's designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every day. But, I'm often asked if you could day. But, I'm often asked if you could day. But, I'm often asked if you could take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is always AG1 because it has just been oh always AG1 because it has just been oh always AG1 because it has just been oh so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a For a to get a special offer. For a For a to get a special offer. For a For a time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, D3K2 with your subscription. Again, that's drink AG1 with the numeral that's drink AG1 with the numeral that's drink AG1 with the numeral one.com/huberman to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. &gt;&gt; Thank you for explaining that so clearly &gt;&gt; Thank you for explaining that so clearly &gt;&gt; Thank you for explaining that so clearly because I don't think anyone has ever because I don't think anyone has ever because I don't think anyone has ever explained how exactly gut health is explained how exactly gut health is explained how exactly gut health is signaling cardiovascular health or signaling cardiovascular health or signaling cardiovascular health or pushing or pulling down on or raising pushing or pulling down on or raising pushing or pulling down on or raising cardiovascular health. As a neuro guy, I cardiovascular health. As a neuro guy, I cardiovascular health. As a neuro guy, I think about the vagus nerve as the think about the vagus nerve as the think about the vagus nerve as the primary conduit between gut and brain primary conduit between gut and brain primary conduit between gut and brain and it I was recalling that LPS injected and it I was recalling that LPS injected and it I was recalling that LPS injected into the gut is how you actually into the gut is how you actually into the gut is how you actually experimentally induce a fever because experimentally induce a fever because experimentally induce a fever because the and if you cut the vagus, no fever. the and if you cut the vagus, no fever. the and if you cut the vagus, no fever. So there's this there seems to be So there's this there seems to be So there's this there seems to be something about the way that the gut something about the way that the gut something about the way that the gut communicates with the brain and communicates with the brain and communicates with the brain and other organs that is critically other organs that is critically other organs that is critically dependent on the some threshold level of dependent on the some threshold level of dependent on the some threshold level of LPS. And thank you also for of LPS. And thank you also for of LPS. And thank you also for reminding us that LPS is present in the reminding us that LPS is present in the reminding us that LPS is present in the gut cuz we have yeast in our gut, some gut cuz we have yeast in our gut, some gut cuz we have yeast in our gut, some amount of yeast. You mentioned tight amount of yeast. You mentioned tight amount of yeast. You mentioned tight junctions and the way I think about junctions and the way I think about junctions and the way I think about tight junctions, please correct me cuz tight junctions, please correct me cuz tight junctions, please correct me cuz I'm going to get some or all of this I'm going to get some or all of this I'm going to get some or all of this wrong, is that essentially they form wrong, is that essentially they form wrong, is that essentially they form like a cellular fence in the gut and like a cellular fence in the gut and like a cellular fence in the gut and that transient opening or partial that transient opening or partial that transient opening or partial opening of these is a normal process, opening of these is a normal process, opening of these is a normal process, but it sounds like after a meal some but it sounds like after a meal some but it sounds like after a meal some bacteria, when you say leaks out into bacteria, when you say leaks out into bacteria, when you say leaks out into our system, it's literally going into our system, it's literally going into our system, it's literally going into the bloodstream. So now we're have the bloodstream. So now we're have the bloodstream. So now we're have bacteria circulating and if some of that bacteria circulating and if some of that bacteria circulating and if some of that is small enough to get across the is small enough to get across the is small enough to get across the blood-brain barrier, that's blood-brain barrier, that's blood-brain barrier, that's another way that bacteria can start to another way that bacteria can start to another way that bacteria can start to cause inflammation at the at the brain cause inflammation at the at the brain cause inflammation at the at the brain level. &gt;&gt; It's LPS, which is like the outer &gt;&gt; It's LPS, which is like the outer &gt;&gt; It's LPS, which is like the outer component of bacteria that have died. component of bacteria that have died. component of bacteria that have died. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Actual live bacteria getting in, I don't &gt;&gt; Actual live bacteria getting in, I don't &gt;&gt; Actual live bacteria getting in, I don't know as much about that perhaps as well, know as much about that perhaps as well, know as much about that perhaps as well, but I know that the LPS is getting in but I know that the LPS is getting in but I know that the LPS is getting in and I do know that the LPS, you know, and I do know that the LPS, you know, and I do know that the LPS, you know, activating the immune system and stuff activating the immune system and stuff activating the immune system and stuff in the resident glial cells and in the resident glial cells and in the resident glial cells and stuff in the in the brain um does break stuff in the in the brain um does break stuff in the in the brain um does break down the blood-brain barrier. It's like down the blood-brain barrier. It's like down the blood-brain barrier. It's like the early like we know neuroinflammation the early like we know neuroinflammation the early like we know neuroinflammation is really some of the early parts of is really some of the early parts of is really some of the early parts of breaking down of the blood brain breaking down of the blood brain breaking down of the blood brain barrier, which is the early stages of barrier, which is the early stages of barrier, which is the early stages of neurodegenerative disease. It is how the neurodegenerative disease. It is how the neurodegenerative disease. It is how the gut is gut health is linked to the brain gut is gut health is linked to the brain gut is gut health is linked to the brain and to neurodegenerative disease as and to neurodegenerative disease as and to neurodegenerative disease as well. So, it's the inflammation I think that's So, it's the inflammation I think that's So, it's the inflammation I think that's really um it's really powerful in terms of it's really powerful in terms of it's really powerful in terms of it's a driver of the aging process it's a driver of the aging process it's a driver of the aging process in general. Like this in general. Like this in general. Like this inflammation, inflammaging, you've heard inflammation, inflammaging, you've heard inflammation, inflammaging, you've heard you've heard of inflammaging. You know, you've heard of inflammaging. You know, you've heard of inflammaging. You know, I think I think now it's pretty clear to I think I think now it's pretty clear to I think I think now it's pretty clear to me that is me that is me that is if you're thinking about the molecular if you're thinking about the molecular if you're thinking about the molecular events that are leading to these events that are leading to these events that are leading to these hallmarks of aging which lead to the hallmarks of aging which lead to the hallmarks of aging which lead to the phenotypes and you know, frailty and the phenotypes and you know, frailty and the phenotypes and you know, frailty and the diseases, right? Like type 2 diabetes, diseases, right? Like type 2 diabetes, diseases, right? Like type 2 diabetes, cancer, Alzheimer's disease, like cancer, Alzheimer's disease, like cancer, Alzheimer's disease, like go upstream of that and the inflammation go upstream of that and the inflammation go upstream of that and the inflammation is at the core of it. And so, we hear is at the core of it. And so, we hear is at the core of it. And so, we hear this word inflammation a lot and it's this word inflammation a lot and it's this word inflammation a lot and it's like, what does it mean? You know, and like, what does it mean? You know, and like, what does it mean? You know, and it's a lot it means a lot of things. it's a lot it means a lot of things. it's a lot it means a lot of things. It's not just the gut. The gut is a It's not just the gut. The gut is a It's not just the gut. The gut is a component of it, but there's other component of it, but there's other component of it, but there's other things as well, right? I mean, you can things as well, right? I mean, you can things as well, right? I mean, you can have stress, have stress, have stress, you know, any emotional stress, like you know, any emotional stress, like you know, any emotional stress, like that can lead to inflammation, that can lead to inflammation, that can lead to inflammation, not getting enough sleep, right? There's not getting enough sleep, right? There's not getting enough sleep, right? There's a lot of things that can that can lead a lot of things that can that can lead a lot of things that can that can lead to inflammation. And so, it is kind of to inflammation. And so, it is kind of to inflammation. And so, it is kind of an important point to think about is an important point to think about is an important point to think about is really like really like really like trying to have your inflammation low, trying to have your inflammation low, trying to have your inflammation low, right? And how do you do that? right? And how do you do that? right? And how do you do that? &gt;&gt; I'm going to take three different &gt;&gt; I'm going to take three different &gt;&gt; I'm going to take three different jumping off points here all related to jumping off points here all related to jumping off points here all related to what you said. So, don't think I'm a what you said. So, don't think I'm a what you said. So, don't think I'm a random subject generator here. We will random subject generator here. We will random subject generator here. We will get back to fasting, I promise. get back to fasting, I promise. get back to fasting, I promise. Lately, you've posted a bit about Lately, you've posted a bit about Lately, you've posted a bit about glutamine as a potential tool to glutamine as a potential tool to glutamine as a potential tool to perhaps buffer the immune system under perhaps buffer the immune system under perhaps buffer the immune system under times of stress. I've also been times of stress. I've also been times of stress. I've also been interested in L-glutamine as a way to interested in L-glutamine as a way to interested in L-glutamine as a way to reinforce tight junctions in the gut. I reinforce tight junctions in the gut. I reinforce tight junctions in the gut. I don't know if that literature is robust don't know if that literature is robust don't know if that literature is robust or not. I have to say I started taking or not. I have to say I started taking or not. I have to say I started taking L-glutamine years ago in times when I L-glutamine years ago in times when I L-glutamine years ago in times when I was working a lot and not sleeping was working a lot and not sleeping was working a lot and not sleeping enough because someone told me it would enough because someone told me it would enough because someone told me it would help me not get sick. And indeed, I help me not get sick. And indeed, I help me not get sick. And indeed, I didn't get sick as much as the imaginary didn't get sick as much as the imaginary didn't get sick as much as the imaginary control experiment that I never got to control experiment that I never got to control experiment that I never got to do. Meaning, I don't know if it helped do. Meaning, I don't know if it helped do. Meaning, I don't know if it helped or not, but I continued to take or not, but I continued to take or not, but I continued to take L-glutamine when I'm feeling run down. I L-glutamine when I'm feeling run down. I L-glutamine when I'm feeling run down. I take a couple of other things, too. But take a couple of other things, too. But take a couple of other things, too. But could you tell us about how or if or how could you tell us about how or if or how could you tell us about how or if or how L-glutamine is important for gut health L-glutamine is important for gut health L-glutamine is important for gut health and if and how L-glutamine might be and if and how L-glutamine might be and if and how L-glutamine might be helpful for reinforcing the immune helpful for reinforcing the immune helpful for reinforcing the immune system? &gt;&gt; There's not a ton of evidence in terms &gt;&gt; There's not a ton of evidence in terms &gt;&gt; There's not a ton of evidence in terms of like what's in the scientific of like what's in the scientific of like what's in the scientific literature supporting literature supporting literature supporting these statements, but there is some, you these statements, but there is some, you these statements, but there is some, you know, and it's enough to kind of go, know, and it's enough to kind of go, know, and it's enough to kind of go, well, I'm going to try to maybe well, I'm going to try to maybe well, I'm going to try to maybe experiment with it. So, you know, I experiment with it. So, you know, I experiment with it. So, you know, I first became interested in glutamine first became interested in glutamine first became interested in glutamine because when I was doing my graduate because when I was doing my graduate because when I was doing my graduate research, I was doing a lot of cancer research, I was doing a lot of cancer research, I was doing a lot of cancer metabolism studies and I would do metabolism studies and I would do metabolism studies and I would do nutrient withdrawal and I would, you nutrient withdrawal and I would, you nutrient withdrawal and I would, you know, remove glucose from cancer cells know, remove glucose from cancer cells know, remove glucose from cancer cells and see what would happen. and see what would happen. and see what would happen. And it's like, okay, well, I would get I And it's like, okay, well, I would get I And it's like, okay, well, I would get I would remove glucose from from, you would remove glucose from from, you would remove glucose from from, you know, lymphoma cancer cells in the Petri know, lymphoma cancer cells in the Petri know, lymphoma cancer cells in the Petri dish and a lot of them would die, but dish and a lot of them would die, but dish and a lot of them would die, but they wouldn't all die. And I was like, they wouldn't all die. And I was like, they wouldn't all die. And I was like, why aren't they all dying? Turns out, why aren't they all dying? Turns out, why aren't they all dying? Turns out, oh, they had glutamine there. So, oh, they had glutamine there. So, oh, they had glutamine there. So, glutamine was enough to sustain them. glutamine was enough to sustain them. glutamine was enough to sustain them. Um and so, glutamine can be Um and so, glutamine can be Um and so, glutamine can be converted into many things. So, converted into many things. So, converted into many things. So, glutamine can be an amino acid, right? glutamine can be an amino acid, right? glutamine can be an amino acid, right? It's an amino acid. Glutamine can be It's an amino acid. Glutamine can be It's an amino acid. Glutamine can be converted into the converted into the converted into the Krebs cycle, so it can be converted the Krebs cycle, so it can be converted the Krebs cycle, so it can be converted into intermediates that are used to make into intermediates that are used to make into intermediates that are used to make energy by the mitochondria. And energy by the mitochondria. And energy by the mitochondria. And glutamine can be converted into glutamine can be converted into glutamine can be converted into glutamate, right? Neurotransmitter, glutamate, right? Neurotransmitter, glutamate, right? Neurotransmitter, right? So, there's a lot of pathways and right? So, there's a lot of pathways and right? So, there's a lot of pathways and different fates for glutamine. So, I different fates for glutamine. So, I different fates for glutamine. So, I became interested in that because it became interested in that because it became interested in that because it was like, oh, glutamine's important for was like, oh, glutamine's important for was like, oh, glutamine's important for the survival of these cancer cells. the survival of these cancer cells. the survival of these cancer cells. Then I was doing a lot of activating Then I was doing a lot of activating Then I was doing a lot of activating immune cells studies as, you know, all immune cells studies as, you know, all immune cells studies as, you know, all my graduate advisor is an my graduate advisor is an my graduate advisor is an immunologist by training, and so I was immunologist by training, and so I was immunologist by training, and so I was also doing that. Turns out glutamine was also doing that. Turns out glutamine was also doing that. Turns out glutamine was essential for the activation of immune essential for the activation of immune essential for the activation of immune cells. So, that was kind of always in the back So, that was kind of always in the back So, that was kind of always in the back of my mind. of my mind. of my mind. And then in my postdoc, I And then in my postdoc, I And then in my postdoc, I did my postdoc with Dr. Bruce Ames and did my postdoc with Dr. Bruce Ames and did my postdoc with Dr. Bruce Ames and my colleague Dr. Mark Shigenaga was my colleague Dr. Mark Shigenaga was my colleague Dr. Mark Shigenaga was doing a lot of gut work and this is why doing a lot of gut work and this is why doing a lot of gut work and this is why I know a lot about the LPS in the gut I know a lot about the LPS in the gut I know a lot about the LPS in the gut like it's from him. Like brilliant guy. like it's from him. Like brilliant guy. like it's from him. Like brilliant guy. He's now a photographer like not in He's now a photographer like not in He's now a photographer like not in science at all but brilliant guy and did science at all but brilliant guy and did science at all but brilliant guy and did a lot of really amazing experiments a lot of really amazing experiments a lot of really amazing experiments looking at, you know, gut permeability looking at, you know, gut permeability looking at, you know, gut permeability and things that can help buffer, you and things that can help buffer, you and things that can help buffer, you know, gut permeability and one of those know, gut permeability and one of those know, gut permeability and one of those things were glutamine. So, glutamine can things were glutamine. So, glutamine can things were glutamine. So, glutamine can get converted into these intermediates get converted into these intermediates get converted into these intermediates that are used by mitochondria in the gut that are used by mitochondria in the gut that are used by mitochondria in the gut epithelial cells and so this is like an epithelial cells and so this is like an epithelial cells and so this is like an easy source of energy as well for the easy source of energy as well for the easy source of energy as well for the gut. Now, these are all animal studies, gut. Now, these are all animal studies, gut. Now, these are all animal studies, right? So, take it with a grain of salt, right? So, take it with a grain of salt, right? So, take it with a grain of salt, right? Like cuz right? Like cuz right? Like cuz at some point, you know, at some point, you know, at some point, you know, in my in my opinion animal studies are in my in my opinion animal studies are in my in my opinion animal studies are really important for understanding the really important for understanding the really important for understanding the mechanism behind why things work and we mechanism behind why things work and we mechanism behind why things work and we need human studies, you know, as well. need human studies, you know, as well. need human studies, you know, as well. Looking at the totality of evidence is Looking at the totality of evidence is Looking at the totality of evidence is important. It's the human studies that were It's the human studies that were It's the human studies that were lacking. There's not a ton of them lacking. There's not a ton of them lacking. There's not a ton of them there. The ones that I have found more The ones that I have found more The ones that I have found more compelling, um, not necessarily I mean compelling, um, not necessarily I mean compelling, um, not necessarily I mean with the gut health it's it's, you know, with the gut health it's it's, you know, with the gut health it's it's, you know, it's sparse with humans. it's sparse with humans. it's sparse with humans. Um, I found more compelling with respect to I found more compelling with respect to I found more compelling with respect to you glutamine in human studies was the you glutamine in human studies was the you glutamine in human studies was the immune system and this is where I immune system and this is where I immune system and this is where I started putting connecting the dots, started putting connecting the dots, started putting connecting the dots, right? Where I started coming across right? Where I started coming across right? Where I started coming across this literature of these endurance this literature of these endurance this literature of these endurance athletes who do get a higher amount of athletes who do get a higher amount of athletes who do get a higher amount of respiratory tract infections, you know, respiratory tract infections, you know, respiratory tract infections, you know, like when I mean endurance athletes I like when I mean endurance athletes I like when I mean endurance athletes I mean these guys that are like outrunning mean these guys that are like outrunning mean these guys that are like outrunning marathons all year. Like they're just marathons all year. Like they're just marathons all year. Like they're just constantly training for a marathon, constantly training for a marathon, constantly training for a marathon, right? And so they're really like right? And so they're really like right? And so they're really like they're putting a lot of demand, right? they're putting a lot of demand, right? they're putting a lot of demand, right? Energetic expenditure is happening at a Energetic expenditure is happening at a Energetic expenditure is happening at a really high rate. So, really high rate. So, really high rate. So, um, they're more prone to um, they're more prone to um, they're more prone to respiratory infections and there's a few respiratory infections and there's a few respiratory infections and there's a few studies out there showing that if these studies out there showing that if these studies out there showing that if these athletes take a higher dose of athletes take a higher dose of athletes take a higher dose of glutamine, I think it's like 30 g or glutamine, I think it's like 30 g or glutamine, I think it's like 30 g or something high like that, that they had something high like that, that they had something high like that, that they had a lower incidence of respiratory tract a lower incidence of respiratory tract a lower incidence of respiratory tract infections than the ones that weren't infections than the ones that weren't infections than the ones that weren't doing it. And then I went back to my oh, doing it. And then I went back to my oh, doing it. And then I went back to my oh, I know that glutamine is really I know that glutamine is really I know that glutamine is really important for T-cell activation and I important for T-cell activation and I important for T-cell activation and I was like I'm going to take this because was like I'm going to take this because was like I'm going to take this because being a being a mom and having a being a being a mom and having a being a being a mom and having a child that's bringing everything home child that's bringing everything home child that's bringing everything home like a vector, you know, you're like a vector, you know, you're like a vector, you know, you're like desperate. &gt;&gt; You're the experiment. &gt;&gt; You're the experiment. &gt;&gt; You're the experiment. &gt;&gt; exactly. And and I never used to get &gt;&gt; exactly. And and I never used to get &gt;&gt; exactly. And and I never used to get sick, ever. Like I would never get sick. sick, ever. Like I would never get sick. sick, ever. Like I would never get sick. And then all of a sudden I was getting And then all of a sudden I was getting And then all of a sudden I was getting sick like three times a year. And I was sick like three times a year. And I was sick like three times a year. And I was like, do I have cancer? Like what's like, do I have cancer? Like what's like, do I have cancer? Like what's going on? Like I literally was like going on? Like I literally was like going on? Like I literally was like worried. Um and then I started worried. Um and then I started worried. Um and then I started taking glutamine. Now, I take it just I taking glutamine. Now, I take it just I taking glutamine. Now, I take it just I only take 5 g on a daily basis, but if only take 5 g on a daily basis, but if only take 5 g on a daily basis, but if my son's sick, if there's any if my son's sick, if there's any if my son's sick, if there's any exposure, if it's like during the exposure, if it's like during the exposure, if it's like during the season, if I'm traveling, I go up to 15, season, if I'm traveling, I go up to 15, season, if I'm traveling, I go up to 15, I go up to 20. I go up to 20. I go up to 20. &gt;&gt; Cuz it can be a little hard on the gut, &gt;&gt; Cuz it can be a little hard on the gut, &gt;&gt; Cuz it can be a little hard on the gut, right? &gt;&gt; all at once. &gt;&gt; all at once. &gt;&gt; all at once. Not all at once. I usually do it like in Not all at once. I usually do it like in Not all at once. I usually do it like in fives. So, I do 5 g, 5 g, 5 g. And you fives. So, I do 5 g, 5 g, 5 g. And you fives. So, I do 5 g, 5 g, 5 g. And you know, I have to with the caveat of I do know, I have to with the caveat of I do know, I have to with the caveat of I do that, but I also take a lot of creatine that, but I also take a lot of creatine that, but I also take a lot of creatine as well. And so, I don't know which one as well. And so, I don't know which one as well. And so, I don't know which one or both, but like I really don't get or both, but like I really don't get or both, but like I really don't get sick. I'm not getting sick. And even if I'm not getting sick. And even if I'm not getting sick. And even if it's brought home in my house, I'm not it's brought home in my house, I'm not it's brought home in my house, I'm not getting sick. And maybe it's a placebo. getting sick. And maybe it's a placebo. getting sick. And maybe it's a placebo. And you know what? I am A-OK with that And you know what? I am A-OK with that And you know what? I am A-OK with that because placebo effect is real. As long because placebo effect is real. As long because placebo effect is real. As long as I'm not getting sick. Um so, I do as I'm not getting sick. Um so, I do as I'm not getting sick. Um so, I do think I think with the glutamine, you think I think with the glutamine, you think I think with the glutamine, you know, it's not something that I would know, it's not something that I would know, it's not something that I would feel comfortable saying that it's feel comfortable saying that it's feel comfortable saying that it's there's a lot of evidence, it's there's a lot of evidence, it's there's a lot of evidence, it's overwhelming and with confidence that overwhelming and with confidence that overwhelming and with confidence that it's improving gut health and it's improving gut health and it's improving gut health and it's improving, you mean you know, it's going improving, you mean you know, it's going improving, you mean you know, it's going to help give your immune cells energy, to help give your immune cells energy, to help give your immune cells energy, particularly if they need to be particularly if they need to be particularly if they need to be activated, you know, upon exposure to activated, you know, upon exposure to activated, you know, upon exposure to any pathogen. But I feel like it's worth any pathogen. But I feel like it's worth any pathogen. But I feel like it's worth experimenting with. Um perhaps maybe if experimenting with. Um perhaps maybe if experimenting with. Um perhaps maybe if someone has colon cancer, that would be someone has colon cancer, that would be someone has colon cancer, that would be more of a concern cuz I did mention that more of a concern cuz I did mention that more of a concern cuz I did mention that cancer cells Cancer cells love cancer cells Cancer cells love cancer cells Cancer cells love everything, anything that's good for everything, anything that's good for everything, anything that's good for you. Right? Folate, I mean, if you don't you. Right? Folate, I mean, if you don't you. Right? Folate, I mean, if you don't have enough folate, you can cause double have enough folate, you can cause double have enough folate, you can cause double stranded breaks to your DNA, which lead stranded breaks to your DNA, which lead stranded breaks to your DNA, which lead to mutations that lead to cancer. But if to mutations that lead to cancer. But if to mutations that lead to cancer. But if you have cancer and you take a bunch of you have cancer and you take a bunch of you have cancer and you take a bunch of folate, you need folate to make new DNA. folate, you need folate to make new DNA. folate, you need folate to make new DNA. And so, they like the folate, right? So, And so, they like the folate, right? So, And so, they like the folate, right? So, it's like it's like it's like &gt;&gt; It's an abnormal growth. So, anything &gt;&gt; It's an abnormal growth. So, anything &gt;&gt; It's an abnormal growth. So, anything that's associated with drugs, mTOR. I that's associated with drugs, mTOR. I that's associated with drugs, mTOR. I saw the recent study on taurine, which saw the recent study on taurine, which saw the recent study on taurine, which scared a lot of people cuz taurine's in scared a lot of people cuz taurine's in scared a lot of people cuz taurine's in a lot of energy drinks, but that was an a lot of energy drinks, but that was an a lot of energy drinks, but that was an in vitro study. Um Um, yes, I was going in vitro study. Um Um, yes, I was going in vitro study. Um Um, yes, I was going to ask, you know, um, is to ask, you know, um, is to ask, you know, um, is there increased cancer risk if you're is there increased cancer risk if you're is there increased cancer risk if you're supplementing with glutamine because supplementing with glutamine because supplementing with glutamine because cancer cells like glutamine? cancer cells like glutamine? cancer cells like glutamine? &gt;&gt; my personal opinion, I'm obviously not a &gt;&gt; my personal opinion, I'm obviously not a &gt;&gt; my personal opinion, I'm obviously not a medical physician. This is not a medical physician. This is not a medical physician. This is not a prescription. It's just my opinion. prescription. It's just my opinion. prescription. It's just my opinion. I personally am not scared of getting I personally am not scared of getting I personally am not scared of getting cancer from taking glutamine. cancer from taking glutamine. cancer from taking glutamine. If I had a colon tumor in a tumor in my If I had a colon tumor in a tumor in my If I had a colon tumor in a tumor in my colon, the first site that the colon, the first site that the colon, the first site that the glutamine is seeing, maybe the liver as glutamine is seeing, maybe the liver as glutamine is seeing, maybe the liver as well, since that's also the next step, well, since that's also the next step, well, since that's also the next step, but uh barring like having a tumor but uh barring like having a tumor but uh barring like having a tumor already in my liver or in my colon, already in my liver or in my colon, already in my liver or in my colon, those would be the only, you know, types those would be the only, you know, types those would be the only, you know, types of situations that I would be worried of situations that I would be worried of situations that I would be worried about taking glutamine. I don't think about taking glutamine. I don't think about taking glutamine. I don't think it's going to cause cancer, right? Now, it's going to cause cancer, right? Now, it's going to cause cancer, right? Now, I guess the question is like what if you I guess the question is like what if you I guess the question is like what if you don't know you have don't know you have don't know you have &gt;&gt; Well, hopefully the cost will come down &gt;&gt; Well, hopefully the cost will come down &gt;&gt; Well, hopefully the cost will come down on whole body MRIs. Actually, the cost on whole body MRIs. Actually, the cost on whole body MRIs. Actually, the cost is coming down on whole body MRIs. is coming down on whole body MRIs. is coming down on whole body MRIs. Hopefully, more people are able to get Hopefully, more people are able to get Hopefully, more people are able to get those. It's not just such a high-end those. It's not just such a high-end those. It's not just such a high-end exclusive thing in the near future. Kind exclusive thing in the near future. Kind exclusive thing in the near future. Kind of like blood draws. Used to be like of like blood draws. Used to be like of like blood draws. Used to be like panels of blood testing, you only like panels of blood testing, you only like panels of blood testing, you only got them if you really needed them. Now, got them if you really needed them. Now, got them if you really needed them. Now, the cost of blood draws is really low. the cost of blood draws is really low. the cost of blood draws is really low. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; So, hopefully, people will be more &gt;&gt; So, hopefully, people will be more &gt;&gt; So, hopefully, people will be more aware. Yeah, I aware. Yeah, I aware. Yeah, I will take a tablespoon of glutamine once will take a tablespoon of glutamine once will take a tablespoon of glutamine once or twice or three times a day if I'm or twice or three times a day if I'm or twice or three times a day if I'm feeling run down. You mentioned being feeling run down. You mentioned being feeling run down. You mentioned being exposed to pathogens from vectors of exposed to pathogens from vectors of exposed to pathogens from vectors of different sorts. Before we went on mic, different sorts. Before we went on mic, different sorts. Before we went on mic, we were talking about NAC, we were talking about NAC, we were talking about NAC, N-acetylcysteine. Um, I take it once a day I take it once a day I take it once a day uh consistently, but I'll take it three uh consistently, but I'll take it three uh consistently, but I'll take it three times a day if I'm traveling a lot and times a day if I'm traveling a lot and times a day if I'm traveling a lot and because I'm around sick people when I because I'm around sick people when I because I'm around sick people when I travel, especially in winter. Um, or if travel, especially in winter. Um, or if travel, especially in winter. Um, or if I feel like I'm getting run down. And I feel like I'm getting run down. And I feel like I'm getting run down. And there the data are pretty interesting. there the data are pretty interesting. there the data are pretty interesting. There's at least one study uh showing There's at least one study uh showing There's at least one study uh showing that it reduced flu transmission that it reduced flu transmission that it reduced flu transmission um where people were deliberately um where people were deliberately um where people were deliberately exposed to flu. I think it took the exposed to flu. I think it took the exposed to flu. I think it took the number of people that contracted flu number of people that contracted flu number of people that contracted flu compared to the placebo group somewhere compared to the placebo group somewhere compared to the placebo group somewhere from the high 70% from the high 70% from the high 70% area. I don't remember the exact number area. I don't remember the exact number area. I don't remember the exact number now. We'll put a link to the study down now. We'll put a link to the study down now. We'll put a link to the study down to maybe high 20s, which is pretty to maybe high 20s, which is pretty to maybe high 20s, which is pretty impressive. And then ER doc came on this impressive. And then ER doc came on this impressive. And then ER doc came on this podcast uh Roger Schwell, who um and said he was uh Roger Schwell, who um and said he was uh Roger Schwell, who um and said he was a big proponent of a big proponent of a big proponent of NAC system for people that are around NAC system for people that are around NAC system for people that are around sick people. Do you take NAC? sick people. Do you take NAC? sick people. Do you take NAC? &gt;&gt; So my only concern with taking on a &gt;&gt; So my only concern with taking on a &gt;&gt; So my only concern with taking on a daily basis is it is a pretty powerful daily basis is it is a pretty powerful daily basis is it is a pretty powerful antioxidant and you know antioxidant and you know antioxidant and you know I think that we need to understand like I think that we need to understand like I think that we need to understand like antioxidants and the opposite we should antioxidants and the opposite we should antioxidants and the opposite we should be generating oxidation right? Like It's be generating oxidation right? Like It's be generating oxidation right? Like It's not it's not like oxidation is bad. It's not it's not like oxidation is bad. It's not it's not like oxidation is bad. It's bad when it's constant slow drip bad when it's constant slow drip bad when it's constant slow drip oxidation that's damaging you know other oxidation that's damaging you know other oxidation that's damaging you know other parts of our body DNA proteins lipids. parts of our body DNA proteins lipids. parts of our body DNA proteins lipids. Some oxidation you want like if you're Some oxidation you want like if you're Some oxidation you want like if you're exercising right? There's a burst of exercising right? There's a burst of exercising right? There's a burst of oxidation. &gt;&gt; the adaptation. &gt;&gt; the adaptation. &gt;&gt; the adaptation. &gt;&gt; the adaptations. And so my concern would &gt;&gt; the adaptations. And so my concern would &gt;&gt; the adaptations. And so my concern would be for one maybe timing it around your be for one maybe timing it around your be for one maybe timing it around your exercise so not taking it close to when exercise so not taking it close to when exercise so not taking it close to when you're exercising and these studies come you're exercising and these studies come you're exercising and these studies come out of you know studies that have been out of you know studies that have been out of you know studies that have been done with high dose vitamin E plus done with high dose vitamin E plus done with high dose vitamin E plus vitamin C. vitamin C. vitamin C. I haven't seen a lot of vitamin C I haven't seen a lot of vitamin C I haven't seen a lot of vitamin C studies alone that are blunting exercise alone that are blunting exercise alone that are blunting exercise adaptations. There's maybe one at a high adaptations. There's maybe one at a high adaptations. There's maybe one at a high dose. Most of the time it's vitamin C dose. Most of the time it's vitamin C dose. Most of the time it's vitamin C and vitamin E vitamin E alpha and vitamin E vitamin E alpha and vitamin E vitamin E alpha tocopherol. When I say high dose usually tocopherol. When I say high dose usually tocopherol. When I say high dose usually it's 400 IUs just to give you a it's 400 IUs just to give you a it's 400 IUs just to give you a reference point the RDA is like 24 IUs reference point the RDA is like 24 IUs reference point the RDA is like 24 IUs or something. So we're talking high or something. So we're talking high or something. So we're talking high dose. &gt;&gt; supplement can be 200 to 800. So it &gt;&gt; supplement can be 200 to 800. So it &gt;&gt; supplement can be 200 to 800. So it wouldn't be hard to blunt that exercise wouldn't be hard to blunt that exercise wouldn't be hard to blunt that exercise effect but accidentally. Yeah, I don't effect but accidentally. Yeah, I don't effect but accidentally. Yeah, I don't take vitamin E. It spiked my prostate take vitamin E. It spiked my prostate take vitamin E. It spiked my prostate specific antigen which I was told is a specific antigen which I was told is a specific antigen which I was told is a is a known effect among urologists. is a known effect among urologists. is a known effect among urologists. &gt;&gt; trial was done. So the select trial was &gt;&gt; trial was done. So the select trial was &gt;&gt; trial was done. So the select trial was um was looking at selenium and vitamin E um was looking at selenium and vitamin E um was looking at selenium and vitamin E and if it could slow the progression of and if it could slow the progression of and if it could slow the progression of prostate cancer and it turned out that prostate cancer and it turned out that prostate cancer and it turned out that um the opposite was found and it was um the opposite was found and it was um the opposite was found and it was really kind of due to this high dose of really kind of due to this high dose of really kind of due to this high dose of alpha tocopherol which also has other alpha tocopherol which also has other alpha tocopherol which also has other effects of um effects of um effects of um lowering another type of vitamin E in lowering another type of vitamin E in lowering another type of vitamin E in the body called gamma tocopherol which the body called gamma tocopherol which the body called gamma tocopherol which is anti-inflammatory is anti-inflammatory is anti-inflammatory and I think that has something to do and I think that has something to do and I think that has something to do with inflammation actually can increase with inflammation actually can increase with inflammation actually can increase the PSA right? So anyways um the point the PSA right? So anyways um the point the PSA right? So anyways um the point here is that with NAC, here is that with NAC, here is that with NAC, my only concern would be, you know, my only concern would be, you know, my only concern would be, you know, blunting the oxidation that you're blunting the oxidation that you're blunting the oxidation that you're getting from beneficial cuz I know getting from beneficial cuz I know getting from beneficial cuz I know you're highly active. you're highly active. you're highly active. &gt;&gt; I'm training hard. I don't want my &gt;&gt; I'm training hard. I don't want my &gt;&gt; I'm training hard. I don't want my training to be short-circuited from NAC. training to be short-circuited from NAC. training to be short-circuited from NAC. I'm perfectly happy to only take NAC if I'm perfectly happy to only take NAC if I'm perfectly happy to only take NAC if I'm feeling run down or exposed to I'm feeling run down or exposed to I'm feeling run down or exposed to um illnesses around me, or I feel like um illnesses around me, or I feel like um illnesses around me, or I feel like maybe I'm coming down with something. maybe I'm coming down with something. maybe I'm coming down with something. &gt;&gt; I take it, but it's mostly because of I &gt;&gt; I take it, but it's mostly because of I &gt;&gt; I take it, but it's mostly because of I wasn't familiar with the flu influenza wasn't familiar with the flu influenza wasn't familiar with the flu influenza data that's interesting. I was just It's data that's interesting. I was just It's data that's interesting. I was just It's good for lung health, too. Like so, good for lung health, too. Like so, good for lung health, too. Like so, although if smokers take it, I think it although if smokers take it, I think it although if smokers take it, I think it has the opposite effect where again, has the opposite effect where again, has the opposite effect where again, it's like the can't the precancerous it's like the can't the precancerous it's like the can't the precancerous cells are using it to their benefit. You cells are using it to their benefit. You cells are using it to their benefit. You know, we used to think antioxidants, oh, know, we used to think antioxidants, oh, know, we used to think antioxidants, oh, it's so good, you know, just more it's so good, you know, just more it's so good, you know, just more more, and it turns out it's not the more, and it turns out it's not the more, and it turns out it's not the case, right? Like and that's why a lot case, right? Like and that's why a lot case, right? Like and that's why a lot of these other types of hormetic of these other types of hormetic of these other types of hormetic stressors or plant phytochemicals, stressors or plant phytochemicals, stressors or plant phytochemicals, they're actually generating an they're actually generating an they're actually generating an antioxidant response endogenously antioxidant response endogenously antioxidant response endogenously in our body by activating these in our body by activating these in our body by activating these antioxidant pathways, which are so much antioxidant pathways, which are so much antioxidant pathways, which are so much more powerful than what you would get more powerful than what you would get more powerful than what you would get from an antioxidant, right? And so, from an antioxidant, right? And so, from an antioxidant, right? And so, that's kind of And it's not like you that's kind of And it's not like you that's kind of And it's not like you don't want some antioxidants. It's just don't want some antioxidants. It's just don't want some antioxidants. It's just like you don't want to overdose on like you don't want to overdose on like you don't want to overdose on taking too much NAC and too much vitamin taking too much NAC and too much vitamin taking too much NAC and too much vitamin C and too much vitamin E because there's C and too much vitamin E because there's C and too much vitamin E because there's also something called reductive stress. also something called reductive stress. also something called reductive stress. So, we know about oxidative stress. So, we know about oxidative stress. So, we know about oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is when you're you Oxidative stress is when you're you Oxidative stress is when you're you know, you're again, you're know, you're again, you're know, you're again, you're causing these reactive oxygen causing these reactive oxygen causing these reactive oxygen species to damage things like your DNA, species to damage things like your DNA, species to damage things like your DNA, for example, and over time, eventually for example, and over time, eventually for example, and over time, eventually that happens in a part of the gene that happens in a part of the gene that happens in a part of the gene that can be oncogenic, lead to cancer. Well, can be oncogenic, lead to cancer. Well, can be oncogenic, lead to cancer. Well, reductive stress is like the opposite reductive stress is like the opposite reductive stress is like the opposite of that. So, it's like too much of the of that. So, it's like too much of the of that. So, it's like too much of the um reducing equivalents, like the, you um reducing equivalents, like the, you um reducing equivalents, like the, you know, the NADH, the NADPH, the you know, the NADH, the NADPH, the you know, the NADH, the NADPH, the you know, so and it also has negative effects. So, so and it also has negative effects. So, so and it also has negative effects. So, you kind of don't want to go too far on you kind of don't want to go too far on you kind of don't want to go too far on either ends of the of the spectrum. But either ends of the of the spectrum. But either ends of the of the spectrum. But also, you want to instead of having this also, you want to instead of having this also, you want to instead of having this like slow leaking effect of these slow leaking effect of these slow leaking effect of these pro-oxidants where that are happening pro-oxidants where that are happening pro-oxidants where that are happening from eating a bad diet, from you know, from eating a bad diet, from you know, from eating a bad diet, from you know, inflammation, things like that. You want inflammation, things like that. You want inflammation, things like that. You want it to be a short burst where you switch it to be a short burst where you switch it to be a short burst where you switch it on, you have the adaptation, it's it on, you have the adaptation, it's it on, you have the adaptation, it's off, right? And the adaptation, the off, right? And the adaptation, the off, right? And the adaptation, the adaptation happens in the recovery adaptation happens in the recovery adaptation happens in the recovery period, right? When you're For example, period, right? When you're For example, period, right? When you're For example, if you exercise, it's a big burst of if you exercise, it's a big burst of if you exercise, it's a big burst of reactive oxygen species that is reactive oxygen species that is reactive oxygen species that is beneficial and you want it, right? And beneficial and you want it, right? And beneficial and you want it, right? And you don't want to blunt those you don't want to blunt those you don't want to blunt those adaptations and adaptations and adaptations and So, that's kind of my concern So, that's kind of my concern So, that's kind of my concern with daily dosing of NAC. with daily dosing of NAC. with daily dosing of NAC. &gt;&gt; Great. I don't cold plunge in the 68 &gt;&gt; Great. I don't cold plunge in the 68 &gt;&gt; Great. I don't cold plunge in the 68 hours after resistance training for hours after resistance training for hours after resistance training for exactly the reason you're talking about. exactly the reason you're talking about. exactly the reason you're talking about. Yeah, I want the inflammation. I want Yeah, I want the inflammation. I want Yeah, I want the inflammation. I want the increased blood flow. I don't want the increased blood flow. I don't want the increased blood flow. I don't want to short-circuit that. I'm perfectly to short-circuit that. I'm perfectly to short-circuit that. I'm perfectly happy to only take NAC under conditions happy to only take NAC under conditions happy to only take NAC under conditions where I'm run down and where I'm run down and where I'm run down and that's also when I'll take and that's also when I'll take and that's also when I'll take glutamine. If you take L-glutamine glutamine. If you take L-glutamine glutamine. If you take L-glutamine regularly, I personally observe that I regularly, I personally observe that I regularly, I personally observe that I get stronger get stronger get stronger um at a steady state of starch um at a steady state of starch um at a steady state of starch intake. And I don't like dropping intake. And I don't like dropping intake. And I don't like dropping starches too low cuz I get weak. starches too low cuz I get weak. starches too low cuz I get weak. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I also can't sleep as well if my &gt;&gt; And I also can't sleep as well if my &gt;&gt; And I also can't sleep as well if my starches are too low. starches are too low. starches are too low. I just I'm too wired. I just I'm too wired. I just I'm too wired. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a There was a new study on &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a There was a new study on &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a There was a new study on eating starches and improving sleep. on eating starches and improving sleep. on eating starches and improving sleep. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I'm so grateful for that &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I'm so grateful for that &gt;&gt; Yeah, and I'm so grateful for that because for several years I talked about because for several years I talked about because for several years I talked about that on the podcast and people said, that on the podcast and people said, that on the podcast and people said, "Oh, you know, he's gorging himself with "Oh, you know, he's gorging himself with "Oh, you know, he's gorging himself with pasta and then passing out and that's pasta and then passing out and that's pasta and then passing out and that's the worst time." I wasn't saying that. the worst time." I wasn't saying that. the worst time." I wasn't saying that. I'm saying that if you're not I'm saying that if you're not I'm saying that if you're not If you're If you're If you're running like crazy, I'll hear from running like crazy, I'll hear from running like crazy, I'll hear from marathoners and ultra people and people marathoners and ultra people and people marathoners and ultra people and people who are doing a million things. They'll who are doing a million things. They'll who are doing a million things. They'll say, "I'm not sleeping well." And say, "I'm not sleeping well." And say, "I'm not sleeping well." And they're exercising like crazy. It's they're exercising like crazy. It's they're exercising like crazy. It's like, "Well, when was the last time you like, "Well, when was the last time you like, "Well, when was the last time you had a bowl of pasta?" Like, "Oh, no, I had a bowl of pasta?" Like, "Oh, no, I had a bowl of pasta?" Like, "Oh, no, I don't eat pasta." And like, and then don't eat pasta." And like, and then don't eat pasta." And like, and then they'll have some rice or some pasta. they'll have some rice or some pasta. they'll have some rice or some pasta. Like, "Oh, I slept like a baby." And Like, "Oh, I slept like a baby." And Like, "Oh, I slept like a baby." And they were having it at lunch. And I just they were having it at lunch. And I just they were having it at lunch. And I just think that the brain doesn't shut think that the brain doesn't shut think that the brain doesn't shut down well when you have high levels of down well when you have high levels of down well when you have high levels of cortisol. And the cortisol-starch thing cortisol. And the cortisol-starch thing cortisol. And the cortisol-starch thing is an interesting one. is an interesting one. is an interesting one. &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you brought this up because &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you brought this up because &gt;&gt; I'm so glad you brought this up because I think um this is something I did want I think um this is something I did want I think um this is something I did want to talk about really and it has to do to talk about really and it has to do to talk about really and it has to do with stop eating 3 hours before bed for with stop eating 3 hours before bed for with stop eating 3 hours before bed for that very reason. So, there was a new that very reason. So, there was a new that very reason. So, there was a new even a new study but there's been even a new study but there's been even a new study but there's been several studies now really showing that several studies now really showing that several studies now really showing that this is important for that this is important for that this is important for that cardiovascular reset, right? Your cardiovascular reset, right? Your cardiovascular reset, right? Your parasympathetic activity is supposed to parasympathetic activity is supposed to parasympathetic activity is supposed to go higher. You're in your rest and go higher. You're in your rest and go higher. You're in your rest and recovery phase, right? When you're recovery phase, right? When you're recovery phase, right? When you're eating food, that's the sympathetic eating food, that's the sympathetic eating food, that's the sympathetic activity, right? You're activity, right? You're activity, right? You're that's activating the sympathetic that's activating the sympathetic that's activating the sympathetic nervous system. nervous system. nervous system. &gt;&gt; As you're eating, yeah. &gt;&gt; As you're eating, yeah. &gt;&gt; As you're eating, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And even as you're digesting. So, you &gt;&gt; And even as you're digesting. So, you &gt;&gt; And even as you're digesting. So, you have to think about it. Like, you digest have to think about it. Like, you digest have to think about it. Like, you digest it, what it takes like 5 or so hours to it, what it takes like 5 or so hours to it, what it takes like 5 or so hours to fully finish about fully finish about fully finish about &gt;&gt; Yeah, depending on the meal, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, depending on the meal, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, depending on the meal, yeah. &gt;&gt; Depending on the meal, right. So, if &gt;&gt; Depending on the meal, right. So, if &gt;&gt; Depending on the meal, right. So, if you're eating, you know, right before you're eating, you know, right before you're eating, you know, right before you go to bed, you are you are you are you go to bed, you are you are you are you go to bed, you are you are you are not in that parasym- sympathetic not in that parasym- sympathetic not in that parasym- sympathetic activity, you know, part of the part of activity, you know, part of the part of activity, you know, part of the part of the, you know, the cycle that you want the, you know, the cycle that you want the, you know, the cycle that you want to be in. So, um there was a new even a to be in. So, um there was a new even a to be in. So, um there was a new even a new study that I shared like, I don't new study that I shared like, I don't new study that I shared like, I don't know, couple days ago even, showing that know, couple days ago even, showing that know, couple days ago even, showing that if you stop eating 3 hours before bed, if you stop eating 3 hours before bed, if you stop eating 3 hours before bed, so these people were actually um this so these people were actually um this so these people were actually um this interesting they're they had their blood interesting they're they had their blood interesting they're they had their blood pressure measured for starting in the pressure measured for starting in the pressure measured for starting in the mid-afternoon all the way throughout the mid-afternoon all the way throughout the mid-afternoon all the way throughout the night. This is the first study that night. This is the first study that night. This is the first study that really not just one endpoint looking at really not just one endpoint looking at really not just one endpoint looking at blood pressure, but just measuring it blood pressure, but just measuring it blood pressure, but just measuring it continuously. I don't know if it was continuously. I don't know if it was continuously. I don't know if it was every 15 minutes or something like that. every 15 minutes or something like that. every 15 minutes or something like that. But, um it was found that there during But, um it was found that there during But, um it was found that there during sleep, if they had stopped eating 3 sleep, if they had stopped eating 3 sleep, if they had stopped eating 3 hours before bed versus the group that hours before bed versus the group that hours before bed versus the group that did not stop eating 3 hours before bed, did not stop eating 3 hours before bed, did not stop eating 3 hours before bed, their blood pressure dipped like lower. their blood pressure dipped like lower. their blood pressure dipped like lower. So, you get that you get that barrel So, you get that you get that barrel So, you get that you get that barrel reflex dipping, right? So, this is like reflex dipping, right? So, this is like reflex dipping, right? So, this is like part of the parasympathetic activation. part of the parasympathetic activation. part of the parasympathetic activation. As you know, very important for you As you know, very important for you As you know, very important for you know, the blood pressure to go down, know, the blood pressure to go down, know, the blood pressure to go down, heart rate went down like, you know, heart rate went down like, you know, heart rate went down like, you know, much lower. And that reset is so much lower. And that reset is so much lower. And that reset is so important for cardiovascular health. I important for cardiovascular health. I important for cardiovascular health. I think what was found was it was think what was found was it was think what was found was it was something like um translated to like 20% something like um translated to like 20% something like um translated to like 20% lower risk of cardiovascular events, lower risk of cardiovascular events, lower risk of cardiovascular events, like heart attacks. So, it's really like heart attacks. So, it's really like heart attacks. So, it's really pretty significant. Yeah. And it really pretty significant. Yeah. And it really pretty significant. Yeah. And it really is an easy thing to do to think about is an easy thing to do to think about is an easy thing to do to think about stopping eating, you know, 3 hours stopping eating, you know, 3 hours stopping eating, you know, 3 hours before you go to bed. Like, that's before you go to bed. Like, that's before you go to bed. Like, that's something I think that is not that's something I think that is not that's something I think that is not that hard to implement. And it will that hard to implement. And it will that hard to implement. And it will improve your sleep as well as your improve your sleep as well as your improve your sleep as well as your cardiovascular health. Although, I think cardiovascular health. Although, I think cardiovascular health. Although, I think in that study, I don't know that sleep in that study, I don't know that sleep in that study, I don't know that sleep was really it was subjective and I don't was really it was subjective and I don't was really it was subjective and I don't think it really wasn't improved more, think it really wasn't improved more, think it really wasn't improved more, but other studies have found that as but other studies have found that as but other studies have found that as well. That sleep does improve. I know well. That sleep does improve. I know well. That sleep does improve. I know Sachin Panda, he's been on my podcast, Sachin Panda, he's been on my podcast, Sachin Panda, he's been on my podcast, your podcast. He's had studies showing your podcast. He's had studies showing your podcast. He's had studies showing that it seemed like stop eating 3 that it seemed like stop eating 3 that it seemed like stop eating 3 hours before bed really does seem to hours before bed really does seem to hours before bed really does seem to improve sleep. improve sleep. improve sleep. But this parasympathetic activation, you But this parasympathetic activation, you But this parasympathetic activation, you know, you don't want to have a meal know, you don't want to have a meal know, you don't want to have a meal right before you bed because you want right before you bed because you want right before you bed because you want you want to be in the rest and recovery you want to be in the rest and recovery you want to be in the rest and recovery part, right? part, right? part, right? So. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think people hear &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think people hear &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think people hear uh and I understand why the nomenclature uh and I understand why the nomenclature uh and I understand why the nomenclature and the buzzwords of, you know, fight or and the buzzwords of, you know, fight or and the buzzwords of, you know, fight or flight for sympathetic and rest and flight for sympathetic and rest and flight for sympathetic and rest and digest for parasympathetic. But yeah, digest for parasympathetic. But yeah, digest for parasympathetic. But yeah, the evidence shows eating stimulates the evidence shows eating stimulates the evidence shows eating stimulates the sympathetic nervous system. It's not a sympathetic nervous system. It's not a sympathetic nervous system. It's not a stress event, but it it's a it requires stress event, but it it's a it requires stress event, but it it's a it requires energy. Anything that requires energy energy. Anything that requires energy energy. Anything that requires energy raises body temperature and your body's raises body temperature and your body's raises body temperature and your body's doing work. doing work. doing work. &gt;&gt; It's an awake event, right? It's an &gt;&gt; It's an awake event, right? It's an &gt;&gt; It's an awake event, right? It's an awake you don't eat awake you don't eat awake you don't eat while you're sleeping. while you're sleeping. while you're sleeping. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and that's why these phrases, &gt;&gt; Yeah, and that's why these phrases, &gt;&gt; Yeah, and that's why these phrases, while I don't demonize anyone for while I don't demonize anyone for while I don't demonize anyone for creating the, you know, fight or flight creating the, you know, fight or flight creating the, you know, fight or flight and well, I mean, there's ways that you and well, I mean, there's ways that you and well, I mean, there's ways that you want your sympathetic nervous system want your sympathetic nervous system want your sympathetic nervous system activated that are not about fight or activated that are not about fight or activated that are not about fight or flight. Like I actually think that flight. Like I actually think that flight. Like I actually think that people just got the first hour of their people just got the first hour of their people just got the first hour of their day more active and energized bright day more active and energized bright day more active and energized bright light, exercise, caffeine if you're me light, exercise, caffeine if you're me light, exercise, caffeine if you're me and Lord knows I'm grateful that and Lord knows I'm grateful that and Lord knows I'm grateful that caffeine exists in the first hour of the caffeine exists in the first hour of the caffeine exists in the first hour of the day or first hours if you can't manage day or first hours if you can't manage day or first hours if you can't manage that because of schedule. And then the that because of schedule. And then the that because of schedule. And then the last hour of the day was strongly last hour of the day was strongly last hour of the day was strongly parasympathetic. I mean, everything parasympathetic. I mean, everything parasympathetic. I mean, everything would get better without having to think would get better without having to think would get better without having to think a ton about a ton about a ton about exactly how you're doing that cuz on a exactly how you're doing that cuz on a exactly how you're doing that cuz on a given day you just do what you can. given day you just do what you can. given day you just do what you can. &gt;&gt; And that's what you want, right? I mean, &gt;&gt; And that's what you want, right? I mean, &gt;&gt; And that's what you want, right? I mean, so cortisol is circadian dependent as so cortisol is circadian dependent as so cortisol is circadian dependent as you know. I mean, in the like early you know. I mean, in the like early you know. I mean, in the like early morning of early hours of the morning, morning of early hours of the morning, morning of early hours of the morning, that's when you want it to peak, right? that's when you want it to peak, right? that's when you want it to peak, right? The part of the awakening response. Like The part of the awakening response. Like The part of the awakening response. Like you want it to go up. And it's you want it to go up. And it's you want it to go up. And it's interesting. I interesting. I interesting. I the reason I'm going on this is cuz it's the reason I'm going on this is cuz it's the reason I'm going on this is cuz it's a little bit of a um soapbox for me, but a little bit of a um soapbox for me, but a little bit of a um soapbox for me, but so with the with the cortisol so with the with the cortisol so with the with the cortisol activation um activation um activation um people don't realize this, you know, people don't realize this, you know, people don't realize this, you know, obviously it's a hormone and it's obviously it's a hormone and it's obviously it's a hormone and it's binding to two different receptors. binding to two different receptors. binding to two different receptors. There's the glucocorticoid receptor and There's the glucocorticoid receptor and There's the glucocorticoid receptor and then there's the mineralocorticoid then there's the mineralocorticoid then there's the mineralocorticoid receptor and both of those receptor and both of those receptor and both of those um when cortisol binds to it, they go um when cortisol binds to it, they go um when cortisol binds to it, they go into the nucleus of the cell, and into the nucleus of the cell, and into the nucleus of the cell, and they're changing the expression. So, they're changing the expression. So, they're changing the expression. So, they're activating genes and they're activating genes and they're activating genes and deactivating genes, like 20% of the deactivating genes, like 20% of the deactivating genes, like 20% of the human genome. It's a large percentage, human genome. It's a large percentage, human genome. It's a large percentage, right? And this is on multiple different right? And this is on multiple different right? And this is on multiple different organs. So, it's it Cortisol has a very organs. So, it's it Cortisol has a very organs. So, it's it Cortisol has a very important role, and you want that peak. important role, and you want that peak. important role, and you want that peak. You want that spike, right? That's what You want that spike, right? That's what You want that spike, right? That's what you want, and then you want it to shut you want, and then you want it to shut you want, and then you want it to shut off. And there things that can activate off. And there things that can activate off. And there things that can activate it, obviously, like in the morning, it, obviously, like in the morning, it, obviously, like in the morning, going out, bright light exposure, as you going out, bright light exposure, as you going out, bright light exposure, as you mentioned. Like that's very important mentioned. Like that's very important mentioned. Like that's very important for that cortisol awakening response. for that cortisol awakening response. for that cortisol awakening response. But you can also, actually, like But you can also, actually, like But you can also, actually, like intensity intense exercise can switch it intensity intense exercise can switch it intensity intense exercise can switch it on. Um but what's interesting, and so can Um but what's interesting, and so can Um but what's interesting, and so can intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, that it What's interesting is there's that it What's interesting is there's that it What's interesting is there's studies from Mark Mattson's lab showing studies from Mark Mattson's lab showing studies from Mark Mattson's lab showing that, you know, that, you know, that, you know, the types of stressors that are the types of stressors that are the types of stressors that are beneficial, these hormetic stressors, beneficial, these hormetic stressors, beneficial, these hormetic stressors, like exercise, like, you know, like exercise, like, you know, like exercise, like, you know, intermittent fasting, um perhaps even intermittent fasting, um perhaps even intermittent fasting, um perhaps even cold exposure, like these types of cold exposure, like these types of cold exposure, like these types of exposures change the receptor density of exposures change the receptor density of exposures change the receptor density of the receptors. So, if you If you look at the receptors. So, if you If you look at the receptors. So, if you If you look at what activates cortisol in a negative what activates cortisol in a negative what activates cortisol in a negative way, chronic stress, let's say way, chronic stress, let's say way, chronic stress, let's say emotional, financial, psychological, um emotional, financial, psychological, um emotional, financial, psychological, um chronic sleep deprivation, like that bad chronic sleep deprivation, like that bad chronic sleep deprivation, like that bad type of stress, you're getting a You're type of stress, you're getting a You're type of stress, you're getting a You're not getting a big spike, you're getting not getting a big spike, you're getting not getting a big spike, you're getting a slow drip of it. And so, what happens a slow drip of it. And so, what happens a slow drip of it. And so, what happens is when you have that type of stress, is when you have that type of stress, is when you have that type of stress, you're increasing the glucocorticoid you're increasing the glucocorticoid you're increasing the glucocorticoid receptors, and you're decreasing the receptors, and you're decreasing the receptors, and you're decreasing the mineralocorticoid receptors. There's a mineralocorticoid receptors. There's a mineralocorticoid receptors. There's a different biological response in the different biological response in the different biological response in the brain, in the hypothalamus, but also in brain, in the hypothalamus, but also in brain, in the hypothalamus, but also in you know, other organs as well, when you know, other organs as well, when you know, other organs as well, when you're when you're activating cortisol you're when you're activating cortisol you're when you're activating cortisol through a beneficial type of stress, the through a beneficial type of stress, the through a beneficial type of stress, the hormetic stressors, like hormetic stressors, like hormetic stressors, like intermittent fasting, like exercise. Um intermittent fasting, like exercise. Um intermittent fasting, like exercise. Um I believe probably deliberate cold I believe probably deliberate cold I believe probably deliberate cold exposure as well. Where um it's a exposure as well. Where um it's a exposure as well. Where um it's a different biological response, and also, different biological response, and also, different biological response, and also, if you think about it, if you think about it, if you think about it, you know, you actually want cortisol to you know, you actually want cortisol to you know, you actually want cortisol to do its, you know, function. You want it do its, you know, function. You want it do its, you know, function. You want it to change the expression of this. That's to change the expression of this. That's to change the expression of this. That's what it's supposed to do, right? The what it's supposed to do, right? The what it's supposed to do, right? The problem is when you have that slow problem is when you have that slow problem is when you have that slow drip, then, you know, not only are your drip, then, you know, not only are your drip, then, you know, not only are your increasing They're changing the your increasing They're changing the your increasing They're changing the receptor, you know, activation, but also receptor, you know, activation, but also receptor, you know, activation, but also they become resistant to the cortisol. they become resistant to the cortisol. they become resistant to the cortisol. And so you're not getting the benefits. And so you're not getting the benefits. And so you're not getting the benefits. You know, cortisol represses You know, cortisol represses You know, cortisol represses inflammation, right? It's It suppresses inflammation, right? It's It suppresses inflammation, right? It's It suppresses the immune system. But like So you're the immune system. But like So you're the immune system. But like So you're not getting that anti-inflammatory not getting that anti-inflammatory not getting that anti-inflammatory effect from cortisol. It's being effect from cortisol. It's being effect from cortisol. It's being dysregulated. And that's what you don't dysregulated. And that's what you don't dysregulated. And that's what you don't want. You don't want cortisol to be want. You don't want cortisol to be want. You don't want cortisol to be dysregulated in terms of like the genes dysregulated in terms of like the genes dysregulated in terms of like the genes that it's supposed to activate or that it's supposed to activate or that it's supposed to activate or deactivate. You want it to be doing what deactivate. You want it to be doing what deactivate. You want it to be doing what it's supposed to. It's supposed to it's supposed to. It's supposed to it's supposed to. It's supposed to regulate. We're supposed to have the regulate. We're supposed to have the regulate. We're supposed to have the cortisol, you know, activation response. cortisol, you know, activation response. cortisol, you know, activation response. So, um, anyway, I that's something that So, um, anyway, I that's something that So, um, anyway, I that's something that I kind of want to clear in people's I kind of want to clear in people's I kind of want to clear in people's minds cuz I feel like a lot of people minds cuz I feel like a lot of people minds cuz I feel like a lot of people get worried about oh my gosh, I'm doing, get worried about oh my gosh, I'm doing, get worried about oh my gosh, I'm doing, you know, hit and it's activating my you know, hit and it's activating my you know, hit and it's activating my cortisol. Well, that's fine. It's like, cortisol. Well, that's fine. It's like, cortisol. Well, that's fine. It's like, you know, I mean, I guess if you do too you know, I mean, I guess if you do too you know, I mean, I guess if you do too much hit, right? You could always take much hit, right? You could always take much hit, right? You could always take something to the extreme. Okay, with something to the extreme. Okay, with something to the extreme. Okay, with that caveat, obviously I'm not talking that caveat, obviously I'm not talking that caveat, obviously I'm not talking about that. But with that caveat, like about that. But with that caveat, like about that. But with that caveat, like you do you want your body to be able you do you want your body to be able you do you want your body to be able to turn it on and then turn it off and to turn it on and then turn it off and to turn it on and then turn it off and have the adaptation, have the response, have the adaptation, have the response, have the adaptation, have the response, right? And like I said, it's a different right? And like I said, it's a different right? And like I said, it's a different biological response than the biological response than the biological response than the chronic type of cortisol activation that chronic type of cortisol activation that chronic type of cortisol activation that you get with the bad types of stress. you get with the bad types of stress. you get with the bad types of stress. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I guess same goes for intermittent &gt;&gt; Yeah, I guess same goes for intermittent &gt;&gt; Yeah, I guess same goes for intermittent fasting. And maybe you could share with fasting. And maybe you could share with fasting. And maybe you could share with us what your intermittent fasting us what your intermittent fasting us what your intermittent fasting protocol is. I know that recently protocol is. I know that recently protocol is. I know that recently cortisol has been like increasingly cortisol has been like increasingly cortisol has been like increasingly demonized as the stress hormone, stress demonized as the stress hormone, stress demonized as the stress hormone, stress hormone, and people saw pictures of hormone, and people saw pictures of hormone, and people saw pictures of people with Cushing's disease, which is, people with Cushing's disease, which is, people with Cushing's disease, which is, you know, a drastically elevated you know, a drastically elevated you know, a drastically elevated cortisol and the moon face and the cortisol and the moon face and the cortisol and the moon face and the excessive visceral fat and this excessive visceral fat and this excessive visceral fat and this sort of um, sort of um, sort of um, fear-mongering around cortisol was fear-mongering around cortisol was fear-mongering around cortisol was particularly directed toward women. And particularly directed toward women. And particularly directed toward women. And this entered the health fitness space this entered the health fitness space this entered the health fitness space because I think in an appropriate way, because I think in an appropriate way, because I think in an appropriate way, I'll just be very direct here. I don't I'll just be very direct here. I don't I'll just be very direct here. I don't like I no longer tap dance around who like I no longer tap dance around who like I no longer tap dance around who said, you know, what In a very said, you know, what In a very said, you know, what In a very appropriate way, um, appropriate way, um, appropriate way, um, that I appreciate, uh, Dr. Stacy Sims that I appreciate, uh, Dr. Stacy Sims that I appreciate, uh, Dr. Stacy Sims came on the podcast and she said, came on the podcast and she said, came on the podcast and she said, "Listen, some women shouldn't train "Listen, some women shouldn't train "Listen, some women shouldn't train fasted because they don't feel well when fasted because they don't feel well when fasted because they don't feel well when they train fasted and their cortisol is they train fasted and their cortisol is they train fasted and their cortisol is too high and so forth." That captured a too high and so forth." That captured a too high and so forth." That captured a lot of people's experience. a lot of lot of people's experience. a lot of lot of people's experience. a lot of women in particular, but some men women in particular, but some men women in particular, but some men certainly were like, "Yes. Oh my god, certainly were like, "Yes. Oh my god, certainly were like, "Yes. Oh my god, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you." But then the they the message got But then the they the message got But then the they the message got contorted, right? As it does, right? And contorted, right? As it does, right? And contorted, right? As it does, right? And then it became women shouldn't train then it became women shouldn't train then it became women shouldn't train fasted. And then we had a Lauren Clenso fasted. And then we had a Lauren Clenso fasted. And then we had a Lauren Clenso Simple on this podcast who's a, you Simple on this podcast who's a, you Simple on this podcast who's a, you know, trained as a PhD, she has a know, trained as a PhD, she has a know, trained as a PhD, she has a background in nutrition, physiology, background in nutrition, physiology, background in nutrition, physiology, strength training coach, etc. And she strength training coach, etc. And she strength training coach, etc. And she said, "No, listen, you can train fasted said, "No, listen, you can train fasted said, "No, listen, you can train fasted or not fasted as a woman or a man, it's or not fasted as a woman or a man, it's or not fasted as a woman or a man, it's a kind of your preference. But that we a kind of your preference. But that we a kind of your preference. But that we don't need to fear these cortisol don't need to fear these cortisol don't need to fear these cortisol spikes. And forgive me for going long spikes. And forgive me for going long spikes. And forgive me for going long here, but I think it is important that here, but I think it is important that here, but I think it is important that people hear this, um, again, which is people hear this, um, again, which is people hear this, um, again, which is there's also this idea that deliberate there's also this idea that deliberate there's also this idea that deliberate cold exposure increases cortisol, but cold exposure increases cortisol, but cold exposure increases cortisol, but when you look at the data, it definitely when you look at the data, it definitely when you look at the data, it definitely increases adrenaline and peripheral increases adrenaline and peripheral increases adrenaline and peripheral dopamine and probably, I'll go on dopamine and probably, I'll go on dopamine and probably, I'll go on record, it probably central dopamine, record, it probably central dopamine, record, it probably central dopamine, although we don't have as good evidence although we don't have as good evidence although we don't have as good evidence for that yet. But for that yet. But for that yet. But their evidence points to the fact that their evidence points to the fact that their evidence points to the fact that deliberate cold exposure lowers deliberate cold exposure lowers deliberate cold exposure lowers cortisol. So this then, you know, cortisol. So this then, you know, cortisol. So this then, you know, because and I again I think Stacy because and I again I think Stacy because and I again I think Stacy appropriately said a lot of women who appropriately said a lot of women who appropriately said a lot of women who want to use cold shouldn't go as cold, want to use cold shouldn't go as cold, want to use cold shouldn't go as cold, but the message got contorted but the message got contorted but the message got contorted and it became women shouldn't do and it became women shouldn't do and it became women shouldn't do deliberate cold exposure because of the deliberate cold exposure because of the deliberate cold exposure because of the cortisol increase. And so part of the cortisol increase. And so part of the cortisol increase. And so part of the reason I'm going long here is I'm trying reason I'm going long here is I'm trying reason I'm going long here is I'm trying to correct the narrative on her behalf. to correct the narrative on her behalf. to correct the narrative on her behalf. She said, "Do what works for you." She said, "Do what works for you." She said, "Do what works for you." Right? And that's what Lauren's saying Right? And that's what Lauren's saying Right? And that's what Lauren's saying and I'm guessing, um, that's what you'll and I'm guessing, um, that's what you'll and I'm guessing, um, that's what you'll say as well. Um, but I just need to get say as well. Um, but I just need to get say as well. Um, but I just need to get that out there because the message has that out there because the message has that out there because the message has gotten totally pretzel twisted up and gotten totally pretzel twisted up and gotten totally pretzel twisted up and cortisol is neither good nor bad. You cortisol is neither good nor bad. You cortisol is neither good nor bad. You want it high in the morning, you want it want it high in the morning, you want it want it high in the morning, you want it low at night, um, in general. Um, it low at night, um, in general. Um, it low at night, um, in general. Um, it sounds like you train fasted. sounds like you train fasted. sounds like you train fasted. &gt;&gt; I listen to how I feel. That's exactly &gt;&gt; I listen to how I feel. That's exactly &gt;&gt; I listen to how I feel. That's exactly what I do. So what your podcast what I do. So what your podcast what I do. So what your podcast guests and the researchers are guests and the researchers are guests and the researchers are talking about is exactly. There are talking about is exactly. There are talking about is exactly. There are times when I wake up in the morning and times when I wake up in the morning and times when I wake up in the morning and I'm like, I need to eat something before I'm like, I need to eat something before I'm like, I need to eat something before I work out. And I do. Um, but I work out. And I do. Um, but I work out. And I do. Um, but I oftentimes do train fasted one because I oftentimes do train fasted one because I oftentimes do train fasted one because I am practicing intermittent fasting am practicing intermittent fasting am practicing intermittent fasting again, but I do it I'm not like starving again, but I do it I'm not like starving again, but I do it I'm not like starving myself and like I said, the reason myself and like I said, the reason myself and like I said, the reason there's multiple reasons I do it. One there's multiple reasons I do it. One there's multiple reasons I do it. One reason is because it really did help me reason is because it really did help me reason is because it really did help me lose the belly fat, which is a visceral lose the belly fat, which is a visceral lose the belly fat, which is a visceral fat, which is like the worst kind of fat fat, which is like the worst kind of fat fat, which is like the worst kind of fat you can have. And we can talk more about you can have. And we can talk more about you can have. And we can talk more about that. But the second reason is I love that. But the second reason is I love that. But the second reason is I love the cognitive benefits I have in the cognitive benefits I have in the cognitive benefits I have in the morning with it. And it's the main morning with it. And it's the main morning with it. And it's the main reason I do it. And so there are many reason I do it. And so there are many reason I do it. And so there are many times when I do train fasted, but I am times when I do train fasted, but I am times when I do train fasted, but I am not out running 15 miles. Most of my not out running 15 miles. Most of my not out running 15 miles. Most of my like I said, my sessions are about an like I said, my sessions are about an like I said, my sessions are about an hour long. And am I taking a little bit hour long. And am I taking a little bit hour long. And am I taking a little bit of a performance hit with the high of a performance hit with the high of a performance hit with the high intensity? Probably. Probably yes, but intensity? Probably. Probably yes, but intensity? Probably. Probably yes, but it's not much to matter for me. And you it's not much to matter for me. And you it's not much to matter for me. And you do burn a little bit more fat if you do burn a little bit more fat if you do burn a little bit more fat if you train fasted. I mean, that's known. train fasted. I mean, that's known. train fasted. I mean, that's known. You will if it is a longer session, you You will if it is a longer session, you You will if it is a longer session, you will take an a performance enhancement will take an a performance enhancement will take an a performance enhancement hit. That is also known, right? So I hit. That is also known, right? So I hit. That is also known, right? So I think it really does come down to like think it really does come down to like think it really does come down to like what is your goal? How do you feel? And what is your goal? How do you feel? And what is your goal? How do you feel? And and then you kind of go with that. And I and then you kind of go with that. And I and then you kind of go with that. And I completely agree. Like there are times I completely agree. Like there are times I completely agree. Like there are times when you know, I'm on my cycle and I when you know, I'm on my cycle and I when you know, I'm on my cycle and I feel fine and I'm working out just fine. feel fine and I'm working out just fine. feel fine and I'm working out just fine. And there are other times that I'm like And there are other times that I'm like And there are other times that I'm like I don't feel good. Like I'm going to I'm I don't feel good. Like I'm going to I'm I don't feel good. Like I'm going to I'm going to take it easier. I still train, going to take it easier. I still train, going to take it easier. I still train, I just you listen to your body. And I just you listen to your body. And I just you listen to your body. And I that's a pretty easy, I think, rule of that's a pretty easy, I think, rule of that's a pretty easy, I think, rule of thumb. Sometimes people like to thumb. Sometimes people like to thumb. Sometimes people like to complicate things, you know, I don't complicate things, you know, I don't complicate things, you know, I don't there's lots of reasons why I don't we there's lots of reasons why I don't we there's lots of reasons why I don't we need to get into that. need to get into that. need to get into that. &gt;&gt; I have theories, yeah, I have theories, &gt;&gt; I have theories, yeah, I have theories, &gt;&gt; I have theories, yeah, I have theories, but they're not important right now. but they're not important right now. but they're not important right now. &gt;&gt; No, it's not important, yeah. So so &gt;&gt; No, it's not important, yeah. So so &gt;&gt; No, it's not important, yeah. So so yeah, I do I do train fasted and it is yeah, I do I do train fasted and it is yeah, I do I do train fasted and it is for me it is helped me tremendously for me it is helped me tremendously for me it is helped me tremendously change my body composition. Like I said, change my body composition. Like I said, change my body composition. Like I said, I'm in a different part of my life than I'm in a different part of my life than I'm in a different part of my life than perhaps a 30-year-old woman is, right? perhaps a 30-year-old woman is, right? perhaps a 30-year-old woman is, right? So when I was 30, I mean, like I So when I was 30, I mean, like I So when I was 30, I mean, like I didn't have to train fasted. It was it didn't have to train fasted. It was it didn't have to train fasted. It was it was it was easy to keep, you know, the was it was easy to keep, you know, the was it was easy to keep, you know, the belly fat, the visceral fat lower. the belly fat, the visceral fat lower. the belly fat, the visceral fat lower. Hormonal changes are do play a role in Hormonal changes are do play a role in Hormonal changes are do play a role in the way your body so estrogen plays a the way your body so estrogen plays a the way your body so estrogen plays a role in telling your body how to store role in telling your body how to store role in telling your body how to store fat. So subcutaneous fat would be the fat. So subcutaneous fat would be the fat. So subcutaneous fat would be the kind of fat that you can just like kind of fat that you can just like kind of fat that you can just like pinch, right? The the fat that we see, pinch, right? The the fat that we see, pinch, right? The the fat that we see, the visceral fat, that's that deep fat the visceral fat, that's that deep fat the visceral fat, that's that deep fat that's lining your organs. It's often that's lining your organs. It's often that's lining your organs. It's often belly fat, you know, and it's lining the belly fat, you know, and it's lining the belly fat, you know, and it's lining the intestines, the liver, you know, it's intestines, the liver, you know, it's intestines, the liver, you know, it's almost like an it's almost like an it's almost like an endocrine organ. I mean, cuz it is endocrine organ. I mean, cuz it is endocrine organ. I mean, cuz it is secreting hormones. It's secreting hormones. It's secreting hormones. It's secreting inflammatory factors. It's metabolically inflammatory factors. It's metabolically inflammatory factors. It's metabolically active. It's constantly breaking down active. It's constantly breaking down active. It's constantly breaking down triglycerides. It's associated with triglycerides. It's associated with triglycerides. It's associated with double the increased risk double the double the increased risk double the double the increased risk double the risk of early death. Um people that have risk of early death. Um people that have risk of early death. Um people that have high visceral fat have 44% higher chance high visceral fat have 44% higher chance high visceral fat have 44% higher chance of having cancer, many different types of having cancer, many different types of having cancer, many different types of cancers. of cancers. of cancers. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; It's huge. It's huge. You know, and &gt;&gt; It's huge. It's huge. You know, and &gt;&gt; It's huge. It's huge. You know, and of course insulin resistance is the and of course insulin resistance is the and of course insulin resistance is the number one problem with visceral fat, number one problem with visceral fat, number one problem with visceral fat, right? And I'd love to talk about right? And I'd love to talk about right? And I'd love to talk about that, but um if you want, I mean, we can that, but um if you want, I mean, we can that, but um if you want, I mean, we can we can get into that. Yeah, it's so we can get into that. Yeah, it's so we can get into that. Yeah, it's so with the visceral fat and like I said, with the visceral fat and like I said, with the visceral fat and like I said, you know, visceral fat is something if you know, visceral fat is something if you know, visceral fat is something if you really directly want to measure it, you really directly want to measure it, you really directly want to measure it, you do a DEXA scan. But, you know, for you do a DEXA scan. But, you know, for you do a DEXA scan. But, you know, for the average person that isn't going to the average person that isn't going to the average person that isn't going to go out and do a DEXA scan, go out and do a DEXA scan, go out and do a DEXA scan, waist circumference is a proxy. It's waist circumference is a proxy. It's waist circumference is a proxy. It's used in a lot of studies. So, women that used in a lot of studies. So, women that used in a lot of studies. So, women that have a waist circumference of 35 in or have a waist circumference of 35 in or have a waist circumference of 35 in or above are considered to have a higher above are considered to have a higher above are considered to have a higher amount of visceral fat. amount of visceral fat. amount of visceral fat. Men that have a waist circumference of Men that have a waist circumference of Men that have a waist circumference of 40 in or above are considered to have 40 in or above are considered to have 40 in or above are considered to have higher amount of visceral fat. It's also higher amount of visceral fat. It's also higher amount of visceral fat. It's also that belly fat. Like you can you can you that belly fat. Like you can you can you that belly fat. Like you can you can you just know, right? Um interestingly, like just know, right? Um interestingly, like just know, right? Um interestingly, like 70% of women over the age of 50 have 70% of women over the age of 50 have 70% of women over the age of 50 have high visceral fat. 50% of men over the high visceral fat. 50% of men over the high visceral fat. 50% of men over the age of 50, too. You know, again, it age of 50, too. You know, again, it age of 50, too. You know, again, it coming down to women go through coming down to women go through coming down to women go through menopause. Estrogen plays an important role in Estrogen plays an important role in Estrogen plays an important role in telling the body, you know, to store the telling the body, you know, to store the telling the body, you know, to store the fat subcutaneously rather than fat subcutaneously rather than fat subcutaneously rather than viscerally deep around organs. And so, viscerally deep around organs. And so, viscerally deep around organs. And so, as women transition to perimenopause, as women transition to perimenopause, as women transition to perimenopause, you know, that the years before you know, that the years before you know, that the years before menopause and menopause, menopause and menopause, menopause and menopause, it their estrogen goes down, it their estrogen goes down, it their estrogen goes down, and that does change the way the body and that does change the way the body and that does change the way the body stores fat. And any woman that's going stores fat. And any woman that's going stores fat. And any woman that's going through either of those stages knows it. through either of those stages knows it. through either of those stages knows it. And it's also why you see often women And it's also why you see often women And it's also why you see often women over the age of 50 with more belly fat, over the age of 50 with more belly fat, over the age of 50 with more belly fat, right? I mean, that's something that I right? I mean, that's something that I right? I mean, that's something that I think is it's hard to deny. But, um think is it's hard to deny. But, um think is it's hard to deny. But, um it's one of the reasons why I kind it's one of the reasons why I kind it's one of the reasons why I kind of went back to practicing intermittent of went back to practicing intermittent of went back to practicing intermittent fasting because fasting because fasting because there's a there's a couple of ways that there's a there's a couple of ways that there's a there's a couple of ways that you can really powerfully lose visceral you can really powerfully lose visceral you can really powerfully lose visceral fat, and one of them is doing aerobic fat, and one of them is doing aerobic fat, and one of them is doing aerobic exercise, high-intensity interval exercise, high-intensity interval exercise, high-intensity interval training also really powerfully can do training also really powerfully can do training also really powerfully can do it, but also being in a caloric deficit. it, but also being in a caloric deficit. it, but also being in a caloric deficit. And I think when you start to get the And I think when you start to get the And I think when you start to get the combination of both, that's what really combination of both, that's what really combination of both, that's what really worked for me. worked for me. worked for me. It's crazy how quickly you can gain it It's crazy how quickly you can gain it It's crazy how quickly you can gain it based on your diet as well. based on your diet as well. based on your diet as well. So, it is different from the So, it is different from the So, it is different from the subcutaneous fat in many ways. subcutaneous fat in many ways. subcutaneous fat in many ways. I mentioned it's secreting these I mentioned it's secreting these I mentioned it's secreting these inflammatory molecules. It's, you know, inflammatory molecules. It's, you know, inflammatory molecules. It's, you know, hormones, but it's also constantly hormones, but it's also constantly hormones, but it's also constantly breaking down triglycerides into free breaking down triglycerides into free breaking down triglycerides into free fatty acids. And the location of it is fatty acids. And the location of it is fatty acids. And the location of it is very dangerous because it's right very dangerous because it's right very dangerous because it's right surrounding the liver, right? It's this surrounding the liver, right? It's this surrounding the liver, right? It's this deep organ fat. And that's very close to deep organ fat. And that's very close to deep organ fat. And that's very close to the portal vein. And so, you're the portal vein. And so, you're the portal vein. And so, you're constantly getting this sort of constantly getting this sort of constantly getting this sort of mainlining free fatty acids to the mainlining free fatty acids to the mainlining free fatty acids to the liver. And visceral fat is very different from And visceral fat is very different from And visceral fat is very different from subcutaneous fat because it doesn't subcutaneous fat because it doesn't subcutaneous fat because it doesn't respond to insulin like subcutaneous fat respond to insulin like subcutaneous fat respond to insulin like subcutaneous fat does. In other words, when you have a does. In other words, when you have a does. In other words, when you have a meal, you eat a carbohydrate meal, and meal, you eat a carbohydrate meal, and meal, you eat a carbohydrate meal, and you basically your body increases you basically your body increases you basically your body increases insulin to help take it up glucose into insulin to help take it up glucose into insulin to help take it up glucose into your liver, your liver, your liver, muscle, adipose tissue, lipolysis shuts muscle, adipose tissue, lipolysis shuts muscle, adipose tissue, lipolysis shuts down, right? So, okay, no longer am I down, right? So, okay, no longer am I down, right? So, okay, no longer am I going to break down these fats, it's going to break down these fats, it's going to break down these fats, it's time to use this energy, right? time to use this energy, right? time to use this energy, right? Visceral fat doesn't respond to insulin, Visceral fat doesn't respond to insulin, Visceral fat doesn't respond to insulin, so it just keeps going, right? And these so it just keeps going, right? And these so it just keeps going, right? And these free fatty acids, because they're going free fatty acids, because they're going free fatty acids, because they're going right to the liver, right to the liver, right to the liver, uh it's essentially antagonizing uh it's essentially antagonizing uh it's essentially antagonizing the insulin receptors. So, it causes the insulin receptors. So, it causes the insulin receptors. So, it causes insulin receptors to become more insulin receptors to become more insulin receptors to become more resistant to insulin. resistant to insulin. resistant to insulin. And this is part of why people with high And this is part of why people with high And this is part of why people with high visceral fat, by the way, you can gain visceral fat, by the way, you can gain visceral fat, by the way, you can gain visceral fat without gaining a pound. visceral fat without gaining a pound. visceral fat without gaining a pound. And we can talk about those studies. And we can talk about those studies. And we can talk about those studies. Like, people are skinny Like, people are skinny Like, people are skinny and can have high amounts of visceral and can have high amounts of visceral and can have high amounts of visceral fat. You've heard of like lean fat. You've heard of like lean fat. You've heard of like lean metabolically unhealthy but lean metabolically unhealthy but lean metabolically unhealthy but lean individuals. Those people exist and so you can have a Those people exist and so you can have a Those people exist and so you can have a high amount of visceral fat but not high amount of visceral fat but not high amount of visceral fat but not really look like you do. really look like you do. really look like you do. So, when you know, obviously the insulin So, when you know, obviously the insulin So, when you know, obviously the insulin resistance is a problem for many resistance is a problem for many resistance is a problem for many reasons, but it also plays a role in reasons, but it also plays a role in reasons, but it also plays a role in those energy crashes that you those energy crashes that you those energy crashes that you experience, right? And that's kind of experience, right? And that's kind of experience, right? And that's kind of like some of the first signs of insulin like some of the first signs of insulin like some of the first signs of insulin resistance actually have to do with what resistance actually have to do with what resistance actually have to do with what you're feeling. So, we talked about you're feeling. So, we talked about you're feeling. So, we talked about lethargy, right? So, you know, the lethargy, right? So, you know, the lethargy, right? So, you know, the inflammation that's being generated from inflammation that's being generated from inflammation that's being generated from these this visceral fat constantly these this visceral fat constantly these this visceral fat constantly making these, you know, pro-inflammatory making these, you know, pro-inflammatory making these, you know, pro-inflammatory compounds are and it's an energy sink, compounds are and it's an energy sink, compounds are and it's an energy sink, right? So, you do constantly feel tired, right? So, you do constantly feel tired, right? So, you do constantly feel tired, but also because your cells are becoming but also because your cells are becoming but also because your cells are becoming insulin resistant, insulin resistant, insulin resistant, when you have a high glucose meal when you have a high glucose meal when you have a high glucose meal and you're not responding, the body kind and you're not responding, the body kind and you're not responding, the body kind of overcompensates and produces more of overcompensates and produces more of overcompensates and produces more insulin. So, it's like I we got to get insulin. So, it's like I we got to get insulin. So, it's like I we got to get this blood glucose out of our system, this blood glucose out of our system, this blood glucose out of our system, right? It can cause a lot of damage if right? It can cause a lot of damage if right? It can cause a lot of damage if it sits around there. And so, you make it sits around there. And so, you make it sits around there. And so, you make more insulin and then what happens is more insulin and then what happens is more insulin and then what happens is you your blood glucose goes way low cuz you your blood glucose goes way low cuz you your blood glucose goes way low cuz it was like this overcompensation, it was like this overcompensation, it was like this overcompensation, right? And then you feel a crash. You feel like And then you feel a crash. You feel like And then you feel a crash. You feel like this crash and that signals to the, you this crash and that signals to the, you this crash and that signals to the, you know, hypothalamus part of the brain, know, hypothalamus part of the brain, know, hypothalamus part of the brain, I need energy, right? So, then you I need energy, right? So, then you I need energy, right? So, then you sort of crave you get those cravings for sort of crave you get those cravings for sort of crave you get those cravings for those calorically energetic dense foods. those calorically energetic dense foods. those calorically energetic dense foods. What I'm talking about is like the What I'm talking about is like the What I'm talking about is like the experience of like experience of like experience of like you know, insulin resistance. And what's you know, insulin resistance. And what's you know, insulin resistance. And what's interesting is that you can cause interesting is that you can cause interesting is that you can cause someone to gain visceral fat and someone to gain visceral fat and someone to gain visceral fat and their brain could become insulin their brain could become insulin their brain could become insulin resistant. So, we think a lot about resistant. So, we think a lot about resistant. So, we think a lot about insulin resistance in the muscle, liver, insulin resistance in the muscle, liver, insulin resistance in the muscle, liver, your brain also can become insulin your brain also can become insulin your brain also can become insulin resistant quite quickly actually. So, um resistant quite quickly actually. So, um resistant quite quickly actually. So, um insulin's very important in the brain insulin's very important in the brain insulin's very important in the brain for a lot of reasons as you know, but for a lot of reasons as you know, but for a lot of reasons as you know, but you know, a couple of the things you know, a couple of the things you know, a couple of the things relative to what we're or relevant to relative to what we're or relevant to relative to what we're or relevant to what we're talking about would be one is what we're talking about would be one is what we're talking about would be one is it does act on the hypothalamus and it does act on the hypothalamus and it does act on the hypothalamus and help, you know, tell it to basically help, you know, tell it to basically help, you know, tell it to basically um stop eating. Be satiated. Like I took a stop eating. Be satiated. Like I took a stop eating. Be satiated. Like I took a meal in, okay, like I'm going to be meal in, okay, like I'm going to be meal in, okay, like I'm going to be satiated. But it also plays a role in satiated. But it also plays a role in satiated. But it also plays a role in energy storage and telling the body energy storage and telling the body energy storage and telling the body how to store the energy. And so when how to store the energy. And so when how to store the energy. And so when your brain becomes insulin resistant, your brain becomes insulin resistant, your brain becomes insulin resistant, it's not doing that. And so you're not it's not doing that. And so you're not it's not doing that. And so you're not being satiated, so you eat more, and being satiated, so you eat more, and being satiated, so you eat more, and you're storing the fat more viscerally. you're storing the fat more viscerally. you're storing the fat more viscerally. And there was a study that was published And there was a study that was published And there was a study that was published actually quite recently. I covered this actually quite recently. I covered this actually quite recently. I covered this in a in a recent newsletter. It was a in a in a recent newsletter. It was a in a in a recent newsletter. It was a really interesting study cuz it was really interesting study cuz it was really interesting study cuz it was healthy young men, healthy young men, healthy young men, and researchers put them on a and researchers put them on a and researchers put them on a little bit of a calorically dense, so it little bit of a calorically dense, so it little bit of a calorically dense, so it was like they were eating 1,200 to 1,500 was like they were eating 1,200 to 1,500 was like they were eating 1,200 to 1,500 more calories a day, and it was more calories a day, and it was more calories a day, and it was high saturated fat, high sugar. So it high saturated fat, high sugar. So it high saturated fat, high sugar. So it was a processed foods, ultra-processed was a processed foods, ultra-processed was a processed foods, ultra-processed foods, like, you know, ultimate, right? foods, like, you know, ultimate, right? foods, like, you know, ultimate, right? &gt;&gt; That's a lot of extra calories. &gt;&gt; That's a lot of extra calories. &gt;&gt; That's a lot of extra calories. &gt;&gt; extra calories for 5 days. It is. &gt;&gt; extra calories for 5 days. It is. &gt;&gt; extra calories for 5 days. It is. But what happened was their they did But what happened was their they did But what happened was their they did cause their brains to become insulin cause their brains to become insulin cause their brains to become insulin resistant, and they didn't gain weight, resistant, and they didn't gain weight, resistant, and they didn't gain weight, but they gained visceral fat. And they but they gained visceral fat. And they but they gained visceral fat. And they started gaining fat around their liver. started gaining fat around their liver. started gaining fat around their liver. And that's something that happens as And that's something that happens as And that's something that happens as well because visceral fat is surrounding well because visceral fat is surrounding well because visceral fat is surrounding liver, you're getting a lot of free liver, you're getting a lot of free liver, you're getting a lot of free fatty acids, and they're going right to fatty acids, and they're going right to fatty acids, and they're going right to the liver, so the liver has to store it, the liver, so the liver has to store it, the liver, so the liver has to store it, right? So you get this non-alcoholic, right? So you get this non-alcoholic, right? So you get this non-alcoholic, you know, fatty liver. you know, fatty liver. you know, fatty liver. But and that happened after 5 days. I But and that happened after 5 days. I But and that happened after 5 days. I mean, without gaining mean, without gaining mean, without gaining &gt;&gt; young, healthy &gt;&gt; young, healthy &gt;&gt; young, healthy &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, you know, they were eating a &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, you know, they were eating a &gt;&gt; Yeah. But, you know, they were eating a lot of calories, extra calories. lot of calories, extra calories. lot of calories, extra calories. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's like an a 1,200 That's like &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's like an a 1,200 That's like &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's like an a 1,200 That's like a half a pizza a half a pizza a half a pizza uh extra above your uh extra above your uh extra above your maintenance calories per night. maintenance calories per night. maintenance calories per night. &gt;&gt; what they were doing. They were eating &gt;&gt; what they were doing. They were eating &gt;&gt; what they were doing. They were eating lots of Well, they were eating like lots of Well, they were eating like lots of Well, they were eating like saturated fat and refined sugar, so it saturated fat and refined sugar, so it saturated fat and refined sugar, so it &gt;&gt; Doritos and french fries. &gt;&gt; Doritos and french fries. &gt;&gt; Doritos and french fries. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, obviously if you're going &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, obviously if you're going &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, obviously if you're going to do the study, you want to kind of do to do the study, you want to kind of do to do the study, you want to kind of do it to a degree where you're going to see it to a degree where you're going to see it to a degree where you're going to see some change, right? So so maybe like some change, right? So so maybe like some change, right? So so maybe like maybe it's not going to happen in 5 days maybe it's not going to happen in 5 days maybe it's not going to happen in 5 days if you're if you're only eating 500 more if you're if you're only eating 500 more if you're if you're only eating 500 more calories a day, but over time you will calories a day, but over time you will calories a day, but over time you will be gaining visceral fat, right? So it's be gaining visceral fat, right? So it's be gaining visceral fat, right? So it's not going to be the same degree. not going to be the same degree. not going to be the same degree. It's something to be concerned about, It's something to be concerned about, It's something to be concerned about, it's something to think about, and also it's something to think about, and also it's something to think about, and also because you can gain it and not really because you can gain it and not really because you can gain it and not really even know it, like, you know, without even know it, like, you know, without even know it, like, you know, without gaining a pound. And there are other gaining a pound. And there are other gaining a pound. And there are other things that cause it, not just, you things that cause it, not just, you things that cause it, not just, you know, eating too many calories or diet know, eating too many calories or diet know, eating too many calories or diet composition. I mean, you mentioned composition. I mean, you mentioned composition. I mean, you mentioned cortisol. I mean, chronic elevated cortisol. I mean, chronic elevated cortisol. I mean, chronic elevated cortisol makes you store the fat around cortisol makes you store the fat around cortisol makes you store the fat around around, you know, visceral fat. Sleep around, you know, visceral fat. Sleep around, you know, visceral fat. Sleep loss. I mean, there's also studies loss. I mean, there's also studies loss. I mean, there's also studies showing that you take healthy men, sleep showing that you take healthy men, sleep showing that you take healthy men, sleep deprive them for a couple of weeks, I deprive them for a couple of weeks, I deprive them for a couple of weeks, I think 4 hours, they're getting 4 hours think 4 hours, they're getting 4 hours think 4 hours, they're getting 4 hours of sleep at night, they can start of sleep at night, they can start of sleep at night, they can start gaining visceral fat, I mean, pretty gaining visceral fat, I mean, pretty gaining visceral fat, I mean, pretty rapidly with only like a pound gaining a rapidly with only like a pound gaining a rapidly with only like a pound gaining a pound of weight. So again, it's like not pound of weight. So again, it's like not pound of weight. So again, it's like not necessarily something that you're going necessarily something that you're going necessarily something that you're going to see on the scale, but it's happening. to see on the scale, but it's happening. to see on the scale, but it's happening. Right? And it's affecting your Right? And it's affecting your Right? And it's affecting your short-term mood, I mean, how you feel, short-term mood, I mean, how you feel, short-term mood, I mean, how you feel, your energy. It's affecting, you know, your energy. It's affecting, you know, your energy. It's affecting, you know, the way you're eating. It's a vicious the way you're eating. It's a vicious the way you're eating. It's a vicious cycle cuz you start to eat more cycle cuz you start to eat more cycle cuz you start to eat more calories, right? And then it just calories, right? And then it just calories, right? And then it just becomes this vicious cycle of that you becomes this vicious cycle of that you becomes this vicious cycle of that you start to gain more visceral fat. start to gain more visceral fat. start to gain more visceral fat. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet to 32 oz of water with an Element packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting Element has a bunch of great tasting Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So if you'd like to try Element, flavor. So if you'd like to try Element, flavor. So if you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. &gt;&gt; Such an important point that you can &gt;&gt; Such an important point that you can &gt;&gt; Such an important point that you can either not be gaining much or not either not be gaining much or not either not be gaining much or not gaining any total body weight, but gaining any total body weight, but gaining any total body weight, but gaining visceral fat. I think that's gaining visceral fat. I think that's gaining visceral fat. I think that's first time I've heard that and it's a first time I've heard that and it's a first time I've heard that and it's a vital message for people to hear because vital message for people to hear because vital message for people to hear because this visceral fat sounds like one of the this visceral fat sounds like one of the this visceral fat sounds like one of the major health hazards we need to worry major health hazards we need to worry major health hazards we need to worry about. You mentioned elevated about. You mentioned elevated about. You mentioned elevated chronically elevated cortisol, sleep chronically elevated cortisol, sleep chronically elevated cortisol, sleep deprivation will increase visceral fat. deprivation will increase visceral fat. deprivation will increase visceral fat. Once again, I know I'm beating a drum Once again, I know I'm beating a drum Once again, I know I'm beating a drum here almost to death, but almost to death, but almost to death, but having high cortisol early in the day having high cortisol early in the day having high cortisol early in the day and low cortisol in the evening is the and low cortisol in the evening is the and low cortisol in the evening is the definition of not definition of not definition of not chronically high cortisol. The chronically high cortisol. The chronically high cortisol. The definition of chronically high cortisol definition of chronically high cortisol definition of chronically high cortisol is somewhat elevated or elevated cortisol somewhat elevated or elevated cortisol somewhat elevated or elevated cortisol in the morning, but especially in the in the morning, but especially in the in the morning, but especially in the hours before sleep and I actually have hours before sleep and I actually have hours before sleep and I actually have a theory that is not a stretch that one a theory that is not a stretch that one a theory that is not a stretch that one of the main reasons why it's so of the main reasons why it's so of the main reasons why it's so detrimental to our mental and physical detrimental to our mental and physical detrimental to our mental and physical health in the short and long term is health in the short and long term is health in the short and long term is because of the ways it's disrupt sleep. because of the ways it's disrupt sleep. because of the ways it's disrupt sleep. And so and we can't tease those apart. And so and we can't tease those apart. And so and we can't tease those apart. You can't do a study where you spike You can't do a study where you spike You can't do a study where you spike cortisol late in the day, even if you cortisol late in the day, even if you cortisol late in the day, even if you can fall asleep just fine after the end can fall asleep just fine after the end can fall asleep just fine after the end of a really stressful day, of a really stressful day, of a really stressful day, the sleep is different. And people say, the sleep is different. And people say, the sleep is different. And people say, "Well, life has stress." And I totally "Well, life has stress." And I totally "Well, life has stress." And I totally agree. I mean, Lord knows I've agree. I mean, Lord knows I've agree. I mean, Lord knows I've experienced life has stress, but getting experienced life has stress, but getting experienced life has stress, but getting that last hour of the day doing things that last hour of the day doing things that last hour of the day doing things to push down on cortisol, push down on to push down on cortisol, push down on to push down on cortisol, push down on stress, lower heart rate, not eating in stress, lower heart rate, not eating in stress, lower heart rate, not eating in that certainly that last hour before that certainly that last hour before that certainly that last hour before sleep, ideally three, sleep, ideally three, sleep, ideally three, I feel like that small change can make a I feel like that small change can make a I feel like that small change can make a an outsize positive difference. an outsize positive difference. an outsize positive difference. &gt;&gt; That's interesting like the &gt;&gt; That's interesting like the &gt;&gt; That's interesting like the correlation between the high cortisol correlation between the high cortisol correlation between the high cortisol affecting your sleep and maybe that's affecting your sleep and maybe that's affecting your sleep and maybe that's also like they're related and so also like they're related and so also like they're related and so the sleep loss really does make you We the sleep loss really does make you We the sleep loss really does make you We know. We know from, you know, you know. We know from, you know, you know. We know from, you know, you probably know who the researchers are probably know who the researchers are probably know who the researchers are that have done those studies on sleep that have done those studies on sleep that have done those studies on sleep loss and it affecting appetite, right? I loss and it affecting appetite, right? I loss and it affecting appetite, right? I mean, &gt;&gt; Oh, everything gets disregulated. I know &gt;&gt; Oh, everything gets disregulated. I know &gt;&gt; Oh, everything gets disregulated. I know I don't want to take us off course, but I don't want to take us off course, but I don't want to take us off course, but I think you might find it interesting I think you might find it interesting I think you might find it interesting that there's a beautiful study where that there's a beautiful study where that there's a beautiful study where they look measured metabolism during they look measured metabolism during they look measured metabolism during sleep. They basically had people breathe sleep. They basically had people breathe sleep. They basically had people breathe into a tube into a tube into a tube during sleep. They had a mask on and it during sleep. They had a mask on and it during sleep. They had a mask on and it turns out that the brain cycles through turns out that the brain cycles through turns out that the brain cycles through all the different forms of metabolism all the different forms of metabolism all the different forms of metabolism during sleep. There's a phase of sleep during sleep. There's a phase of sleep during sleep. There's a phase of sleep where you're essentially running on where you're essentially running on where you're essentially running on sugar. There's a you're then you're like sugar. There's a you're then you're like sugar. There's a you're then you're like a almost looks like somebody's ketogenic a almost looks like somebody's ketogenic a almost looks like somebody's ketogenic at one. Basically that the middle of the at one. Basically that the middle of the at one. Basically that the middle of the night when we're so well should be at night when we're so well should be at night when we're so well should be at night. When you're sleeping is a is kind night. When you're sleeping is a is kind night. When you're sleeping is a is kind of a test run of all the systems but of a test run of all the systems but of a test run of all the systems but they get recalibrated and it's so they get recalibrated and it's so they get recalibrated and it's so important. think you know most of the important. think you know most of the important. think you know most of the negative effects of alcohol that people negative effects of alcohol that people negative effects of alcohol that people talk about. Yes, it's a poison. It's a talk about. Yes, it's a poison. It's a talk about. Yes, it's a poison. It's a class one carcinogen class one carcinogen class one carcinogen as classified by the World Health as classified by the World Health as classified by the World Health Organization on a I think most of the Organization on a I think most of the Organization on a I think most of the negative effects of drinking are because negative effects of drinking are because negative effects of drinking are because of the negative effects of alcohol on of the negative effects of alcohol on of the negative effects of alcohol on sleep. I'm not telling people to drink in the I'm not telling people to drink in the I'm not telling people to drink in the morning but you know morning but you know morning but you know and so I think that if you get your and so I think that if you get your and so I think that if you get your sleep right, you're not 90% of the way sleep right, you're not 90% of the way sleep right, you're not 90% of the way there but you're halfway there. there but you're halfway there. there but you're halfway there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I really do believe that. And then &gt;&gt; I really do believe that. And then &gt;&gt; I really do believe that. And then getting your sleep right makes you do a getting your sleep right makes you do a getting your sleep right makes you do a bunch of other things. bunch of other things. bunch of other things. &gt;&gt; Right. You're more you're more &gt;&gt; Right. You're more you're more &gt;&gt; Right. You're more you're more motivated to exercise for one. motivated to exercise for one. motivated to exercise for one. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; More motivated to exercise. Your food &gt;&gt; More motivated to exercise. Your food &gt;&gt; More motivated to exercise. Your food choices I mean and on and on. The the choices I mean and on and on. The the choices I mean and on and on. The the problem with talking about sleep is so problem with talking about sleep is so problem with talking about sleep is so important is people will get sleep important is people will get sleep important is people will get sleep anxiety. So we tap dance around this anxiety. So we tap dance around this anxiety. So we tap dance around this like we don't want people stress learn like we don't want people stress learn like we don't want people stress learn how to fall asleep, learn how to fall how to fall asleep, learn how to fall how to fall asleep, learn how to fall back asleep. These no one gets it back asleep. These no one gets it back asleep. These no one gets it perfect. Yes, you'll survive like it perfect. Yes, you'll survive like it perfect. Yes, you'll survive like it without one poor night's sleep or an without one poor night's sleep or an without one poor night's sleep or an all-nighter you're not going to die. all-nighter you're not going to die. all-nighter you're not going to die. Like you know just get good at it on Like you know just get good at it on Like you know just get good at it on average, right? That's what I'd say. average, right? That's what I'd say. average, right? That's what I'd say. Could you tell us what the structure of Could you tell us what the structure of Could you tell us what the structure of the intermittent fasting is for you? the intermittent fasting is for you? the intermittent fasting is for you? Does that mean skipping breakfast, Does that mean skipping breakfast, Does that mean skipping breakfast, skipping lunch, skipping dinner? Because skipping lunch, skipping dinner? Because skipping lunch, skipping dinner? Because I know a number of people are So we're I know a number of people are So we're I know a number of people are So we're getting drawn back to intermittent getting drawn back to intermittent getting drawn back to intermittent fasting after a couple years of it fasting after a couple years of it fasting after a couple years of it getting beat up on is like not the best getting beat up on is like not the best getting beat up on is like not the best way to lose fat or is a way to lose fat or is a way to lose fat or is a I think it's a terrific way to do the I think it's a terrific way to do the I think it's a terrific way to do the sorts of things that you're describing sorts of things that you're describing sorts of things that you're describing and I'm learning and I'm learning and I'm learning today more about the positive things it today more about the positive things it today more about the positive things it can do can do can do for insulin sensitivity and so forth. for insulin sensitivity and so forth. for insulin sensitivity and so forth. If you're on a bout of intermittent If you're on a bout of intermittent If you're on a bout of intermittent fasting, are you doing it by the clock? fasting, are you doing it by the clock? fasting, are you doing it by the clock? Are you doing it by feel? What does it Are you doing it by feel? What does it Are you doing it by feel? What does it look like? look like? look like? &gt;&gt; For me it really does depend on &gt;&gt; For me it really does depend on &gt;&gt; For me it really does depend on the day and I really do try to stop the day and I really do try to stop the day and I really do try to stop eating 3 hours before I go to bed. It eating 3 hours before I go to bed. It eating 3 hours before I go to bed. It doesn't always happen, you know, with doesn't always happen, you know, with doesn't always happen, you know, with family obligations, social obligations, family obligations, social obligations, family obligations, social obligations, but it's the habit that's important, but it's the habit that's important, but it's the habit that's important, right? So, intermittent fasting, you know, it's So, intermittent fasting, you know, it's So, intermittent fasting, you know, it's more than just one intervention as I more than just one intervention as I more than just one intervention as I mentioned. It's a behavioral tool that mentioned. It's a behavioral tool that mentioned. It's a behavioral tool that you can use to limit your calorie intake you can use to limit your calorie intake you can use to limit your calorie intake with actually without actually having to with actually without actually having to with actually without actually having to count all the calories, which some count all the calories, which some count all the calories, which some people like to do, some people don't, people like to do, some people don't, people like to do, some people don't, right? So, it's a tool, but also it's right? So, it's a tool, but also it's right? So, it's a tool, but also it's really important for a metabolic switch. really important for a metabolic switch. really important for a metabolic switch. As you mentioned, insulin sensitivity. As you mentioned, insulin sensitivity. As you mentioned, insulin sensitivity. And the metabolic switch is something And the metabolic switch is something And the metabolic switch is something that Dr. Mark Mattson coined and I love that Dr. Mark Mattson coined and I love that Dr. Mark Mattson coined and I love it because I feel like, you know, it because I feel like, you know, it because I feel like, you know, thinking about intermittent fasting in thinking about intermittent fasting in thinking about intermittent fasting in that way makes it a little more clear as that way makes it a little more clear as that way makes it a little more clear as to the benefits of it. It depends on the to the benefits of it. It depends on the to the benefits of it. It depends on the meal you have and how much exercise you meal you have and how much exercise you meal you have and how much exercise you do, right? But on average, let's say do, right? But on average, let's say do, right? But on average, let's say 11-12 hours to deplete your liver 11-12 hours to deplete your liver 11-12 hours to deplete your liver glycogen levels. And once that happens, glycogen levels. And once that happens, glycogen levels. And once that happens, you do start to burn fat and use fatty you do start to burn fat and use fatty you do start to burn fat and use fatty acids as fuel and make ketone bodies, so acids as fuel and make ketone bodies, so acids as fuel and make ketone bodies, so you go into ketogenesis, right? you go into ketogenesis, right? you go into ketogenesis, right? And that's a metabolic switch, metabolic And that's a metabolic switch, metabolic And that's a metabolic switch, metabolic flexibility. You're not You're going flexibility. You're not You're going flexibility. You're not You're going from using carbohydrates as fuel to from using carbohydrates as fuel to from using carbohydrates as fuel to using fatty acids and making ketone using fatty acids and making ketone using fatty acids and making ketone bodies as fuel. And that's something bodies as fuel. And that's something bodies as fuel. And that's something that, you know, throughout human that, you know, throughout human that, you know, throughout human evolution was ingrained, right? Like we evolution was ingrained, right? Like we evolution was ingrained, right? Like we didn't always have access to Uber Eats didn't always have access to Uber Eats didn't always have access to Uber Eats and Instacart and you just at a swipe and Instacart and you just at a swipe and Instacart and you just at a swipe you get food, right? I mean, there were you get food, right? I mean, there were you get food, right? I mean, there were many times when, you know, people had to many times when, you know, people had to many times when, you know, people had to not eat because they couldn't forage not eat because they couldn't forage not eat because they couldn't forage their foods, maybe the time of year or their foods, maybe the time of year or their foods, maybe the time of year or they couldn't hunt their food because they couldn't hunt their food because they couldn't hunt their food because they didn't they didn't they didn't get a win or whatever. I don't know. So, get a win or whatever. I don't know. So, get a win or whatever. I don't know. So, this metabolic flexibility is something this metabolic flexibility is something this metabolic flexibility is something that's really ingrained in our in our that's really ingrained in our in our that's really ingrained in our in our DNA in a sense, right? I mean, one our DNA in a sense, right? I mean, one our DNA in a sense, right? I mean, one of the reasons I like to do that is the of the reasons I like to do that is the of the reasons I like to do that is the ketone production. And why is that, you ketone production. And why is that, you ketone production. And why is that, you know, ketones are really clean They're know, ketones are really clean They're know, ketones are really clean They're clean a clean way to burn energy. So, clean a clean way to burn energy. So, clean a clean way to burn energy. So, they generate less oxidative stress, they generate less oxidative stress, they generate less oxidative stress, less oxidative products, less oxidative products, less oxidative products, but they also are energetically but they also are energetically but they also are energetically favorable in that it takes less energy favorable in that it takes less energy favorable in that it takes less energy to use them to make energy than glucose to use them to make energy than glucose to use them to make energy than glucose does. So, it takes more energy to use does. So, it takes more energy to use does. So, it takes more energy to use glucose as energy than it does ketones. glucose as energy than it does ketones. glucose as energy than it does ketones. But, [snorts] they're also a signaling But, [snorts] they're also a signaling But, [snorts] they're also a signaling molecule. So, it's a way for the body, molecule. So, it's a way for the body, molecule. So, it's a way for the body, you know, to signal to other parts of you know, to signal to other parts of you know, to signal to other parts of the body like, "Hey, the body like, "Hey, the body like, "Hey, this is a stressful time. There's no this is a stressful time. There's no this is a stressful time. There's no food. I'm, you know, burning I'm in food. I'm, you know, burning I'm in food. I'm, you know, burning I'm in ketosis. in ketosis. in ketosis. Um let's make you stronger, Um let's make you stronger, Um let's make you stronger, right?" Cuz that's kind of what right?" Cuz that's kind of what right?" Cuz that's kind of what evolution wants. Like, if you're not evolution wants. Like, if you're not evolution wants. Like, if you're not able to find or eat food, you have to be able to find or eat food, you have to be able to find or eat food, you have to be stronger to be able to do it, right? And stronger to be able to do it, right? And stronger to be able to do it, right? And so, that's kind of at the I say so, that's kind of at the I say so, that's kind of at the I say core of this metabolic switch and why core of this metabolic switch and why core of this metabolic switch and why it's important. And I think that I it's important. And I think that I it's important. And I think that I really like Mark Mattson being the really like Mark Mattson being the really like Mark Mattson being the pioneer in this. And as a neuroscientist pioneer in this. And as a neuroscientist pioneer in this. And as a neuroscientist really looking at the benefits in the really looking at the benefits in the really looking at the benefits in the brain as well, you know, these ketones brain as well, you know, these ketones brain as well, you know, these ketones like beta-hydroxybutyrate are like beta-hydroxybutyrate are like beta-hydroxybutyrate are activating, you know, growth factors activating, you know, growth factors activating, you know, growth factors like brain-derived neurotrophic factor like brain-derived neurotrophic factor like brain-derived neurotrophic factor in the brain. As you know, it's very in the brain. As you know, it's very in the brain. As you know, it's very important for, you know, learning, important for, you know, learning, important for, you know, learning, memory, you know, re- synap- synapse memory, you know, re- synap- synapse memory, you know, re- synap- synapse formation and stuff. This hugely formation and stuff. This hugely formation and stuff. This hugely important for syn- um important for syn- um important for syn- um neuroplasticity. So, it's activating neuroplasticity. So, it's activating neuroplasticity. So, it's activating beneficial compounds like that. And beneficial compounds like that. And beneficial compounds like that. And again, um it it's not going to again, um it it's not going to again, um it it's not going to happen if you're never going into this happen if you're never going into this happen if you're never going into this metabolic switch. And there's other ways metabolic switch. And there's other ways metabolic switch. And there's other ways to get there, right? So, you can limit to get there, right? So, you can limit to get there, right? So, you can limit your food, go into this ketosis, your food, go into this ketosis, your food, go into this ketosis, right? Where you're basically depleting right? Where you're basically depleting right? Where you're basically depleting your liver glycogen. your liver glycogen. your liver glycogen. Or, you can exercise a lot, right? So, Or, you can exercise a lot, right? So, Or, you can exercise a lot, right? So, your energy expenditure goes up. So, your energy expenditure goes up. So, your energy expenditure goes up. So, there's different ways to get to there's different ways to get to there's different ways to get to this metabolic switch. It doesn't this metabolic switch. It doesn't this metabolic switch. It doesn't necessarily have to be intermittent necessarily have to be intermittent necessarily have to be intermittent fasting. God. And then, I'm telling you fasting. God. And then, I'm telling you fasting. God. And then, I'm telling you this because you this because you this because you I want to tell you why I'm sort of I want to tell you why I'm sort of I want to tell you why I'm sort of back on the intermittent fasting. back on the intermittent fasting. back on the intermittent fasting. And by the way, it's not for everyone. And by the way, it's not for everyone. And by the way, it's not for everyone. Like I said, I mean, I think that you Like I said, I mean, I think that you Like I said, I mean, I think that you can find other ways to get this can find other ways to get this can find other ways to get this metabolic switch. And um for me, metabolic switch. And um for me, metabolic switch. And um for me, intermittent fasting works. And so, what intermittent fasting works. And so, what intermittent fasting works. And so, what I do typically is I will do most of the I do typically is I will do most of the I do typically is I will do most of the time my fast my workouts will be fasted. time my fast my workouts will be fasted. time my fast my workouts will be fasted. Not all the time. It it does depend on Not all the time. It it does depend on Not all the time. It it does depend on how I feel. how I feel. how I feel. &gt;&gt; What time do you typically wake up? &gt;&gt; What time do you typically wake up? &gt;&gt; What time do you typically wake up? &gt;&gt; So, I wake up like s- between 6:00 and &gt;&gt; So, I wake up like s- between 6:00 and &gt;&gt; So, I wake up like s- between 6:00 and 7:00. And if I didn't have a family, like, you And if I didn't have a family, like, you And if I didn't have a family, like, you know, getting my son ready and I would know, getting my son ready and I would know, getting my son ready and I would probably work out right away. But I probably work out right away. But I probably work out right away. But I don't end up working out until like don't end up working out until like don't end up working out until like 8:30. So I'm, you know, and I still pretty So I'm, you know, and I still pretty So I'm, you know, and I still pretty early. What time do you go to sleep if early. What time do you go to sleep if early. What time do you go to sleep if you don't mind me asking? I'm asleep you don't mind me asking? I'm asleep you don't mind me asking? I'm asleep like I'm asleep by 10. I'm usually in like I'm asleep by 10. I'm usually in like I'm asleep by 10. I'm usually in bed at 9. Takes an hour of just like, bed at 9. Takes an hour of just like, bed at 9. Takes an hour of just like, you know, hanging out and yeah. So so um you know, hanging out and yeah. So so um you know, hanging out and yeah. So so um or 9:30 sometimes, but yeah, usually or 9:30 sometimes, but yeah, usually or 9:30 sometimes, but yeah, usually 10:00 is when I'm sleeping. That's my 10:00 is when I'm sleeping. That's my 10:00 is when I'm sleeping. That's my bedtime. And uh so I do stop eating. I bedtime. And uh so I do stop eating. I bedtime. And uh so I do stop eating. I try to stop eating by 7:00 p.m. try to stop eating by 7:00 p.m. try to stop eating by 7:00 p.m. But typically my first meal on it But typically my first meal on it But typically my first meal on it depends on the day, but it'll usually be depends on the day, but it'll usually be depends on the day, but it'll usually be like around 11, maybe sometimes 12. If like around 11, maybe sometimes 12. If like around 11, maybe sometimes 12. If I'm doing a podcast, it'll be later. I'm doing a podcast, it'll be later. I'm doing a podcast, it'll be later. And um I do like to be fasted in the And um I do like to be fasted in the And um I do like to be fasted in the morning because the cognitive benefits morning because the cognitive benefits morning because the cognitive benefits is really what I'm interested in with is really what I'm interested in with is really what I'm interested in with that metabolic switch and it does come that metabolic switch and it does come that metabolic switch and it does come down to ketones and I know that um Mark down to ketones and I know that um Mark down to ketones and I know that um Mark Mattson's talked a lot about this. I had Mattson's talked a lot about this. I had Mattson's talked a lot about this. I had him on my podcast a couple year a few him on my podcast a couple year a few him on my podcast a couple year a few years ago actually. I learned so much. years ago actually. I learned so much. years ago actually. I learned so much. But the ketones like beta But the ketones like beta But the ketones like beta hydroxybutyrate are increasing GABA. hydroxybutyrate are increasing GABA. hydroxybutyrate are increasing GABA. They're like balancing the glutamate, They're like balancing the glutamate, They're like balancing the glutamate, the you know, excitatory the you know, excitatory the you know, excitatory neurotransmitter with the inhibitory neurotransmitter with the inhibitory neurotransmitter with the inhibitory one, GABA. one, GABA. one, GABA. And I think that increasing GABA is what And I think that increasing GABA is what And I think that increasing GABA is what helps me and what I love the most helps me and what I love the most helps me and what I love the most because it does help, I think, quiet because it does help, I think, quiet because it does help, I think, quiet down some of the other down some of the other down some of the other I don't know, chitter-chatter in my I don't know, chitter-chatter in my I don't know, chitter-chatter in my brain and help me focus because it's brain and help me focus because it's brain and help me focus because it's like somehow the GABA is calming in a like somehow the GABA is calming in a like somehow the GABA is calming in a way. I don't I don't know exactly. You way. I don't I don't know exactly. You way. I don't I don't know exactly. You could probably describe it better than I could probably describe it better than I could probably describe it better than I can. All I know is that I really like can. All I know is that I really like can. All I know is that I really like it. And so in the mornings, I like to it. And so in the mornings, I like to it. And so in the mornings, I like to be, you know, I like to be fasted. I be, you know, I like to be fasted. I be, you know, I like to be fasted. I like to be cognitively aware. It's when like to be cognitively aware. It's when like to be cognitively aware. It's when I get most of my productive work done. I get most of my productive work done. I get most of my productive work done. And I feel smarter. So I'm doing it. And I feel smarter. So I'm doing it. And I feel smarter. So I'm doing it. And that's why I typically like to shift my that's why I typically like to shift my that's why I typically like to shift my breakfast to later. Now, I do I would breakfast to later. Now, I do I would breakfast to later. Now, I do I would say some days I do only eat two meals say some days I do only eat two meals say some days I do only eat two meals where I am on honestly, I'm skipping where I am on honestly, I'm skipping where I am on honestly, I'm skipping the quote-unquote breakfast. But uh Uh, the quote-unquote breakfast. But uh Uh, the quote-unquote breakfast. But uh Uh, some days I do have some days I do have some days I do have three meals and, you know, oftentimes three meals and, you know, oftentimes three meals and, you know, oftentimes they're like different size meals, they're like different size meals, they're like different size meals, right? And usually my if I do have three right? And usually my if I do have three right? And usually my if I do have three meals, the third one will be the meals, the third one will be the meals, the third one will be the in-between the first meal and the second in-between the first meal and the second in-between the first meal and the second meal will be like a very like a half of meal will be like a very like a half of meal will be like a very like a half of or 3/4 of a turkey burger or something. or 3/4 of a turkey burger or something. or 3/4 of a turkey burger or something. So, it's mostly protein and it's So, it's mostly protein and it's So, it's mostly protein and it's not heavy. not heavy. not heavy. But, so I would say I'm, you know, But, so I would say I'm, you know, But, so I would say I'm, you know, usually 11:00 to 7:00 probably is when usually 11:00 to 7:00 probably is when usually 11:00 to 7:00 probably is when I'm eating my meals most days. Some I'm eating my meals most days. Some I'm eating my meals most days. Some days it's, you know, I fast for a days it's, you know, I fast for a days it's, you know, I fast for a shorter period of time. Some days I wake shorter period of time. Some days I wake shorter period of time. Some days I wake up in the morning because I did too up in the morning because I did too up in the morning because I did too early of like I, you know, I'd early of like I, you know, I'd early of like I, you know, I'd stopped eating like 4 or 5 hours stopped eating like 4 or 5 hours stopped eating like 4 or 5 hours before bed and I'm like, I need to eat. before bed and I'm like, I need to eat. before bed and I'm like, I need to eat. And I guess what? I eat and then I work And I guess what? I eat and then I work And I guess what? I eat and then I work out and it's like that's, you know, you out and it's like that's, you know, you out and it's like that's, you know, you kind of just listen to the to what your kind of just listen to the to what your kind of just listen to the to what your body's doing. Actually, Mark Mattson body's doing. Actually, Mark Mattson body's doing. Actually, Mark Mattson just published a study very just published a study very just published a study very recently showing that recently showing that recently showing that he did a I think he was doing a 5:2 he did a I think he was doing a 5:2 he did a I think he was doing a 5:2 intermittent fasting protocol where it's intermittent fasting protocol where it's intermittent fasting protocol where it's like 2 days you're getting pretty severe like 2 days you're getting pretty severe like 2 days you're getting pretty severe caloric restriction. Like you're eating caloric restriction. Like you're eating caloric restriction. Like you're eating one meal, but it's like 500 calories, one meal, but it's like 500 calories, one meal, but it's like 500 calories, you know, you know, you know, for that for the day. And it's twice 2 for that for the day. And it's twice 2 for that for the day. And it's twice 2 days 2 days out of the week. The other 5 days 2 days out of the week. The other 5 days 2 days out of the week. The other 5 days you're eating normal and compared days you're eating normal and compared days you're eating normal and compared that to calorie like eating like that to calorie like eating like that to calorie like eating like a healthy diet and they were somewhat a healthy diet and they were somewhat a healthy diet and they were somewhat calorie restricted but not quite as much calorie restricted but not quite as much calorie restricted but not quite as much as the people that were doing the as the people that were doing the as the people that were doing the fasting and they had the fasting group fasting and they had the fasting group fasting and they had the fasting group had massive cognitive benefits like 20% had massive cognitive benefits like 20% had massive cognitive benefits like 20% improvement in a battery of tests that improvement in a battery of tests that improvement in a battery of tests that were done. were done. were done. &gt;&gt; He attributes that to the ketones and &gt;&gt; He attributes that to the ketones and &gt;&gt; He attributes that to the ketones and the effect of ketones on GABA. the effect of ketones on GABA. the effect of ketones on GABA. &gt;&gt; attributes it to the ketones and like &gt;&gt; attributes it to the ketones and like &gt;&gt; attributes it to the ketones and like can you get that to some degree with can you get that to some degree with can you get that to some degree with caloric restriction? Probably, caloric restriction? Probably, caloric restriction? Probably, especially the more severe caloric especially the more severe caloric especially the more severe caloric restriction you do. You can, if we're restriction you do. You can, if we're restriction you do. You can, if we're talking about weight loss, talking about weight loss, talking about weight loss, caloric restriction's key, right? You caloric restriction's key, right? You caloric restriction's key, right? You have to have that. If we're talking have to have that. If we're talking have to have that. If we're talking about the cardiovascular reset, like about the cardiovascular reset, like about the cardiovascular reset, like caloric restriction, if you're eating caloric restriction, if you're eating caloric restriction, if you're eating meals right before bed, you're not going meals right before bed, you're not going meals right before bed, you're not going to get that. Like that those studies to get that. Like that those studies to get that. Like that those studies have been done. I think, you know, have been done. I think, you know, have been done. I think, you know, Courtney Peterson was some of the one of Courtney Peterson was some of the one of Courtney Peterson was some of the one of the first ones to really show that the first ones to really show that the first ones to really show that effect on blood pressure, you know, like effect on blood pressure, you know, like effect on blood pressure, you know, like really significant. In fact, if you if really significant. In fact, if you if really significant. In fact, if you if you do early time restricted eating and you do early time restricted eating and you do early time restricted eating and stop eating, you know, I don't know how stop eating, you know, I don't know how stop eating, you know, I don't know how early in the day it was, maybe 6:00 early in the day it was, maybe 6:00 early in the day it was, maybe 6:00 Maybe it was 8:00 p.m. but you know, Maybe it was 8:00 p.m. but you know, Maybe it was 8:00 p.m. but you know, there was like a blood pressure drop there was like a blood pressure drop there was like a blood pressure drop that was like 10, you know, 10 I think that was like 10, you know, 10 I think that was like 10, you know, 10 I think was um was um was um uh points or something millimeters of points or something millimeters of points or something millimeters of mercury. &gt;&gt; Significant. &gt;&gt; Significant. &gt;&gt; Significant. &gt;&gt; Is it &gt;&gt; Is it &gt;&gt; Is it &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yep. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yep. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yep. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; So, I mean that's very significant. I &gt;&gt; So, I mean that's very significant. I &gt;&gt; So, I mean that's very significant. I saw it's on magnitude of what you'd see saw it's on magnitude of what you'd see saw it's on magnitude of what you'd see with like some of the first line, you with like some of the first line, you with like some of the first line, you know, drugs that are used to treat drugs that are used to treat drugs that are used to treat hypertension. I would never say for hypertension. I would never say for hypertension. I would never say for someone to do that, but I'm just saying someone to do that, but I'm just saying someone to do that, but I'm just saying it's significant. And that's not it's significant. And that's not it's significant. And that's not something that you typically see if something that you typically see if something that you typically see if you're eating you know, fewer calories you're eating you know, fewer calories you're eating you know, fewer calories but you're eating constantly throughout but you're eating constantly throughout but you're eating constantly throughout the day. So, I do think there are the day. So, I do think there are the day. So, I do think there are special benefits that can be had, but special benefits that can be had, but special benefits that can be had, but again, it's also a tool that people use. again, it's also a tool that people use. again, it's also a tool that people use. I use it as a tool as well. I don't like I use it as a tool as well. I don't like I use it as a tool as well. I don't like to count calories. Like I don't, you to count calories. Like I don't, you to count calories. Like I don't, you know, some people do and that's fine. know, some people do and that's fine. know, some people do and that's fine. Then, you know, that's the way Then, you know, that's the way Then, you know, that's the way you can you can do it. But, I like it you can you can do it. But, I like it you can you can do it. But, I like it for the metabolic switch as well. for the metabolic switch as well. for the metabolic switch as well. &gt;&gt; Definitely. &gt;&gt; Definitely. &gt;&gt; Definitely. &gt;&gt; Um if I were an endurance athlete &gt;&gt; Um if I were an endurance athlete &gt;&gt; Um if I were an endurance athlete running, you know, 10 14 miles a day, I running, you know, 10 14 miles a day, I running, you know, 10 14 miles a day, I wouldn't have to do [clears throat] wouldn't have to do [clears throat] wouldn't have to do [clears throat] this. That would be my metabolic switch. this. That would be my metabolic switch. this. That would be my metabolic switch. And it's not that I'm not metabolically And it's not that I'm not metabolically And it's not that I'm not metabolically flexible. I mean, I do I think you can flexible. I mean, I do I think you can flexible. I mean, I do I think you can just training itself, you know, does to just training itself, you know, does to just training itself, you know, does to some degree help with metabolic some degree help with metabolic some degree help with metabolic flexibility, right? The ability to flexibility, right? The ability to flexibility, right? The ability to switch between switch between switch between burning glucose and carbohydrates and burning glucose and carbohydrates and burning glucose and carbohydrates and then burning burn using fat and then burning burn using fat and then burning burn using fat and fatty acids as your energy source. It's fatty acids as your energy source. It's fatty acids as your energy source. It's that I really I want that I want that real I really I want that I want that real I really I want that I want that real switch to be on and I want it to be on switch to be on and I want it to be on switch to be on and I want it to be on for a little bit of time and then I for a little bit of time and then I for a little bit of time and then I want to turn it off by eating. You know, want to turn it off by eating. You know, want to turn it off by eating. You know, I'm not I'm not I'm not starving myself and I think you can go starving myself and I think you can go starving myself and I think you can go too far with exercise and with your too far with exercise and with your too far with exercise and with your fasting. The problems with fasting and fasting. The problems with fasting and fasting. The problems with fasting and the people that are like, oh fasting's the people that are like, oh fasting's the people that are like, oh fasting's terrible for you. I mean, it comes down terrible for you. I mean, it comes down terrible for you. I mean, it comes down to one, to one, to one, they were all about it's like the weight they were all about it's like the weight they were all about it's like the weight loss is not just due to intermittent loss is not just due to intermittent loss is not just due to intermittent fasting itself, it's due to calorie fasting itself, it's due to calorie fasting itself, it's due to calorie restriction. Guess what? They were restriction. Guess what? They were restriction. Guess what? They were right. They were right. Number two, right. They were right. Number two, right. They were right. Number two, they're afraid of losing muscle. And I they're afraid of losing muscle. And I they're afraid of losing muscle. And I think we have enough data now that it's think we have enough data now that it's think we have enough data now that it's like if you're training, if you're doing like if you're training, if you're doing like if you're training, if you're doing resistance training, you're not going to resistance training, you're not going to resistance training, you're not going to be losing muscle. Now, maybe you won't be losing muscle. Now, maybe you won't be losing muscle. Now, maybe you won't gain as much as if you were gain as much as if you were gain as much as if you were eating more protein. But, um you could eating more protein. But, um you could eating more protein. But, um you could you could just eat more protein um you could just eat more protein um you could just eat more protein um within the window that you're eating and within the window that you're eating and within the window that you're eating and be fine, right? So, I think that's the be fine, right? So, I think that's the be fine, right? So, I think that's the other thing that people are worried other thing that people are worried other thing that people are worried about is muscle loss, including myself. about is muscle loss, including myself. about is muscle loss, including myself. And I train so much now, and it just And I train so much now, and it just And I train so much now, and it just works well for me, and I feel good, and works well for me, and I feel good, and works well for me, and I feel good, and I it's like this clean feeling. You feel I it's like this clean feeling. You feel I it's like this clean feeling. You feel cognitively sharp. And it works. And I cognitively sharp. And it works. And I cognitively sharp. And it works. And I think that the metabolic switch is think that the metabolic switch is think that the metabolic switch is something to not be scared of as long as something to not be scared of as long as something to not be scared of as long as you're not, again, going to the extreme, you're not, again, going to the extreme, you're not, again, going to the extreme, right? And if you don't want to train right? And if you don't want to train right? And if you don't want to train while you're fasted, don't train while you're fasted, don't train while you're fasted, don't train while you're fasted. You don't have to, you you're fasted. You don't have to, you you're fasted. You don't have to, you know? I think there's a little bit of know? I think there's a little bit of know? I think there's a little bit of an added benefit that works for me in an added benefit that works for me in an added benefit that works for me in terms of burning fat, which is what I, terms of burning fat, which is what I, terms of burning fat, which is what I, you know, particularly visceral fat. And you know, particularly visceral fat. And you know, particularly visceral fat. And to me that that's what works to me that that's what works to me that that's what works well. But, um you can obviously, like if well. But, um you can obviously, like if well. But, um you can obviously, like if you're training hard and a lot and you're training hard and a lot and you're training hard and a lot and really fasting, maybe that's too much. really fasting, maybe that's too much. really fasting, maybe that's too much. It's too much of a stress. So, you have It's too much of a stress. So, you have It's too much of a stress. So, you have to kind of figure it out for yourself. to kind of figure it out for yourself. to kind of figure it out for yourself. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think the uh &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think the uh &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think the uh the known increase in adrenaline from the known increase in adrenaline from the known increase in adrenaline from being slightly fasted is awesome for being slightly fasted is awesome for being slightly fasted is awesome for cognitive function. Um I think it allows cognitive function. Um I think it allows cognitive function. Um I think it allows people to people to people to ingest fewer stimulants in the form of ingest fewer stimulants in the form of ingest fewer stimulants in the form of caffeine. You can, you know, you don't caffeine. You can, you know, you don't caffeine. You can, you know, you don't need as much caffeine when you're doing need as much caffeine when you're doing need as much caffeine when you're doing some fasting. I What you describe is um some fasting. I What you describe is um some fasting. I What you describe is um similar to what I do, although I notice similar to what I do, although I notice similar to what I do, although I notice these days I'm waking up hungrier and these days I'm waking up hungrier and these days I'm waking up hungrier and hungrier, and I attribute that actually hungrier, and I attribute that actually hungrier, and I attribute that actually to my last bite of food to my last bite of food to my last bite of food you know, coming a little bit earlier in you know, coming a little bit earlier in you know, coming a little bit earlier in the day and further from sleep. And also the day and further from sleep. And also the day and further from sleep. And also that thermogenic effect of eating raises that thermogenic effect of eating raises that thermogenic effect of eating raises core body temperature, and you know, core body temperature, and you know, core body temperature, and you know, to fall asleep, you want your body to fall asleep, you want your body to fall asleep, you want your body temperature dropping. So, it all starts temperature dropping. So, it all starts temperature dropping. So, it all starts to What You know what I think is kind of to What You know what I think is kind of to What You know what I think is kind of uh is very exciting to me is that for a uh is very exciting to me is that for a uh is very exciting to me is that for a few years there, it seemed like there few years there, it seemed like there few years there, it seemed like there were just so many things, so many were just so many things, so many were just so many things, so many protocols, so many studies. But, I when protocols, so many studies. But, I when protocols, so many studies. But, I when I think about cortisol high in the I think about cortisol high in the I think about cortisol high in the morning, low in the evening, bracketing morning, low in the evening, bracketing morning, low in the evening, bracketing the day, that what works best for sleep, the day, that what works best for sleep, the day, that what works best for sleep, but what you're describing, certainly but what you're describing, certainly but what you're describing, certainly today you really, in addition to many today you really, in addition to many today you really, in addition to many other things, really clarified the other things, really clarified the other things, really clarified the relationship between gut and relationship between gut and relationship between gut and inflammation and brain and other inflammation and brain and other inflammation and brain and other tissues. Things start to fall into bins that Things start to fall into bins that Things start to fall into bins that it's, you know, it's, you know, it's, you know, like all of biology so beautifully like all of biology so beautifully like all of biology so beautifully organized that it doesn't mean long list organized that it doesn't mean long list organized that it doesn't mean long list of things for people to do. I love the of things for people to do. I love the of things for people to do. I love the idea that while it sounds like you're idea that while it sounds like you're idea that while it sounds like you're just saying, "Oh, if I wake up and I'm just saying, "Oh, if I wake up and I'm just saying, "Oh, if I wake up and I'm hungry, I eat. And if I'm not and I hungry, I eat. And if I'm not and I hungry, I eat. And if I'm not and I think I can train faster, I like to think I can train faster, I like to think I can train faster, I like to train faster." That might seem like a train faster." That might seem like a train faster." That might seem like a like an obvious thing to some, but I like an obvious thing to some, but I like an obvious thing to some, but I think it's so critical because the think it's so critical because the think it's so critical because the mechanism that you're chasing in both mechanism that you're chasing in both mechanism that you're chasing in both cases is the same. You're trying to get cases is the same. You're trying to get cases is the same. You're trying to get great sleep, great workouts, but great sleep, great workouts, but great sleep, great workouts, but you're not trying to optimize the you're not trying to optimize the you're not trying to optimize the workout to the point where, you know, workout to the point where, you know, workout to the point where, you know, you disrupt your sleep or you insist on you disrupt your sleep or you insist on you disrupt your sleep or you insist on doing something like eating or fasting, doing something like eating or fasting, doing something like eating or fasting, whatever it is. So, the find out what whatever it is. So, the find out what whatever it is. So, the find out what works for you thing is so crucial works for you thing is so crucial works for you thing is so crucial because it's about feel that fits into a because it's about feel that fits into a because it's about feel that fits into a logic. And I have to say And I have to say And I have to say that's initially what drew me to your that's initially what drew me to your that's initially what drew me to your work is there's a logic You're not just work is there's a logic You're not just work is there's a logic You're not just saying, "Okay, this study said this, so saying, "Okay, this study said this, so saying, "Okay, this study said this, so I'm going to do this." It fits into a I'm going to do this." It fits into a I'm going to do this." It fits into a broader logic that comes from your broader logic that comes from your broader logic that comes from your training. So, I just That's a just a training. So, I just That's a just a training. So, I just That's a just a point of gratitude and I hope it will point of gratitude and I hope it will point of gratitude and I hope it will frame in people's minds that yes, do frame in people's minds that yes, do frame in people's minds that yes, do what you feel, do what works for you, what you feel, do what works for you, what you feel, do what works for you, but try and frame it in a certain logic. but try and frame it in a certain logic. but try and frame it in a certain logic. And that will cuz that's actually what And that will cuz that's actually what And that will cuz that's actually what gives you flexibility over time. Like, gives you flexibility over time. Like, gives you flexibility over time. Like, "Oh, you're traveling, you have to eat a "Oh, you're traveling, you have to eat a "Oh, you're traveling, you have to eat a little later. Okay, the next morning little later. Okay, the next morning little later. Okay, the next morning maybe train fasted." Or vice versa. maybe train fasted." Or vice versa. maybe train fasted." Or vice versa. &gt;&gt; about the habit. Exactly, it's about the &gt;&gt; about the habit. Exactly, it's about the &gt;&gt; about the habit. Exactly, it's about the habit. And there are days when I just habit. And there are days when I just habit. And there are days when I just like I can't train fasted or there are like I can't train fasted or there are like I can't train fasted or there are days when I wake up and I have to eat. days when I wake up and I have to eat. days when I wake up and I have to eat. Exactly, where you you, you know. And Exactly, where you you, you know. And Exactly, where you you, you know. And there are days when I nights when I have there are days when I nights when I have there are days when I nights when I have when I'm eating later because of social when I'm eating later because of social when I'm eating later because of social obligations and I don't freak out about obligations and I don't freak out about obligations and I don't freak out about it because it's about the habit. it because it's about the habit. it because it's about the habit. &gt;&gt; I like the idea of one metabolic switch &gt;&gt; I like the idea of one metabolic switch &gt;&gt; I like the idea of one metabolic switch per day. You know, you said you could per day. You know, you said you could per day. You know, you said you could get it from exercise and I thought, you get it from exercise and I thought, you get it from exercise and I thought, you know, I can really imagine that in 5 know, I can really imagine that in 5 know, I can really imagine that in 5 years a concept of health that years a concept of health that years a concept of health that hopefully everyone understands out there hopefully everyone understands out there hopefully everyone understands out there is that find a way to generate the is that find a way to generate the is that find a way to generate the metabolic switch once per day. Maybe you metabolic switch once per day. Maybe you metabolic switch once per day. Maybe you fast and exercise. Maybe you just fast and exercise. Maybe you just fast and exercise. Maybe you just exercise. Maybe you just fast cuz you exercise. Maybe you just fast cuz you exercise. Maybe you just fast cuz you can't exercise because people's can't exercise because people's can't exercise because people's schedules are constrained, but the schedules are constrained, but the schedules are constrained, but the notion of the metabolic switch is being notion of the metabolic switch is being notion of the metabolic switch is being Here's where it fits in exactly. The Here's where it fits in exactly. The Here's where it fits in exactly. The logic is you want the metabolic switch. logic is you want the metabolic switch. logic is you want the metabolic switch. &gt;&gt; You do. And it's not just, you know, &gt;&gt; You do. And it's not just, you know, &gt;&gt; You do. And it's not just, you know, there's other components this metabolic there's other components this metabolic there's other components this metabolic switch that we haven't even discussed, switch that we haven't even discussed, switch that we haven't even discussed, which is like when you're in that fasted which is like when you're in that fasted which is like when you're in that fasted state, when you're in the ketosis, like state, when you're in the ketosis, like state, when you're in the ketosis, like that's also repair mode for your body, that's also repair mode for your body, that's also repair mode for your body, right? So, there's the fed state, the right? So, there's the fed state, the right? So, there's the fed state, the grow, anabolic, and of course that we're grow, anabolic, and of course that we're grow, anabolic, and of course that we're all obsessed with anabolic now because all obsessed with anabolic now because all obsessed with anabolic now because it's associated with muscle growth, it's associated with muscle growth, it's associated with muscle growth, right? But there's also the repair and right? But there's also the repair and right? But there's also the repair and recovery state, right? And so, you don't recovery state, right? And so, you don't recovery state, right? And so, you don't always want the growth on, right? You always want the growth on, right? You always want the growth on, right? You want to repair damage, and repairing want to repair damage, and repairing want to repair damage, and repairing damage can be damage to DNA. A lot of damage can be damage to DNA. A lot of damage can be damage to DNA. A lot of these genes are activated, you know, these genes are activated, you know, these genes are activated, you know, when you're in a nutrient deprived when you're in a nutrient deprived when you're in a nutrient deprived state, right? When you're in deprived state, right? When you're in deprived state, right? When you're in that metabolic switch. And autophagy, that metabolic switch. And autophagy, that metabolic switch. And autophagy, and that's another one that people some and that's another one that people some and that's another one that people some It's a buzz It's a buzzword now, but it It's a buzz It's a buzzword now, but it It's a buzz It's a buzzword now, but it is something that is activated. It's is something that is activated. It's is something that is activated. It's First of all, we have basal amount of First of all, we have basal amount of First of all, we have basal amount of autophagy going on at any point, right? autophagy going on at any point, right? autophagy going on at any point, right? Like that's happening. Like that's happening. Like that's happening. Like &gt;&gt; Yeah, you don't have to fast. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you don't have to fast. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you don't have to fast. &gt;&gt; to fast. Exactly. &gt;&gt; to fast. Exactly. &gt;&gt; to fast. Exactly. &gt;&gt; deficit, which will also exacerbate it. &gt;&gt; deficit, which will also exacerbate it. &gt;&gt; deficit, which will also exacerbate it. Yeah. &gt;&gt; do have fasted activated autophagy, and &gt;&gt; do have fasted activated autophagy, and &gt;&gt; do have fasted activated autophagy, and certain tissues are more sensitive, like certain tissues are more sensitive, like certain tissues are more sensitive, like the liver and the brain, actually. And the liver and the brain, actually. And the liver and the brain, actually. And so, you know, we don't have a lot of so, you know, we don't have a lot of so, you know, we don't have a lot of human data on that in terms of like human data on that in terms of like human data on that in terms of like fasting Exercise also activates it. We fasting Exercise also activates it. We fasting Exercise also activates it. We don't have a lot of great quality don't have a lot of great quality don't have a lot of great quality human data, and that's for a lot of human data, and that's for a lot of human data, and that's for a lot of reasons. One is reasons. One is reasons. One is the tissues that are most responsive to the tissues that are most responsive to the tissues that are most responsive to fasting-induced autophagy are not blood fasting-induced autophagy are not blood fasting-induced autophagy are not blood cells. In fact, like blood cells are cells. In fact, like blood cells are cells. In fact, like blood cells are pretty restricted in their response to pretty restricted in their response to pretty restricted in their response to fasted-induced autophagy, but that's the fasted-induced autophagy, but that's the fasted-induced autophagy, but that's the easiest cell to act, you know, to access easiest cell to act, you know, to access easiest cell to act, you know, to access if you're going to measure autophagy in if you're going to measure autophagy in if you're going to measure autophagy in humans, right? Muscle biopsies have been humans, right? Muscle biopsies have been humans, right? Muscle biopsies have been done. That's The muscle's also response done. That's The muscle's also response done. That's The muscle's also response responsive to fasting-induced responsive to fasting-induced responsive to fasting-induced autophagy. It's responsive to autophagy. It's responsive to autophagy. It's responsive to exercise-induced autophagy. By the way, exercise-induced autophagy. By the way, exercise-induced autophagy. By the way, the exercise again, it's increasing the exercise again, it's increasing the exercise again, it's increasing energy expenditure, so at the end of the energy expenditure, so at the end of the energy expenditure, so at the end of the day, you're getting into that day, you're getting into that day, you're getting into that sort of ketosis, right? state. sort of ketosis, right? state. sort of ketosis, right? state. The metabolic switch. The metabolic switch. The metabolic switch. So, um there are studies showing that So, um there are studies showing that So, um there are studies showing that there's a signal there, there's a signal there, there's a signal there, uh but, you know, for some people it's uh but, you know, for some people it's uh but, you know, for some people it's not enough. Well, it's not enough, we not enough. Well, it's not enough, we not enough. Well, it's not enough, we don't really know, and you can't go off don't really know, and you can't go off don't really know, and you can't go off the animal data, and, you know, I think the animal data, and, you know, I think the animal data, and, you know, I think to some degree to some degree to some degree it's going to be hard to go get a liver. it's going to be hard to go get a liver. it's going to be hard to go get a liver. I mean, maybe we'll have some tools soon I mean, maybe we'll have some tools soon I mean, maybe we'll have some tools soon that we can easily access a, you know, that we can easily access a, you know, that we can easily access a, you know, liver biopsy, and that'd be great for liver biopsy, and that'd be great for liver biopsy, and that'd be great for many reasons, right? Not just looking at many reasons, right? Not just looking at many reasons, right? Not just looking at autophagy. But, I think that it to some autophagy. But, I think that it to some autophagy. But, I think that it to some degree you kind of just have to know degree you kind of just have to know degree you kind of just have to know that, okay, that, okay, that, okay, autophagy's happening right now in our autophagy's happening right now in our autophagy's happening right now in our in our cells. Like, so we know that it's in our cells. Like, so we know that it's in our cells. Like, so we know that it's activated by activated by activated by like fasting, by exercise, by these like fasting, by exercise, by these like fasting, by exercise, by these types of stress, and so why wouldn't it types of stress, and so why wouldn't it types of stress, and so why wouldn't it be increased somewhat? And when I be increased somewhat? And when I be increased somewhat? And when I say autophagy, I'm talking about say autophagy, I'm talking about say autophagy, I'm talking about clearing out gunk that's built up in clearing out gunk that's built up in clearing out gunk that's built up in your cell, you know, throughout the day. your cell, you know, throughout the day. your cell, you know, throughout the day. We're talking about pieces of DNA, We're talking about pieces of DNA, We're talking about pieces of DNA, fragments of DNA, we're talking about fragments of DNA, we're talking about fragments of DNA, we're talking about protein aggregates that didn't get protein aggregates that didn't get protein aggregates that didn't get They're either properly, like, not They're either properly, like, not They're either properly, like, not properly folding, or they're not being properly folding, or they're not being properly folding, or they're not being degraded, right? All sorts of stuff, degraded, right? All sorts of stuff, degraded, right? All sorts of stuff, right? And it's important. This is a right? And it's important. This is a right? And it's important. This is a cleanup process. It's important. And so, cleanup process. It's important. And so, cleanup process. It's important. And so, again, that's another part of the again, that's another part of the again, that's another part of the metabolic switch that I think is it's metabolic switch that I think is it's metabolic switch that I think is it's important to think about because we are important to think about because we are important to think about because we are really obsessed with anabolic, really obsessed with anabolic, really obsessed with anabolic, is it anabolic? It's great. You do want is it anabolic? It's great. You do want is it anabolic? It's great. You do want to You definitely want to grow muscle, to You definitely want to grow muscle, to You definitely want to grow muscle, right? You do You do want to grow new right? You do You do want to grow new right? You do You do want to grow new brain cells and stuff, too, but But, you brain cells and stuff, too, but But, you brain cells and stuff, too, but But, you also want to repair, and you want to also want to repair, and you want to also want to repair, and you want to have recovery, and that's have recovery, and that's have recovery, and that's another, you know, it's like the yin and the you know, it's like the yin and the you know, it's like the yin and the yang, right? You kind of want both. So, yang, right? You kind of want both. So, yang, right? You kind of want both. So, I think that's important to think about I think that's important to think about I think that's important to think about as well. Um and fasting, intermittent as well. Um and fasting, intermittent as well. Um and fasting, intermittent fasting, I do I like the daily metabolic fasting, I do I like the daily metabolic fasting, I do I like the daily metabolic switch. It may not be for everyone, you switch. It may not be for everyone, you switch. It may not be for everyone, you know? I mean, like I said, it's not I do know? I mean, like I said, it's not I do know? I mean, like I said, it's not I do think that you can find other ways to think that you can find other ways to think that you can find other ways to get there, exercise being the big one. get there, exercise being the big one. get there, exercise being the big one. Some people do caloric restriction. Some people do caloric restriction. Some people do caloric restriction. Some people don't need to. Caloric people don't need to. Caloric people don't need to. Caloric restriction is something that helps if restriction is something that helps if restriction is something that helps if you're trying to lose weight, right? Um you're trying to lose weight, right? Um you're trying to lose weight, right? Um it helps if you're trying to lose it helps if you're trying to lose it helps if you're trying to lose visceral fat. It's one of the main ways visceral fat. It's one of the main ways visceral fat. It's one of the main ways you can do it. Intermittent fasting, you can do it. Intermittent fasting, you can do it. Intermittent fasting, caloric restriction, exercise, aerobic caloric restriction, exercise, aerobic caloric restriction, exercise, aerobic exercise that helps lose visceral fat. exercise that helps lose visceral fat. exercise that helps lose visceral fat. But, I mean, obviously, we don't want But, I mean, obviously, we don't want But, I mean, obviously, we don't want always want to be in caloric deficit, always want to be in caloric deficit, always want to be in caloric deficit, but we always don't want to be but we always don't want to be but we always don't want to be constantly eating either. constantly eating either. constantly eating either. And that's why it comes down to, I And that's why it comes down to, I And that's why it comes down to, I think, the simple rule for people, like think, the simple rule for people, like think, the simple rule for people, like if they're going to do some sort of if they're going to do some sort of if they're going to do some sort of metabolic switch, some sort of metabolic switch, some sort of metabolic switch, some sort of intermittent fast, it would be like, intermittent fast, it would be like, intermittent fast, it would be like, "Okay, let's try to at least stop eating "Okay, let's try to at least stop eating "Okay, let's try to at least stop eating 3 hours before bed." Because then you're 3 hours before bed." Because then you're 3 hours before bed." Because then you're at least going to be extending that fast at least going to be extending that fast at least going to be extending that fast somewhat by 3 hours, right? somewhat by 3 hours, right? somewhat by 3 hours, right? So, I think that's And then plus you're So, I think that's And then plus you're So, I think that's And then plus you're getting that the cardiovascular benefits getting that the cardiovascular benefits getting that the cardiovascular benefits that are really they seem to be that are really they seem to be that are really they seem to be important. And then not eating at night, important. And then not eating at night, important. And then not eating at night, so there's all these studies that have so there's all these studies that have so there's all these studies that have come out of Israel. come out of Israel. come out of Israel. I think it's Is it Jakubowicz, I think it's Is it Jakubowicz, I think it's Is it Jakubowicz, Jakubowicz and Freud? They're two Jakubowicz and Freud? They're two Jakubowicz and Freud? They're two researchers. Um I mean, Satchin Panda, I remember Um I mean, Satchin Panda, I remember Um I mean, Satchin Panda, I remember years ago showed me one of the studies years ago showed me one of the studies years ago showed me one of the studies that was like published in Science that was like published in Science that was like published in Science showing that if you have the same exact showing that if you have the same exact showing that if you have the same exact meal, same calorie intake, same meal, same calorie intake, same meal, same calorie intake, same composition, macronutrient composition, macronutrient composition, macronutrient composition, in the morning, the afternoon, and the in the morning, the afternoon, and the in the morning, the afternoon, and the evening, the insulin response is like is evening, the insulin response is like is evening, the insulin response is like is different. Like you're the most insulin different. Like you're the most insulin different. Like you're the most insulin sensitive early in the morning. As you sensitive early in the morning. As you sensitive early in the morning. As you start to go towards the evening, and start to go towards the evening, and start to go towards the evening, and particularly 3 hours before your natural particularly 3 hours before your natural particularly 3 hours before your natural bedtime, you your mel- your melatonin bedtime, you your mel- your melatonin bedtime, you your mel- your melatonin levels naturally rise, right? And as you levels naturally rise, right? And as you levels naturally rise, right? And as you know, you know, melatonin is important know, you know, melatonin is important know, you know, melatonin is important for the onset of sleep and preparing for the onset of sleep and preparing for the onset of sleep and preparing the body for sleep, but it's also the body for sleep, but it's also the body for sleep, but it's also preparing the other organs for rest and preparing the other organs for rest and preparing the other organs for rest and recovery, including the pancreas, which recovery, including the pancreas, which recovery, including the pancreas, which is making insulin. And so, you're not is making insulin. And so, you're not is making insulin. And so, you're not making as much insulin when it's closer making as much insulin when it's closer making as much insulin when it's closer to your natural bedtime because of the to your natural bedtime because of the to your natural bedtime because of the melatonin levels that are rising. And melatonin levels that are rising. And melatonin levels that are rising. And so, you don't want to be eating a so, you don't want to be eating a so, you don't want to be eating a particularly a carbohydrate-rich meal, particularly a carbohydrate-rich meal, particularly a carbohydrate-rich meal, but a meal, you're not going to be as but a meal, you're not going to be as but a meal, you're not going to be as insulin sensitive. insulin sensitive. insulin sensitive. &gt;&gt; In the last 3 hours before sleep. &gt;&gt; In the last 3 hours before sleep. &gt;&gt; In the last 3 hours before sleep. &gt;&gt; Yeah, when you're starting to get into &gt;&gt; Yeah, when you're starting to get into &gt;&gt; Yeah, when you're starting to get into that melatonin rising phase of, you that melatonin rising phase of, you that melatonin rising phase of, you know, of your cycle. know, of your cycle. know, of your cycle. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's interesting. I think when &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's interesting. I think when &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's interesting. I think when people hear, "Okay, you're most insulin people hear, "Okay, you're most insulin people hear, "Okay, you're most insulin sensitive in the morning, that would be sensitive in the morning, that would be sensitive in the morning, that would be the time to eat your biggest meal." Then the time to eat your biggest meal." Then the time to eat your biggest meal." Then people say, "Wait, but then I'm trying people say, "Wait, but then I'm trying people say, "Wait, but then I'm trying to fast before and I'm trying to fast before and I'm trying to fast before and I'm trying to exercise and like how do I do this?" I exercise and like how do I do this?" I exercise and like how do I do this?" I think that's where for them the think that's where for them the think that's where for them the confusion comes in and it to me it's confusion comes in and it to me it's confusion comes in and it to me it's very simple. Uh just because your very simple. Uh just because your very simple. Uh just because your insulin sensitivity is highest first insulin sensitivity is highest first insulin sensitivity is highest first thing in the morning, doesn't mean you thing in the morning, doesn't mean you thing in the morning, doesn't mean you have to eat right away. I mean, it just have to eat right away. I mean, it just have to eat right away. I mean, it just means avoid eating too close to bedtime, avoid eating too close to bedtime, avoid eating too close to bedtime, right? Sometime during the day. And right? Sometime during the day. And right? Sometime during the day. And also, if you exercise fasted or after a also, if you exercise fasted or after a also, if you exercise fasted or after a small snack, it's kind of interesting small snack, it's kind of interesting small snack, it's kind of interesting what Stacy Sims said, not everyone what Stacy Sims said, not everyone what Stacy Sims said, not everyone should exercise fasted. She said should exercise fasted. She said should exercise fasted. She said especially a lot of women don't like to especially a lot of women don't like to especially a lot of women don't like to do that. She didn't say eat a meal. She do that. She didn't say eat a meal. She do that. She didn't say eat a meal. She said like have a scoop of whey protein said like have a scoop of whey protein said like have a scoop of whey protein with some I think she said with like with some I think she said with like with some I think she said with like some almond milk in it. And it and you some almond milk in it. And it and you some almond milk in it. And it and you couldn't believe the response on the couldn't believe the response on the couldn't believe the response on the internet. It was like vindication, internet. It was like vindication, internet. It was like vindication, right? And I get it. It was like it right? And I get it. It was like it right? And I get it. It was like it vindicated people's experience like, vindicated people's experience like, vindicated people's experience like, "Oh, thank you. Thank you." And "Oh, thank you. Thank you." And "Oh, thank you. Thank you." And it told me something really important it told me something really important it told me something really important about the kind of sociology of what we about the kind of sociology of what we about the kind of sociology of what we do, which is when something validates do, which is when something validates do, which is when something validates people's experience, people's experience, people's experience, they love it. they love it. they love it. But it doesn't mean that the things that But it doesn't mean that the things that But it doesn't mean that the things that work for other people don't work. work for other people don't work. work for other people don't work. And I think that that's the part And I think that that's the part And I think that that's the part that gets lost. And so, if a study shows that gets lost. And so, if a study shows that gets lost. And so, if a study shows that insulin sensitivity is highest in that insulin sensitivity is highest in that insulin sensitivity is highest in the morning, the morning, the morning, but you can only exercise first thing in but you can only exercise first thing in but you can only exercise first thing in the morning, what do you do? You know, the morning, what do you do? You know, the morning, what do you do? You know, so um you do the best you can. All right. um you do the best you can. All right. um you do the best you can. All right. All right. I think that's where it comes All right. I think that's where it comes All right. I think that's where it comes down to. In fact, I meant to ask you down to. In fact, I meant to ask you down to. In fact, I meant to ask you earlier and it is a good time to um earlier and it is a good time to um earlier and it is a good time to um to talk about this. Uh you've described to talk about this. Uh you've described to talk about this. Uh you've described that if you are slightly sleep deprived, that if you are slightly sleep deprived, that if you are slightly sleep deprived, so not for 4 hours per night or an so not for 4 hours per night or an so not for 4 hours per night or an all-nighter, but if you've only slept 5 all-nighter, but if you've only slept 5 all-nighter, but if you've only slept 5 or let's say you're getting an hour or let's say you're getting an hour or let's say you're getting an hour or two less than your normal ration of two less than your normal ration of two less than your normal ration of sleep, there's some pretty significant sleep, there's some pretty significant sleep, there's some pretty significant inflammation that's that occurs. That's inflammation that's that occurs. That's inflammation that's that occurs. That's not good. But I've heard you cover that not good. But I've heard you cover that not good. But I've heard you cover that exercising can actually offset some of exercising can actually offset some of exercising can actually offset some of that inflammation. This answers a that inflammation. This answers a that inflammation. This answers a an important and common question, a an important and common question, a an important and common question, which is if I have to pick between sleep which is if I have to pick between sleep which is if I have to pick between sleep and exercise, what do I do? Um and it and exercise, what do I do? Um and it and exercise, what do I do? Um and it sounds like if it's one night poor sounds like if it's one night poor sounds like if it's one night poor sleep, exercise. But you but you don't sleep, exercise. But you but you don't sleep, exercise. But you but you don't want to make it a habit. That's Do I want to make it a habit. That's Do I want to make it a habit. That's Do I have that right? have that right? have that right? &gt;&gt; I mean, so this data, a lot of it &gt;&gt; I mean, so this data, a lot of it &gt;&gt; I mean, so this data, a lot of it actually comes from you can cause even actually comes from you can cause even actually comes from you can cause even acute insulin resistance after like a acute insulin resistance after like a acute insulin resistance after like a night of sleep deprivation, certainly night of sleep deprivation, certainly night of sleep deprivation, certainly after two to three nights of sleep after two to three nights of sleep after two to three nights of sleep deprivation. And you know, again, a lot deprivation. And you know, again, a lot deprivation. And you know, again, a lot of that's coming down to some of the of that's coming down to some of the of that's coming down to some of the things we've already talked about. things we've already talked about. things we've already talked about. And but exercise can help basically And but exercise can help basically And but exercise can help basically negate a lot of that. And I learned that negate a lot of that. And I learned that negate a lot of that. And I learned that first hand through experience when I was first hand through experience when I was first hand through experience when I was wearing a continuous glucose monitor. I wearing a continuous glucose monitor. I wearing a continuous glucose monitor. I when I was a new parent, of course when I was a new parent, of course when I was a new parent, of course you're not getting enough sleep. And so you're not getting enough sleep. And so you're not getting enough sleep. And so that's I learned it before I actually that's I learned it before I actually that's I learned it before I actually dove into the science about it. I dove into the science about it. I dove into the science about it. I learned about it through my own data. learned about it through my own data. learned about it through my own data. Where I was, you know, I wasn't Where I was, you know, I wasn't Where I was, you know, I wasn't exercising as much and particularly in exercising as much and particularly in exercising as much and particularly in the first month you really like you're the first month you really like you're the first month you really like you're kind of in a cave as a new mom. You kind of in a cave as a new mom. You kind of in a cave as a new mom. You don't really you're not really don't really you're not really don't really you're not really exercising much at all. exercising much at all. exercising much at all. &gt;&gt; Evolution wants the baby to survive. &gt;&gt; Evolution wants the baby to survive. &gt;&gt; Evolution wants the baby to survive. &gt;&gt; You're recovering too. I mean, &gt;&gt; You're recovering too. I mean, &gt;&gt; You're recovering too. I mean, childbirth is a very it's a very childbirth is a very it's a very childbirth is a very it's a very traumatic process on your body. And so I traumatic process on your body. And so I traumatic process on your body. And so I noticed that my glucose response was noticed that my glucose response was noticed that my glucose response was like it was like pre-diabetic and I was like it was like pre-diabetic and I was like it was like pre-diabetic and I was like what is going on? like what is going on? like what is going on? And um And um And um and that's when I started looking into and that's when I started looking into and that's when I started looking into the literature and happened to be around the literature and happened to be around the literature and happened to be around the same time when I was then starting the same time when I was then starting the same time when I was then starting up my at the time I was doing spin up my at the time I was doing spin up my at the time I was doing spin classes and then it was very clear to classes and then it was very clear to classes and then it was very clear to me. It was like I do these high me. It was like I do these high me. It was like I do these high intensity interval training classes intensity interval training classes intensity interval training classes even just twice a week and it was like even just twice a week and it was like even just twice a week and it was like almost completely negating what I had almost completely negating what I had almost completely negating what I had seen previously of my glucose being seen previously of my glucose being seen previously of my glucose being my fasting glucose being really high and my fasting glucose being really high and my fasting glucose being really high and also my postprandial glucose being also my postprandial glucose being also my postprandial glucose being higher than usual. And so I looked higher than usual. And so I looked higher than usual. And so I looked into the studies and there's now you can into the studies and there's now you can into the studies and there's now you can you can find many studies out there and you can find many studies out there and you can find many studies out there and it really I mean obviously exercise is it really I mean obviously exercise is it really I mean obviously exercise is one of the best thing you can do to one of the best thing you can do to one of the best thing you can do to improve insulin sensitivity and to also improve insulin sensitivity and to also improve insulin sensitivity and to also bring glucose into your cells, right? bring glucose into your cells, right? bring glucose into your cells, right? And so that's part of what you were And so that's part of what you were And so that's part of what you were talking about with oh you're more talking about with oh you're more talking about with oh you're more insulin sensitive during morning least insulin sensitive during morning least insulin sensitive during morning least during the evening and I also mentioned during the evening and I also mentioned during the evening and I also mentioned that. But guess what? There's levers you that. But guess what? There's levers you that. But guess what? There's levers you can pull that like change the equation. can pull that like change the equation. can pull that like change the equation. And exercise is a big one, right? If And exercise is a big one, right? If And exercise is a big one, right? If you're if you're exercising you're if you're exercising you're if you're exercising you're becoming more insulin sensitive. You're becoming more insulin sensitive. You're becoming more insulin sensitive. You're increasing more glucose transporters on increasing more glucose transporters on increasing more glucose transporters on your muscle. That's causing glucose to your muscle. That's causing glucose to your muscle. That's causing glucose to go in easier, right? There's so there's go in easier, right? There's so there's go in easier, right? There's so there's lots of lots of lots of ways around some of these rules that we ways around some of these rules that we ways around some of these rules that we hear about. But with the with the sleep hear about. But with the with the sleep hear about. But with the with the sleep loss it really is it's interesting loss it really is it's interesting loss it really is it's interesting because people like when they don't get because people like when they don't get because people like when they don't get sleep, the last thing they want to do is sleep, the last thing they want to do is sleep, the last thing they want to do is work out. And obviously like you don't work out. And obviously like you don't work out. And obviously like you don't want to do like the hardest thing, want to do like the hardest thing, want to do like the hardest thing, especially if you're really like sleep especially if you're really like sleep especially if you're really like sleep deprived a lot. But it really does help deprived a lot. But it really does help deprived a lot. But it really does help negate the inflammation and the insulin negate the inflammation and the insulin negate the inflammation and the insulin insensitivity that can happen after even insensitivity that can happen after even insensitivity that can happen after even just a single night of sleep and there's just a single night of sleep and there's just a single night of sleep and there's studies out there showing that. And then studies out there showing that. And then studies out there showing that. And then there's also these longitudinal studies there's also these longitudinal studies there's also these longitudinal studies that have been done looking at that have been done looking at that have been done looking at you know, people. So obviously poor you know, people. So obviously poor you know, people. So obviously poor sleep is a problem you know, in the sleep is a problem you know, in the sleep is a problem you know, in the United States. I mean a lot of people United States. I mean a lot of people United States. I mean a lot of people are sleeping fewer than 7 hours a are sleeping fewer than 7 hours a are sleeping fewer than 7 hours a night. And um but there's studies out night. And um but there's studies out night. And um but there's studies out there that have looked at people that there that have looked at people that there that have looked at people that sleep either shorter, so fewer than 7 sleep either shorter, so fewer than 7 sleep either shorter, so fewer than 7 hours a night or they're sleeping more hours a night or they're sleeping more hours a night or they're sleeping more than 10, right? So you don't want to be than 10, right? So you don't want to be than 10, right? So you don't want to be on either end of the spectrum and on either end of the spectrum and on either end of the spectrum and usually like sleeping long, there's like usually like sleeping long, there's like usually like sleeping long, there's like other disease states associated with it, other disease states associated with it, other disease states associated with it, right? But um so people that are right? But um so people that are right? But um so people that are sleeping, you know, not getting enough sleeping, you know, not getting enough sleeping, you know, not getting enough sleep, they have a higher all cause sleep, they have a higher all cause sleep, they have a higher all cause mortality than people that are getting mortality than people that are getting mortality than people that are getting at least 7 to 9 hours of sleep. And the at least 7 to 9 hours of sleep. And the at least 7 to 9 hours of sleep. And the same for like more than 10. They have a same for like more than 10. They have a same for like more than 10. They have a higher all cause mortality than people higher all cause mortality than people higher all cause mortality than people getting between 7 and 9. But if getting between 7 and 9. But if getting between 7 and 9. But if people exercise, if they're meeting the people exercise, if they're meeting the people exercise, if they're meeting the physical activity guidelines right now, physical activity guidelines right now, physical activity guidelines right now, which is 75 minutes of vigorous which is 75 minutes of vigorous which is 75 minutes of vigorous intensity exercise and 150 minutes a intensity exercise and 150 minutes a intensity exercise and 150 minutes a week of moderate intensity exercise. week of moderate intensity exercise. week of moderate intensity exercise. &gt;&gt; Right. Well, cuz the guidelines are &gt;&gt; Right. Well, cuz the guidelines are &gt;&gt; Right. Well, cuz the guidelines are helpful, but they're just guidelines helpful, but they're just guidelines helpful, but they're just guidelines because I mean, doing the sort of because I mean, doing the sort of because I mean, doing the sort of workout that you're doing, working up to workout that you're doing, working up to workout that you're doing, working up to doubles and triples and singles on doubles and triples and singles on doubles and triples and singles on compound lifts and then doing compound lifts and then doing compound lifts and then doing uh cardio, like getting your heart rate uh cardio, like getting your heart rate uh cardio, like getting your heart rate elevated and then doing addition of that elevated and then doing addition of that elevated and then doing addition of that and then you're hiking. I mean, that and then you're hiking. I mean, that and then you're hiking. I mean, that it's just uh it's just uh it's just uh I think the guidelines are a good I think the guidelines are a good I think the guidelines are a good jumping off place for people to think jumping off place for people to think jumping off place for people to think about. &gt;&gt; Well, we can talk about that because &gt;&gt; Well, we can talk about that because &gt;&gt; Well, we can talk about that because there's a new study that there's a new study that there's a new study that kind of throws kind of throws kind of throws &gt;&gt; Yeah, you only &gt;&gt; Yeah, you only &gt;&gt; Yeah, you only &gt;&gt; that on the head. But but the point is &gt;&gt; that on the head. But but the point is &gt;&gt; that on the head. But but the point is that if they were if people were is that if they were if people were is that if they were if people were exercising within the guideline range, exercising within the guideline range, exercising within the guideline range, that they basically if they weren't that they basically if they weren't that they basically if they weren't getting enough sleep, if they were getting enough sleep, if they were getting enough sleep, if they were getting fewer than 7 hours of sleep per getting fewer than 7 hours of sleep per getting fewer than 7 hours of sleep per night, that they basically had the night, that they basically had the night, that they basically had the same mortality rate as people that were same mortality rate as people that were same mortality rate as people that were getting enough sleep. So it's offsetting getting enough sleep. So it's offsetting getting enough sleep. So it's offsetting some of that unhealthy stuff, the some of that unhealthy stuff, the some of that unhealthy stuff, the insulin resistance, you know, the insulin resistance, you know, the insulin resistance, you know, the inflammation that we know, you know, can inflammation that we know, you know, can inflammation that we know, you know, can lead to diseases and early mortality. lead to diseases and early mortality. lead to diseases and early mortality. &gt;&gt; So, find the time to exercise, folks. &gt;&gt; So, find the time to exercise, folks. &gt;&gt; So, find the time to exercise, folks. But, of course, But, of course, But, of course, periods of time like after a new child periods of time like after a new child periods of time like after a new child or new job or particularly stressful or new job or particularly stressful or new job or particularly stressful time, I don't know any human being, I don't I don't know any human being, I don't I don't know any human being, I don't care how driven, care how driven, care how driven, um okay, there's probably um okay, there's probably um okay, there's probably Goggins and Cam Hanes being probably Goggins and Cam Hanes being probably Goggins and Cam Hanes being probably exceptions and a few others, you know, exceptions and a few others, you know, exceptions and a few others, you know, I don't know if you can ride out in a I don't know if you can ride out in a I don't know if you can ride out in a few others, but people who everybody few others, but people who everybody few others, but people who everybody else seems to have periods of time where else seems to have periods of time where else seems to have periods of time where they need to just back off a bit. they need to just back off a bit. they need to just back off a bit. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I know I certainly do. And I feel like &gt;&gt; I know I certainly do. And I feel like &gt;&gt; I know I certainly do. And I feel like I'm doing pretty well for myself I'm doing pretty well for myself I'm doing pretty well for myself despite, you know, and I think that despite, you know, and I think that despite, you know, and I think that it it's important that people it it's important that people it it's important that people not hold themselves to a standard that not hold themselves to a standard that not hold themselves to a standard that is going to make them sick or injured or is going to make them sick or injured or is going to make them sick or injured or miserable beyond Yeah, you also want to miserable beyond Yeah, you also want to miserable beyond Yeah, you also want to continue to enjoy continue to enjoy continue to enjoy health-promoting activities, right? health-promoting activities, right? health-promoting activities, right? &gt;&gt; Right. I mean, you got to say like &gt;&gt; Right. I mean, you got to say like &gt;&gt; Right. I mean, you got to say like what's your goal? Like, your goal is to what's your goal? Like, your goal is to what's your goal? Like, your goal is to be healthy, to be happy. If you're be healthy, to be happy. If you're be healthy, to be happy. If you're taking it to this extreme where you're taking it to this extreme where you're taking it to this extreme where you're trying to just go to the extreme like go trying to just go to the extreme like go trying to just go to the extreme like go hard, go home, and it's hard, go home, and it's hard, go home, and it's you're sacrificing your happiness, too. you're sacrificing your happiness, too. you're sacrificing your happiness, too. I mean, then that's a problem, right? I mean, then that's a problem, right? I mean, then that's a problem, right? Cuz that's part of the equation. Cuz that's part of the equation. Cuz that's part of the equation. Happiness is part of that healthy Happiness is part of that healthy Happiness is part of that healthy equation. &gt;&gt; Health is a daily and lifelong thing, &gt;&gt; Health is a daily and lifelong thing, &gt;&gt; Health is a daily and lifelong thing, but sometimes it means taking a day off. but sometimes it means taking a day off. but sometimes it means taking a day off. I think that's what people don't say, um I think that's what people don't say, um I think that's what people don't say, um and I think it's in a time when perhaps and I think it's in a time when perhaps and I think it's in a time when perhaps a lot of people aren't exercising a lot of people aren't exercising a lot of people aren't exercising enough. So, promoting the no days off enough. So, promoting the no days off enough. So, promoting the no days off thing can be helpful, but for those that thing can be helpful, but for those that thing can be helpful, but for those that are already are already are already you know, you know, forward center of you know, you know, forward center of you know, you know, forward center of mass, you know, coming off the mass, you know, coming off the mass, you know, coming off the accelerator can be really useful. accelerator can be really useful. accelerator can be really useful. &gt;&gt; I also want to just mention because, you &gt;&gt; I also want to just mention because, you &gt;&gt; I also want to just mention because, you know, we talked about my, you know, I know, we talked about my, you know, I know, we talked about my, you know, I work out a lot and I'm sort of I work out a lot and I'm sort of I work out a lot and I'm sort of addicted to it, but like not everyone addicted to it, but like not everyone addicted to it, but like not everyone has the time and motivation to go has the time and motivation to go has the time and motivation to go spend an hour block of time working out. spend an hour block of time working out. spend an hour block of time working out. And this is where I think that people And this is where I think that people And this is where I think that people can sigh a sigh of relief because can sigh a sigh of relief because can sigh a sigh of relief because there's now so much emerging data that there's now so much emerging data that there's now so much emerging data that have been coming out you know, over the have been coming out you know, over the have been coming out you know, over the last decade on these short burst of last decade on these short burst of last decade on these short burst of physical activity that add up. They add physical activity that add up. They add physical activity that add up. They add up and people aren't really thinking up and people aren't really thinking up and people aren't really thinking about them and you know, counting about them and you know, counting about them and you know, counting towards adding up to their towards adding up to their towards adding up to their physical activity, you know, physical activity, you know, physical activity, you know, requirements for the for the week. And requirements for the for the week. And requirements for the for the week. And so there's these there's a lot of so there's these there's a lot of so there's these there's a lot of studies now there's on something called studies now there's on something called studies now there's on something called um vigorous intermittent lifestyle um vigorous intermittent lifestyle um vigorous intermittent lifestyle physical activity Vilpa studies. Have physical activity Vilpa studies. Have physical activity Vilpa studies. Have you heard of those? you heard of those? you heard of those? &gt;&gt; Are these the exercise snacks? &gt;&gt; Are these the exercise snacks? &gt;&gt; Are these the exercise snacks? &gt;&gt; They're unstructured. They're &gt;&gt; They're unstructured. They're &gt;&gt; They're unstructured. They're unstructured and not everyone likes the unstructured and not everyone likes the unstructured and not everyone likes the word exercise snacks. I mean, I kind word exercise snacks. I mean, I kind word exercise snacks. I mean, I kind of like it, but the unstructured of like it, but the unstructured of like it, but the unstructured exercise they're the they're the exercise they're the they're the exercise they're the they're the they're the moments in your life where they're the moments in your life where they're the moments in your life where you're taking advantage of everyday you're taking advantage of everyday you're taking advantage of everyday situations to get your heart rate up to situations to get your heart rate up to situations to get your heart rate up to move. And so that could be I'm playing move. And so that could be I'm playing move. And so that could be I'm playing with my new puppy and I'm sprinting with my new puppy and I'm sprinting with my new puppy and I'm sprinting around with my new puppy. I'm, you know, around with my new puppy. I'm, you know, around with my new puppy. I'm, you know, chasing my grandkid around and playing chasing my grandkid around and playing chasing my grandkid around and playing tag or my child. I'm sprinting up the tag or my child. I'm sprinting up the tag or my child. I'm sprinting up the stairs to get to my office. I'm running stairs to get to my office. I'm running stairs to get to my office. I'm running to catch the bus. I'm moving, right? And to catch the bus. I'm moving, right? And to catch the bus. I'm moving, right? And so um researchers and there have been so um researchers and there have been so um researchers and there have been several studies on this now. Researchers several studies on this now. Researchers several studies on this now. Researchers use accelerometers rather than just use accelerometers rather than just use accelerometers rather than just relying on these questionnaires which relying on these questionnaires which relying on these questionnaires which are, as you know, you know, extremely are, as you know, you know, extremely are, as you know, you know, extremely unreliable. I mean, it's very hard for unreliable. I mean, it's very hard for unreliable. I mean, it's very hard for people to remember how much exercise you people to remember how much exercise you people to remember how much exercise you I'm sitting here asking me about my I'm sitting here asking me about my I'm sitting here asking me about my exercise. I mean, there's only so much, exercise. I mean, there's only so much, exercise. I mean, there's only so much, you know, that you can be accurate with you know, that you can be accurate with you know, that you can be accurate with when you're trying to recall that. So when you're trying to recall that. So when you're trying to recall that. So these accelerometers are worn on these accelerometers are worn on these accelerometers are worn on people's wrists and they're and they're people's wrists and they're and they're people's wrists and they're and they're measuring like fast movement, the measuring like fast movement, the measuring like fast movement, the movement, right? movement, right? movement, right? And so And so And so thousands and thousands like hundreds of thousands and thousands like hundreds of thousands and thousands like hundreds of thousands of participants. There's lots thousands of participants. There's lots thousands of participants. There's lots of data now showing that people that are of data now showing that people that are of data now showing that people that are doing these like short burst at least a doing these like short burst at least a doing these like short burst at least a minute long, but up to 3 minutes, right? minute long, but up to 3 minutes, right? minute long, but up to 3 minutes, right? Where they're getting their they're Where they're getting their they're Where they're getting their they're moving. I'm saying they're getting their moving. I'm saying they're getting their moving. I'm saying they're getting their heart rate up. They're actually not heart rate up. They're actually not heart rate up. They're actually not measuring the heart rate in these days. measuring the heart rate in these days. measuring the heart rate in these days. They're moving faster with intent, They're moving faster with intent, They're moving faster with intent, right? They're they're jogging or right? They're they're jogging or right? They're they're jogging or they're um you know, they're not of they're um you know, they're not of they're um you know, they're not of course there's the cases where they're course there's the cases where they're course there's the cases where they're actually exercising, but the short actually exercising, but the short actually exercising, but the short burst of it um they're doing the things burst of it um they're doing the things burst of it um they're doing the things that I just mentioned and it's having that I just mentioned and it's having that I just mentioned and it's having outsized effects on health outcomes. outsized effects on health outcomes. outsized effects on health outcomes. So, for example, individuals that do on So, for example, individuals that do on So, for example, individuals that do on the high end, so they're doing, you the high end, so they're doing, you the high end, so they're doing, you know, 3 minutes of this short burst of know, 3 minutes of this short burst of know, 3 minutes of this short burst of an unstructured type of exercise snack an unstructured type of exercise snack an unstructured type of exercise snack and they do it three times a day. So, and they do it three times a day. So, and they do it three times a day. So, it's a total of 9 minutes a day. Okay, it's a total of 9 minutes a day. Okay, it's a total of 9 minutes a day. Okay, this type of activity, and it's this type of activity, and it's this type of activity, and it's considered more vigorous because you're considered more vigorous because you're considered more vigorous because you're the intent to move, right? That's more the intent to move, right? That's more the intent to move, right? That's more vigorous even though they're not vigorous even though they're not vigorous even though they're not measuring heart rate. That's associated measuring heart rate. That's associated measuring heart rate. That's associated with a 40% reduction in all-cause with a 40% reduction in all-cause with a 40% reduction in all-cause mortality, 40% reduction in mortality, 40% reduction in mortality, 40% reduction in cancer-related mortality, a 50% cancer-related mortality, a 50% cancer-related mortality, a 50% reduction in cardiovascular-related reduction in cardiovascular-related reduction in cardiovascular-related mortality. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; 9 minutes a day. And this is even in &gt;&gt; 9 minutes a day. And this is even in &gt;&gt; 9 minutes a day. And this is even in people that don't identify as people that don't identify as people that don't identify as exercisers, so they're not the kind of exercisers, so they're not the kind of exercisers, so they're not the kind of people like you and I that go and people like you and I that go and people like you and I that go and intentionally [clears throat] intentionally [clears throat] intentionally [clears throat] set out time to go to the gym. They're set out time to go to the gym. They're set out time to go to the gym. They're people that just they're just take their people that just they're just take their people that just they're just take their they're doing those things, right? they're doing those things, right? they're doing those things, right? They're playing with their grandkids or They're playing with their grandkids or They're playing with their grandkids or their kids or their puppies or whatever. their kids or their puppies or whatever. their kids or their puppies or whatever. And so, um, these moments they add up. And so, um, these moments they add up. And so, um, these moments they add up. And I'm citing one study, but, you And I'm citing one study, but, you And I'm citing one study, but, you know, there was a dose-dependent effect know, there was a dose-dependent effect know, there was a dose-dependent effect even doing 3 minutes a day, you know, even doing 3 minutes a day, you know, even doing 3 minutes a day, you know, there's a study in women showing, you there's a study in women showing, you there's a study in women showing, you know, 3 and 1/2 minutes a day. I mean, know, 3 and 1/2 minutes a day. I mean, know, 3 and 1/2 minutes a day. I mean, they were having pretty profound they were having pretty profound they were having pretty profound benefits on all-cause mortality and benefits on all-cause mortality and benefits on all-cause mortality and cancer-related mortality as well. cancer-related mortality as well. cancer-related mortality as well. And multiple studies now have shown And multiple studies now have shown And multiple studies now have shown this. I mean, this is like one study this. I mean, this is like one study this. I mean, this is like one study after another after another. I mean, it after another after another. I mean, it after another after another. I mean, it is undeniable that these short is undeniable that these short is undeniable that these short moments of, you know, getting physically moments of, you know, getting physically moments of, you know, getting physically active do add up and active do add up and active do add up and structured exercise snacks can be part structured exercise snacks can be part structured exercise snacks can be part of that. Like, maybe of that. Like, maybe of that. Like, maybe you don't have a puppy, maybe you don't you don't have a puppy, maybe you don't you don't have a puppy, maybe you don't have a kid yet, maybe you work from home have a kid yet, maybe you work from home have a kid yet, maybe you work from home and you're not taking the stairs. You and you're not taking the stairs. You and you're not taking the stairs. You know, maybe your situation's different know, maybe your situation's different know, maybe your situation's different than what I described, but you can take than what I described, but you can take than what I described, but you can take these moments to do exercise snacks and these moments to do exercise snacks and these moments to do exercise snacks and that can be a minute long and it can be that can be a minute long and it can be that can be a minute long and it can be like there was there's studies showing like there was there's studies showing like there was there's studies showing that two studies, and I'll talk about two studies, and I'll talk about two studies, and I'll talk about one, showing that getting up and doing one, showing that getting up and doing one, showing that getting up and doing 10 bodyweight squats 10 bodyweight squats 10 bodyweight squats every 45 minutes over a 7 and 1/2 hour every 45 minutes over a 7 and 1/2 hour every 45 minutes over a 7 and 1/2 hour work day work day work day is better at regulating blood glucose is better at regulating blood glucose is better at regulating blood glucose levels than a 30-minute walk, right? So, levels than a 30-minute walk, right? So, levels than a 30-minute walk, right? So, you get up and you do 10 bodyweight you get up and you do 10 bodyweight you get up and you do 10 bodyweight squats. Pretty easy. I mean, it's also squats. Pretty easy. I mean, it's also squats. Pretty easy. I mean, it's also very good to break up that sedentary very good to break up that sedentary very good to break up that sedentary time. So, being sedentary means like time. So, being sedentary means like time. So, being sedentary means like you're not moving. That also is an you're not moving. That also is an you're not moving. That also is an independent risk factor, even if you do independent risk factor, even if you do independent risk factor, even if you do exercise for things like cancer being a exercise for things like cancer being a exercise for things like cancer being a big one. Although, I would say if you're big one. Although, I would say if you're big one. Although, I would say if you're doing a lot of exercise, you're doing a lot of exercise, you're doing a lot of exercise, you're doing pretty good, but I just like to mention pretty good, but I just like to mention pretty good, but I just like to mention that as well. I would say being that as well. I would say being that as well. I would say being sedentary is a disease, actually. That's sedentary is a disease, actually. That's sedentary is a disease, actually. That's something I mean, people aren't That's something I mean, people aren't That's something I mean, people aren't thinking about it, but thinking about it, but thinking about it, but &gt;&gt; Even in the absence of what Layne Norton &gt;&gt; Even in the absence of what Layne Norton &gt;&gt; Even in the absence of what Layne Norton calls energy toxicity, like even if calls energy toxicity, like even if calls energy toxicity, like even if somebody is somebody is somebody is at maintenance or below maintenance at maintenance or below maintenance at maintenance or below maintenance calories, if they're sedentary, that's calories, if they're sedentary, that's calories, if they're sedentary, that's problematic. that's problematic. that's problematic. &gt;&gt; We do have data for one measuring cardio &gt;&gt; We do have data for one measuring cardio &gt;&gt; We do have data for one measuring cardio cardiorespiratory fitness, which is a cardiorespiratory fitness, which is a cardiorespiratory fitness, which is a marker of marker of marker of cardiovascular health. Being physically cardiovascular health. Being physically cardiovascular health. Being physically fit, right? Obviously, the gold standard fit, right? Obviously, the gold standard fit, right? Obviously, the gold standard of that would be measuring VO2 max, your of that would be measuring VO2 max, your of that would be measuring VO2 max, your maximal oxygen uptake during maximal oxygen uptake during maximal oxygen uptake during maximal exercise. A lot of studies do not exercise. A lot of studies do not exercise. A lot of studies do not actually directly measure VO2 max. actually directly measure VO2 max. actually directly measure VO2 max. They'll do, you know, maybe sub a They'll do, you know, maybe sub a They'll do, you know, maybe sub a submaximal treadmill test, or they'll submaximal treadmill test, or they'll submaximal treadmill test, or they'll estimate it, right? There's a estimate it, right? There's a estimate it, right? There's a calculation out there you can do kind of calculation out there you can do kind of calculation out there you can do kind of what your If you wear like an Apple what your If you wear like an Apple what your If you wear like an Apple Watch or some sort of fitness tracker, Watch or some sort of fitness tracker, Watch or some sort of fitness tracker, what they do is which is, you know, it's what they do is which is, you know, it's what they do is which is, you know, it's looking at the distance that you run and looking at the distance that you run and looking at the distance that you run and the amount of time it takes, right? So, the amount of time it takes, right? So, the amount of time it takes, right? So, like a 12-minute like a 12-minute like a 12-minute run would be an example. People do that. run would be an example. People do that. run would be an example. People do that. You run as fast as you can and You run as fast as you can and You run as fast as you can and maintain that pace for 12 minutes. maintain that pace for 12 minutes. maintain that pace for 12 minutes. You're not going all out, obviously. You're not going all out, obviously. You're not going all out, obviously. &gt;&gt; You see how far you can go. &gt;&gt; You see how far you can go. &gt;&gt; You see how far you can go. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then And there's a &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then And there's a &gt;&gt; Yeah. And then And there's a calculation out there that's done to calculation out there that's done to calculation out there that's done to kind of estimate your VO2 max. And so, kind of estimate your VO2 max. And so, kind of estimate your VO2 max. And so, some studies are a lot of studies are some studies are a lot of studies are some studies are a lot of studies are actually doing sort of an estimation of actually doing sort of an estimation of actually doing sort of an estimation of cardiorespiratory fitness. So, cardiorespiratory fitness. So, cardiorespiratory fitness. So, cardiorespiratory fitness cardiorespiratory fitness cardiorespiratory fitness is really important, I think, for, is really important, I think, for, is really important, I think, for, you know, marking your health and you know, marking your health and you know, marking your health and longevity. And, [snorts] you know, if longevity. And, [snorts] you know, if longevity. And, [snorts] you know, if you have a low cardiorespiratory you have a low cardiorespiratory you have a low cardiorespiratory fitness, most of the times you are not fitness, most of the times you are not fitness, most of the times you are not physically active, right? And there's physically active, right? And there's physically active, right? And there's studies showing that if you don't have studies showing that if you don't have studies showing that if you don't have any, you know, diagnosable diseases, so any, you know, diagnosable diseases, so any, you know, diagnosable diseases, so you're not insulin resistant, you don't you're not insulin resistant, you don't you're not insulin resistant, you don't have cardiovascular disease, you don't have cardiovascular disease, you don't have cardiovascular disease, you don't have cancer, all that stuff, right? have cancer, all that stuff, right? have cancer, all that stuff, right? You're not You're not You're not um obese, but you have a low um obese, but you have a low um obese, but you have a low cardiorespiratory fitness, it is cardiorespiratory fitness, it is cardiorespiratory fitness, it is as bad or worse in terms of your as bad or worse in terms of your as bad or worse in terms of your all-cause mortality, your you know, all-cause mortality, your you know, all-cause mortality, your you know, predicting mortality, than predicting mortality, than predicting mortality, than having cardiovascular disease or smoking having cardiovascular disease or smoking having cardiovascular disease or smoking or having hypertension or these things or having hypertension or these things or having hypertension or these things that we know that are really bad for that we know that are really bad for that we know that are really bad for health, right? So, being sedentary, health, right? So, being sedentary, health, right? So, being sedentary, as I'm saying, it's a low as I'm saying, it's a low as I'm saying, it's a low cardiorespiratory fitness, I guess it's cardiorespiratory fitness, I guess it's cardiorespiratory fitness, I guess it's not exactly correct. It's a little bit not exactly correct. It's a little bit not exactly correct. It's a little bit of I'm stretching it a little bit, of I'm stretching it a little bit, of I'm stretching it a little bit, but cardiorespiratory fitness is a but cardiorespiratory fitness is a but cardiorespiratory fitness is a marker of, I would say, fitness. And so, marker of, I would say, fitness. And so, marker of, I would say, fitness. And so, [snorts] um that's why I think being [snorts] um that's why I think being [snorts] um that's why I think being sedentary is a is a disease. And people sedentary is a is a disease. And people sedentary is a is a disease. And people with a low cardiorespiratory fitness, I with a low cardiorespiratory fitness, I with a low cardiorespiratory fitness, I mean, if you go anywhere above that, mean, if you go anywhere above that, mean, if you go anywhere above that, you know, from low to like low normal, you know, from low to like low normal, you know, from low to like low normal, that's associated with a 2-year increase that's associated with a 2-year increase that's associated with a 2-year increase in life expectancy. If you go from low in life expectancy. If you go from low in life expectancy. If you go from low to um high normal, you know, that's like to um high normal, you know, that's like to um high normal, you know, that's like almost a 3-year increase in life almost a 3-year increase in life almost a 3-year increase in life expectancy. And if you go up to high, expectancy. And if you go up to high, expectancy. And if you go up to high, then you're talking about a 5-year then you're talking about a 5-year then you're talking about a 5-year increase in life expectancy compared to increase in life expectancy compared to increase in life expectancy compared to where you were at below. But again, I'm where you were at below. But again, I'm where you were at below. But again, I'm not talking about your VO2 max, I'm not talking about your VO2 max, I'm not talking about your VO2 max, I'm talking about cardiorespiratory fitness. talking about cardiorespiratory fitness. talking about cardiorespiratory fitness. And it's really important. Here's And it's really important. Here's And it's really important. Here's another reason why I think that it's another reason why I think that it's another reason why I think that it's really bad. So, these studies it's really bad. So, these studies it's really bad. So, these studies were done were done were done By the way, cardiorespiratory fitness is By the way, cardiorespiratory fitness is By the way, cardiorespiratory fitness is improved by aerobic exercise improved by aerobic exercise improved by aerobic exercise in general. That's great. And then, you in general. That's great. And then, you in general. That's great. And then, you know, if you if you add in know, if you if you add in know, if you if you add in high-intensity interval training in high-intensity interval training in high-intensity interval training in there, mix that also really helps there, mix that also really helps there, mix that also really helps because there are some people that don't because there are some people that don't because there are some people that don't respond necessarily to respond necessarily to respond necessarily to just doing cardiovascular just doing cardiovascular just doing cardiovascular Yeah, about 40% of people don't respond. Yeah, about 40% of people don't respond. Yeah, about 40% of people don't respond. So, mixing in the high-intensity is So, mixing in the high-intensity is So, mixing in the high-intensity is good. If you're physically active and good. If you're physically active and good. If you're physically active and doing that, that's great. If you're doing that, that's great. If you're doing that, that's great. If you're doing these short bursts of physical doing these short bursts of physical doing these short bursts of physical activity, also good because it's a activity, also good because it's a activity, also good because it's a little bit of a high-intensity, little bit of a high-intensity, little bit of a high-intensity, you know, exercise, right? A min- a you know, exercise, right? A min- a you know, exercise, right? A min- a minute running around chasing your minute running around chasing your minute running around chasing your grandchild or your puppy or your child. grandchild or your puppy or your child. grandchild or your puppy or your child. You know, that's a hit You know, that's a hit You know, that's a hit session. &gt;&gt; is amazing. I was traveling with &gt;&gt; is amazing. I was traveling with &gt;&gt; is amazing. I was traveling with &gt;&gt; Sprinting up the stairs. &gt;&gt; Sprinting up the stairs. &gt;&gt; Sprinting up the stairs. &gt;&gt; Uh sprinting up the stairs or if you're &gt;&gt; Uh sprinting up the stairs or if you're &gt;&gt; Uh sprinting up the stairs or if you're carrying a lot of luggage in the carrying a lot of luggage in the carrying a lot of luggage in the airport, like going up the stairs or airport, like going up the stairs or airport, like going up the stairs or down the stairs. It's wild when you go down the stairs. It's wild when you go down the stairs. It's wild when you go to the airport, uh I like to notice to the airport, uh I like to notice to the airport, uh I like to notice this. Um this. Um this. Um nobody takes the stairs. nobody takes the stairs. nobody takes the stairs. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Down or up. Like the escalators are &gt;&gt; Down or up. Like the escalators are &gt;&gt; Down or up. Like the escalators are there and I'm always like, "Oh, this is there and I'm always like, "Oh, this is there and I'm always like, "Oh, this is a great opportunity to get some extra a great opportunity to get some extra a great opportunity to get some extra steps and some extra work." But I steps and some extra work." But I steps and some extra work." But I realize that's me. Um but it's just it's realize that's me. Um but it's just it's realize that's me. Um but it's just it's striking. Um and if you're in DC ever, you know, Um and if you're in DC ever, you know, Um and if you're in DC ever, you know, they've used the long stairwells that go they've used the long stairwells that go they've used the long stairwells that go um up from the from the public transport um up from the from the public transport um up from the from the public transport and that's a workout, you know? and that's a workout, you know? and that's a workout, you know? &gt;&gt; Carrying your luggage. &gt;&gt; Carrying your luggage. &gt;&gt; Carrying your luggage. &gt;&gt; And I'm always like, "Oh, free workout." &gt;&gt; And I'm always like, "Oh, free workout." &gt;&gt; And I'm always like, "Oh, free workout." Like you know, like get it in my day. I Like you know, like get it in my day. I Like you know, like get it in my day. I mean, it sucks to arrive a little bit mean, it sucks to arrive a little bit mean, it sucks to arrive a little bit more sweaty than you would otherwise, more sweaty than you would otherwise, more sweaty than you would otherwise, but I just think if this were an but I just think if this were an but I just think if this were an experiment and we were looking at mice experiment and we were looking at mice experiment and we were looking at mice and we were videotaping from above, I and we were videotaping from above, I and we were videotaping from above, I would think to myself like which mouse would think to myself like which mouse would think to myself like which mouse am I going to be? All the mice are going am I going to be? All the mice are going am I going to be? All the mice are going up the automatic elevator. It makes up the automatic elevator. It makes up the automatic elevator. It makes sense. And then sense. And then sense. And then why they would want to do that. But why they would want to do that. But why they would want to do that. But these opportunities for exercise are these opportunities for exercise are these opportunities for exercise are clearly there. I feel like this is clearly there. I feel like this is clearly there. I feel like this is also I would be remiss if I didn't do also I would be remiss if I didn't do also I would be remiss if I didn't do a quick shout out to Steve Magnus. Do a quick shout out to Steve Magnus. Do a quick shout out to Steve Magnus. Do you follow ever see his content? you follow ever see his content? you follow ever see his content? &gt;&gt; interacted with him, yeah. &gt;&gt; interacted with him, yeah. &gt;&gt; interacted with him, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've never met him, but um people &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've never met him, but um people &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've never met him, but um people should &gt;&gt; I've interacted with him on X. &gt;&gt; I've interacted with him on X. &gt;&gt; I've interacted with him on X. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh people should um I think give &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh people should um I think give &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh people should um I think give him a follow. He's a very accomplished him a follow. He's a very accomplished him a follow. He's a very accomplished runner uh in his past, a running coach, runner uh in his past, a running coach, runner uh in his past, a running coach, I believe, as well, and um and a I believe, as well, and um and a I believe, as well, and um and a scientist. And I think has the best take scientist. And I think has the best take scientist. And I think has the best take on sort of measuring VO2 max. It's kind on sort of measuring VO2 max. It's kind on sort of measuring VO2 max. It's kind of interesting, you know, he has a of interesting, you know, he has a of interesting, you know, he has a theory which I think is strongly backed theory which I think is strongly backed theory which I think is strongly backed that most measures of VO2 max are not that most measures of VO2 max are not that most measures of VO2 max are not measures of VO2 max at all, but one of measures of VO2 max at all, but one of measures of VO2 max at all, but one of the best measures of cardiorespiratory the best measures of cardiorespiratory the best measures of cardiorespiratory fitness is how fast can you run a mile? fitness is how fast can you run a mile? fitness is how fast can you run a mile? &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And he says people are generally &gt;&gt; And he says people are generally &gt;&gt; And he says people are generally surprised how easy the easy stuff should surprised how easy the easy stuff should surprised how easy the easy stuff should feel and how hard the hard stuff should feel and how hard the hard stuff should feel and how hard the hard stuff should feel. So I want just want to credit feel. So I want just want to credit feel. So I want just want to credit Steve for saying that. So I try and keep Steve for saying that. So I try and keep Steve for saying that. So I try and keep that in mind around my cardio and do that in mind around my cardio and do that in mind around my cardio and do some high I do some high I do some high I do uh less of what you do, I confess. Um uh less of what you do, I confess. Um uh less of what you do, I confess. Um some high-intensity interval training, some high-intensity interval training, some high-intensity interval training, Tabata type stuff, and then some a lot Tabata type stuff, and then some a lot Tabata type stuff, and then some a lot of walks, a lot of hikes. of walks, a lot of hikes. of walks, a lot of hikes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I haven't formally measured my VO2 &gt;&gt; And I haven't formally measured my VO2 &gt;&gt; And I haven't formally measured my VO2 max in a while, but I think he just max in a while, but I think he just max in a while, but I think he just nails it with that. Because I think nails it with that. Because I think nails it with that. Because I think people think the 30-minute jog on the people think the 30-minute jog on the people think the 30-minute jog on the treadmill where you get sweaty and treadmill where you get sweaty and treadmill where you get sweaty and you're like, "Ah." Like that's you're like, "Ah." Like that's you're like, "Ah." Like that's accomplishing what you want, but accomplishing what you want, but accomplishing what you want, but actually there's a much easier path to actually there's a much easier path to actually there's a much easier path to better health, which is what you do and better health, which is what you do and better health, which is what you do and more or less what Steve is describing as more or less what Steve is describing as more or less what Steve is describing as well. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Does that square with your &gt;&gt; Does that square with your &gt;&gt; Does that square with your experience? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. I mean, I do I do mix &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. I mean, I do I do mix &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. I mean, I do I do mix in quite a bit of probably more in quite a bit of probably more in quite a bit of probably more high-intensity interval training, but um high-intensity interval training, but um high-intensity interval training, but um you know, I don't feel like if I felt you know, I don't feel like if I felt you know, I don't feel like if I felt like it was like if I didn't feel good, like it was like if I didn't feel good, like it was like if I didn't feel good, I would I would toggle down the I would I would toggle down the I would I would toggle down the paddle, all right? I wouldn't keep paddle, all right? I wouldn't keep paddle, all right? I wouldn't keep going on it. So, I think you have to going on it. So, I think you have to going on it. So, I think you have to again just listen to your body. You again just listen to your body. You again just listen to your body. You know, you don't want to overdo things. know, you don't want to overdo things. know, you don't want to overdo things. And I am I mean, there are people out And I am I mean, there are people out And I am I mean, there are people out there that are really like endurance there that are really like endurance there that are really like endurance athletes that are you know, like that's athletes that are you know, like that's athletes that are you know, like that's not me. I'm a committed exerciser. I'm not me. I'm a committed exerciser. I'm not me. I'm a committed exerciser. I'm not an I'm not necessarily an athlete. not an I'm not necessarily an athlete. not an I'm not necessarily an athlete. Um but yeah, so that would that's Um but yeah, so that would that's Um but yeah, so that would that's there's different I think levels here, there's different I think levels here, there's different I think levels here, and Steve is obviously athlete. and Steve is obviously athlete. and Steve is obviously athlete. &gt;&gt; Anyway, I've learned from him &gt;&gt; Anyway, I've learned from him &gt;&gt; Anyway, I've learned from him around this topic. It's been It's been around this topic. It's been It's been around this topic. It's been It's been helpful. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PFAS's harmful plastics, and tests for PFAS's harmful plastics, and tests for PFAS's or forever chemicals. Function not only or forever chemicals. Function not only or forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC, supplementing with NAC, supplementing with NAC, N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production and support glutathione production and support glutathione production and detoxification. Now, I should say, by detoxification. Now, I should say, by detoxification. Now, I should say, by taking a second Function test, that taking a second Function test, that taking a second Function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of Function currently has a waitlist of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. I want to ask you about creatine. I want to ask you about creatine. I want to ask you about creatine. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I'm 50. I started taking weight training &gt;&gt; I'm 50. I started taking weight training &gt;&gt; I'm 50. I started taking weight training and running when I was like 16, maybe. and running when I was like 16, maybe. and running when I was like 16, maybe. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And I started taking creatine cuz back &gt;&gt; And I started taking creatine cuz back &gt;&gt; And I started taking creatine cuz back then I was skinny, I wanted to put on then I was skinny, I wanted to put on then I was skinny, I wanted to put on muscle. I think creatine was sort of muscle. I think creatine was sort of muscle. I think creatine was sort of first discussed or released back then first discussed or released back then first discussed or released back then when I was maybe 18 or something like when I was maybe 18 or something like when I was maybe 18 or something like that. Something like that. 18, 19. Um so that. Something like that. 18, 19. Um so that. Something like that. 18, 19. Um so I've been taking it a long, long time. I've been taking it a long, long time. I've been taking it a long, long time. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; 5 to 10 g, but the original protocol, &gt;&gt; 5 to 10 g, but the original protocol, &gt;&gt; 5 to 10 g, but the original protocol, which you nobody does anymore, but I which you nobody does anymore, but I which you nobody does anymore, but I confess I still do it cuz I enjoy it, confess I still do it cuz I enjoy it, confess I still do it cuz I enjoy it, was to take 5 g three to five times per was to take 5 g three to five times per was to take 5 g three to five times per day. There was this loading phase. day. There was this loading phase. day. There was this loading phase. And you would mix it with a little bit And you would mix it with a little bit And you would mix it with a little bit of grape juice cuz the idea was you were of grape juice cuz the idea was you were of grape juice cuz the idea was you were supposed to spike your insulin and then supposed to spike your insulin and then supposed to spike your insulin and then you get more into the muscles. And then you get more into the muscles. And then you get more into the muscles. And then you had a maintenance dose, which was you had a maintenance dose, which was you had a maintenance dose, which was 5 g per day. 5 g per day. 5 g per day. Um and the idea back then was that you Um and the idea back then was that you Um and the idea back then was that you need to do a washout every 20 weeks or need to do a washout every 20 weeks or need to do a washout every 20 weeks or so, where you just stop taking it, you so, where you just stop taking it, you so, where you just stop taking it, you urinate out a bunch of water, and then urinate out a bunch of water, and then urinate out a bunch of water, and then you re- reload. And I confess, I've you re- reload. And I confess, I've you re- reload. And I confess, I've continued to do this minus the grape continued to do this minus the grape continued to do this minus the grape juice, but occasionally I'll do the juice, but occasionally I'll do the juice, but occasionally I'll do the grape juice thing. grape juice thing. grape juice thing. I don't think there's any real merit to I don't think there's any real merit to I don't think there's any real merit to the loading phase, the loading phase, the loading phase, maintenance phase idea, maintenance phase idea, maintenance phase idea, but back then and still now, I feel like but back then and still now, I feel like but back then and still now, I feel like creatine has made me feel great. creatine has made me feel great. creatine has made me feel great. Um stronger. Um I did I wasn't aware of Um stronger. Um I did I wasn't aware of Um stronger. Um I did I wasn't aware of the cognitive benefits. the cognitive benefits. the cognitive benefits. &gt;&gt; They weren't being studied back then. &gt;&gt; They weren't being studied back then. &gt;&gt; They weren't being studied back then. &gt;&gt; They weren't being studied back then. &gt;&gt; They weren't being studied back then. &gt;&gt; They weren't being studied back then. But, what are your thoughts on why But, what are your thoughts on why But, what are your thoughts on why creatine suddenly has become this like creatine suddenly has become this like creatine suddenly has become this like banner supplement? Like, supplement of banner supplement? Like, supplement of banner supplement? Like, supplement of the year. We should start a supplement the year. We should start a supplement the year. We should start a supplement of the year thing, right? For a while, I of the year thing, right? For a while, I of the year thing, right? For a while, I think vitamin D and melatonin came think vitamin D and melatonin came think vitamin D and melatonin came first. Um, we'll have to figure out what first. Um, we'll have to figure out what first. Um, we'll have to figure out what years those were. Then, years those were. Then, years those were. Then, uh, I feel like creatine got supplement uh, I feel like creatine got supplement uh, I feel like creatine got supplement of the year for 2026 is unless something of the year for 2026 is unless something of the year for 2026 is unless something else comes along. So, creatine, else comes along. So, creatine, else comes along. So, creatine, supplement of the year 2026, even though supplement of the year 2026, even though supplement of the year 2026, even though it's been around for a long, long time. it's been around for a long, long time. it's been around for a long, long time. What do you think happened? What do you think happened? What do you think happened? &gt;&gt; Well, so first I want to talk about your &gt;&gt; Well, so first I want to talk about your &gt;&gt; Well, so first I want to talk about your loading phase. And I like that was loading phase. And I like that was loading phase. And I like that was really for the studies that were being really for the studies that were being really for the studies that were being done, right? Because if you're taking 5 done, right? Because if you're taking 5 done, right? Because if you're taking 5 g a day of creatine, it takes about 3 to g a day of creatine, it takes about 3 to g a day of creatine, it takes about 3 to 4 weeks for your crea- for your muscle 4 weeks for your crea- for your muscle 4 weeks for your crea- for your muscle creatine stores to become saturated. And creatine stores to become saturated. And creatine stores to become saturated. And researchers aren't going to do a study researchers aren't going to do a study researchers aren't going to do a study where they wait that long. So, the where they wait that long. So, the where they wait that long. So, the loading phase really was just loading phase really was just loading phase really was just &gt;&gt; what inspired it. &gt;&gt; what inspired it. &gt;&gt; what inspired it. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was it's in this isolated &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was it's in this isolated &gt;&gt; Yeah, it was it's in this isolated bubble of in the experimental protocol, bubble of in the experimental protocol, bubble of in the experimental protocol, but like in the real world, you have 3 but like in the real world, you have 3 but like in the real world, you have 3 weeks. Or if you're like an athlete and weeks. Or if you're like an athlete and weeks. Or if you're like an athlete and you hadn't, you know, taken the you hadn't, you know, taken the you hadn't, you know, taken the creatine, you don't have your creatine creatine, you don't have your creatine creatine, you don't have your creatine stores up and you have to quickly, stores up and you have to quickly, stores up and you have to quickly, rapidly &gt;&gt; Got it. I was just amazed at how quickly &gt;&gt; Got it. I was just amazed at how quickly &gt;&gt; Got it. I was just amazed at how quickly it worked. I might be a hyper it worked. I might be a hyper it worked. I might be a hyper responder, but I legitimately put on I responder, but I legitimately put on I responder, but I legitimately put on I realized some of it was water or most of realized some of it was water or most of realized some of it was water or most of it was water, but somewhere between it was water, but somewhere between it was water, but somewhere between probably 4 and 8 lb of probably 4 and 8 lb of probably 4 and 8 lb of water in the muscle mass. I don't of water in the muscle mass. I don't of water in the muscle mass. I don't want to call it lean mass because it's, want to call it lean mass because it's, want to call it lean mass because it's, you know, it's water in the muscle. you know, it's water in the muscle. you know, it's water in the muscle. Um, but I just was I was like, "Oh my but I just was I was like, "Oh my but I just was I was like, "Oh my goodness, this is crazy." You know? And, goodness, this is crazy." You know? And, goodness, this is crazy." You know? And, um, and then people thought maybe it was um, and then people thought maybe it was um, and then people thought maybe it was a steroid. It's not a steroid. Maybe a steroid. It's not a steroid. Maybe a steroid. It's not a steroid. Maybe it's bad for your kidneys. Turns out it's bad for your kidneys. Turns out it's bad for your kidneys. Turns out safe for your kidneys in most everyone. safe for your kidneys in most everyone. safe for your kidneys in most everyone. Um, pretty remarkable molecule. pretty remarkable molecule. pretty remarkable molecule. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, obviously creatine is &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, obviously creatine is &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, obviously creatine is stored as creatine phosphate in our in stored as creatine phosphate in our in stored as creatine phosphate in our in our cells. We make to some degree, you our cells. We make to some degree, you our cells. We make to some degree, you know, between 1 to 3 g of creatine a know, between 1 to 3 g of creatine a know, between 1 to 3 g of creatine a day. Our liver, our brain also makes it. day. Our liver, our brain also makes it. day. Our liver, our brain also makes it. It's used to make energy. And so, It's used to make energy. And so, It's used to make energy. And so, your muscles, if you're working out, your muscles, if you're working out, your muscles, if you're working out, you're really consuming a lot of energy, you're really consuming a lot of energy, you're really consuming a lot of energy, right? It's very energetically right? It's very energetically right? It's very energetically demanding. So, having the creatine demanding. So, having the creatine demanding. So, having the creatine stores higher in your muscle is stores higher in your muscle is stores higher in your muscle is beneficial because one, you're going to beneficial because one, you're going to beneficial because one, you're going to be able to increase your training be able to increase your training be able to increase your training volume, right? So, it's not like volume, right? So, it's not like volume, right? So, it's not like creatine is anabolic in the sense that creatine is anabolic in the sense that creatine is anabolic in the sense that protein or amino acids are, right? It's protein or amino acids are, right? It's protein or amino acids are, right? It's not like directly affecting muscle not like directly affecting muscle not like directly affecting muscle protein synthesis. It's just helping you protein synthesis. It's just helping you protein synthesis. It's just helping you train more, getting more reps in, you train more, getting more reps in, you train more, getting more reps in, you know, whatever it is, training your know, whatever it is, training your know, whatever it is, training your training volume's going up. And because training volume's going up. And because training volume's going up. And because your training volume's going up, then your training volume's going up, then your training volume's going up, then you're obviously putting more stress on you're obviously putting more stress on you're obviously putting more stress on your muscles, which is going to lead to your muscles, which is going to lead to your muscles, which is going to lead to increased muscle protein synthesis and, increased muscle protein synthesis and, increased muscle protein synthesis and, you know, obviously there's water you know, obviously there's water you know, obviously there's water probably as well. That said, you know, probably as well. That said, you know, probably as well. That said, you know, you asked me, you know, what happened. you asked me, you know, what happened. you asked me, you know, what happened. So, I got interested in creatine back in So, I got interested in creatine back in So, I got interested in creatine back in 20 when I started basically weight 20 when I started basically weight 20 when I started basically weight training. I've obviously had heard about training. I've obviously had heard about training. I've obviously had heard about it forever, never tried it. And um it forever, never tried it. And um it forever, never tried it. And um as I started to get into resistance as I started to get into resistance as I started to get into resistance training, I was like, I better start training, I was like, I better start training, I was like, I better start taking this. This is I'm in this in taking this. This is I'm in this in taking this. This is I'm in this in this world now and started doing some this world now and started doing some this world now and started doing some research on taking it. So, I was taking research on taking it. So, I was taking research on taking it. So, I was taking the 5 g a day cuz that's really what the 5 g a day cuz that's really what the 5 g a day cuz that's really what most of the studies show creatine most of the studies show creatine most of the studies show creatine monohydrate. That's the most monohydrate. That's the most monohydrate. That's the most well-researched form of creatine. And I well-researched form of creatine. And I well-researched form of creatine. And I was taking 5 g a day was taking 5 g a day was taking 5 g a day because I was interested in improving my because I was interested in improving my because I was interested in improving my training volume and getting the my training volume and getting the my training volume and getting the benefits of it, right? the benefits of it, right? the benefits of it, right? Um and then Um and then Um and then I had Darren Candow on the podcast. Uh I had Darren Candow on the podcast. Uh I had Darren Candow on the podcast. Uh that was in 2024, I think it was. that was in 2024, I think it was. that was in 2024, I think it was. And um And um And um once I'd started getting into the once I'd started getting into the once I'd started getting into the creatine research, I the brain stuff started has research, I the brain stuff started has research, I the brain stuff started has been coming out over the past, you know, been coming out over the past, you know, been coming out over the past, you know, few years. few years. few years. And that's for me become very And that's for me become very And that's for me become very interesting. I remember the first time I interesting. I remember the first time I interesting. I remember the first time I heard about it years ago, I was like, heard about it years ago, I was like, heard about it years ago, I was like, oh, it's helping improve cognitive oh, it's helping improve cognitive oh, it's helping improve cognitive function in older older, you know, function in older older, you know, function in older older, you know, people. &gt;&gt; Yeah, the phosphocreatine system seems &gt;&gt; Yeah, the phosphocreatine system seems &gt;&gt; Yeah, the phosphocreatine system seems to be somewhat to be somewhat to be somewhat um biased towards forebrain structures. You biased towards forebrain structures. You biased towards forebrain structures. You know, I mean, obviously it's in lots of know, I mean, obviously it's in lots of know, I mean, obviously it's in lots of brain areas, but that there might be a brain areas, but that there might be a brain areas, but that there might be a reliance on it for reliance on it for reliance on it for brain areas that are associated with brain areas that are associated with brain areas that are associated with strategic planning and you know, working strategic planning and you know, working strategic planning and you know, working memory and yeah. If you if you were to memory and yeah. If you if you were to memory and yeah. If you if you were to sort of just map the sort of sort of just map the sort of sort of just map the sort of density of usage of the phosphocreatine density of usage of the phosphocreatine density of usage of the phosphocreatine system, you'd see a frontal bias system, you'd see a frontal bias system, you'd see a frontal bias for sure. for sure. for sure. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um well, anyways, that's kind of where &gt;&gt; Um well, anyways, that's kind of where &gt;&gt; Um well, anyways, that's kind of where my interest in you know, kind of my interest in you know, kind of my interest in you know, kind of diving deeper. Anything that's helping diving deeper. Anything that's helping diving deeper. Anything that's helping the brain is interesting to me as I know the brain is interesting to me as I know the brain is interesting to me as I know it is to you as well. And um and so I it is to you as well. And um and so I it is to you as well. And um and so I learned a lot from this podcast I did learned a lot from this podcast I did learned a lot from this podcast I did with Darren Candow. He you know, with Darren Candow. He you know, with Darren Candow. He you know, researches creatine and collaborates researches creatine and collaborates researches creatine and collaborates with a lot of different researchers that with a lot of different researchers that with a lot of different researchers that are doing are doing are doing you know, research on the brain and you know, research on the brain and you know, research on the brain and muscle and you know, lots of the bone. muscle and you know, lots of the bone. muscle and you know, lots of the bone. Turns out it's beneficial for the bone Turns out it's beneficial for the bone Turns out it's beneficial for the bone as well. But the brain, it's interesting as well. But the brain, it's interesting as well. But the brain, it's interesting that we also make creatine in the brain, that we also make creatine in the brain, that we also make creatine in the brain, but um it's not like but um it's not like but um it's not like so it's kind of like the muscle, right? so it's kind of like the muscle, right? so it's kind of like the muscle, right? You're not just going to if you take You're not just going to if you take You're not just going to if you take creatine and you don't work out, you're creatine and you don't work out, you're creatine and you don't work out, you're not going to you're not going to get any not going to you're not going to get any not going to you're not going to get any increase in lean mass, right? It's not increase in lean mass, right? It's not increase in lean mass, right? It's not going to do much of anything because going to do much of anything because going to do much of anything because you're not putting in the work. you're not putting in the work. you're not putting in the work. I think the same goes with the brain as I think the same goes with the brain as I think the same goes with the brain as well, where it's like you researchers well, where it's like you researchers well, where it's like you researchers started to find out that well, you can't started to find out that well, you can't started to find out that well, you can't just take creatine and it's going to just take creatine and it's going to just take creatine and it's going to enhance cognitive function. It's in the enhance cognitive function. It's in the enhance cognitive function. It's in the background of stressing the brain, background of stressing the brain, background of stressing the brain, right? You're stressing your muscles by right? You're stressing your muscles by right? You're stressing your muscles by workout. Same goes for the brain. It's workout. Same goes for the brain. It's workout. Same goes for the brain. It's like in these situations of stress, like in these situations of stress, like in these situations of stress, whether that's sleep deprivation, whether that's sleep deprivation, whether that's sleep deprivation, whether it's, you know, a traumatic whether it's, you know, a traumatic whether it's, you know, a traumatic brain injury. I mean, I would argue, you brain injury. I mean, I would argue, you brain injury. I mean, I would argue, you know, there's a lot of know, there's a lot of know, there's a lot of psychological stress, depression, psychological stress, depression, psychological stress, depression, constantly using your brain like you and constantly using your brain like you and constantly using your brain like you and I right now in this conversation. We're I right now in this conversation. We're I right now in this conversation. We're we're learning, we're thinking. I mean, we're learning, we're thinking. I mean, we're learning, we're thinking. I mean, it is stressful on the brain, right? So, it is stressful on the brain, right? So, it is stressful on the brain, right? So, I mean, I'm obviously speculating here I mean, I'm obviously speculating here I mean, I'm obviously speculating here and taking I'm extrapolating, and taking I'm extrapolating, and taking I'm extrapolating, right? I'm not saying that there's right? I'm not saying that there's right? I'm not saying that there's studies showing that, but it does seem studies showing that, but it does seem studies showing that, but it does seem as though that that's when creatine as though that that's when creatine as though that that's when creatine seems to shine in the brain. And seems to shine in the brain. And seems to shine in the brain. And you might go, well, your brain makes it you might go, well, your brain makes it you might go, well, your brain makes it and it's true. Your brain does make, you and it's true. Your brain does make, you and it's true. Your brain does make, you know, again, it's like think between 1 know, again, it's like think between 1 know, again, it's like think between 1 to 3 g or something. I'm not exactly to 3 g or something. I'm not exactly to 3 g or something. I'm not exactly sure how much, but it makes its own sure how much, but it makes its own sure how much, but it makes its own creatine and it's kind of resistant to creatine and it's kind of resistant to creatine and it's kind of resistant to taking up the creatine that you're taking up the creatine that you're taking up the creatine that you're supplementing with. Um particularly supplementing with. Um particularly supplementing with. Um particularly because for one, the muscle is very because for one, the muscle is very because for one, the muscle is very greedy. So, when you're getting to that greedy. So, when you're getting to that greedy. So, when you're getting to that 5 g range, muscles are really consuming 5 g range, muscles are really consuming 5 g range, muscles are really consuming it if you're working out in it if you're working out in it if you're working out in particular, right? Your muscles are kind particular, right? Your muscles are kind particular, right? Your muscles are kind of consuming that because that's they're of consuming that because that's they're of consuming that because that's they're very greedy for it, right? very greedy for it, right? very greedy for it, right? Uh and there have now been I think a Uh and there have now been I think a Uh and there have now been I think a handful of studies showing that when you handful of studies showing that when you handful of studies showing that when you start to get above that, there's a study start to get above that, there's a study start to get above that, there's a study out of Germany showing this. And it's a out of Germany showing this. And it's a out of Germany showing this. And it's a small study. This needs to be small study. This needs to be small study. This needs to be replicated. Like this is all new, replicated. Like this is all new, replicated. Like this is all new, you know, emerging data. But, that study you know, emerging data. But, that study you know, emerging data. But, that study showed that once you start to get to, showed that once you start to get to, showed that once you start to get to, you know, 10 g, then if you look by MRI, you know, 10 g, then if you look by MRI, you know, 10 g, then if you look by MRI, you can start to see that creatine you can start to see that creatine you can start to see that creatine levels are increasing in certain brain levels are increasing in certain brain levels are increasing in certain brain regions and perhaps in the brain regions and perhaps in the brain regions and perhaps in the brain regions that you were talking about. And they're that you were talking about. And they're that you were talking about. And they're going higher than what you would going higher than what you would going higher than what you would get from just your brain normally making get from just your brain normally making get from just your brain normally making its own creatine. its own creatine. its own creatine. So, the 10 g of creatine a day, which is So, the 10 g of creatine a day, which is So, the 10 g of creatine a day, which is now what my baseline is, is based off of now what my baseline is, is based off of now what my baseline is, is based off of that. But, there's studies now showing that. But, there's studies now showing that. But, there's studies now showing that um if you are in this sort of that um if you are in this sort of that um if you are in this sort of stressed state, your brain is stressed state, your brain is stressed state, your brain is stressed like for sleep deprivation, for like for sleep deprivation, for like for sleep deprivation, for example, you're sleep deprived for 21 hours and you're sleep deprived for 21 hours and you're sleep deprived for 21 hours and your brain's not working very good after your brain's not working very good after your brain's not working very good after not sleeping for 21 hours, right? I not sleeping for 21 hours, right? I not sleeping for 21 hours, right? I mean, that's obviously when I have a mean, that's obviously when I have a mean, that's obviously when I have a when I travel internationally, I never when I travel internationally, I never when I travel internationally, I never really sleep good on a an international really sleep good on a an international really sleep good on a an international flight. And so, I'm like not If you were flight. And so, I'm like not If you were flight. And so, I'm like not If you were to come find me after that flight, I'd to come find me after that flight, I'd to come find me after that flight, I'd be like not working very good, right? be like not working very good, right? be like not working very good, right? Cognitively. &gt;&gt; else. &gt;&gt; else. &gt;&gt; else. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Well, some people can sleep great on a &gt;&gt; Well, some people can sleep great on a &gt;&gt; Well, some people can sleep great on a plane, but I'm not one of those people. plane, but I'm not one of those people. plane, but I'm not one of those people. So, um there have now been at least one So, um there have now been at least one So, um there have now been at least one study showing that if you give someone study showing that if you give someone study showing that if you give someone it's like something like .35 it's like something like .35 it's like something like .35 g per kilogram body weight of creatine, g per kilogram body weight of creatine, g per kilogram body weight of creatine, which comes out to a lot. I mean, it's which comes out to a lot. I mean, it's which comes out to a lot. I mean, it's like 20 25 depends on your body weight, like 20 25 depends on your body weight, like 20 25 depends on your body weight, right? Like you 20 25 g, perhaps even right? Like you 20 25 g, perhaps even right? Like you 20 25 g, perhaps even more. I mean, more. I mean, more. I mean, &gt;&gt; I mean, I'm 100 kg. That's a lot of &gt;&gt; I mean, I'm 100 kg. That's a lot of &gt;&gt; I mean, I'm 100 kg. That's a lot of creatine. &gt;&gt; So, for me, it's more like 20 25 grams, &gt;&gt; So, for me, it's more like 20 25 grams, &gt;&gt; So, for me, it's more like 20 25 grams, right? But if you give individuals that right? But if you give individuals that right? But if you give individuals that high dose in that, you know, sleep high dose in that, you know, sleep high dose in that, you know, sleep deprived state, that they're cognitively deprived state, that they're cognitively deprived state, that they're cognitively not only performing not only performing not only performing normal, but they're performing better normal, but they're performing better normal, but they're performing better than their baseline. than their baseline. than their baseline. And that, of course, generated a lot of And that, of course, generated a lot of And that, of course, generated a lot of interest. There've been studies coming interest. There've been studies coming interest. There've been studies coming out since then showing that, okay, if out since then showing that, okay, if out since then showing that, okay, if you give older adults with mild you give older adults with mild you give older adults with mild cognitive impairment, perhaps mild, you cognitive impairment, perhaps mild, you cognitive impairment, perhaps mild, you know, early stage Alzheimer's disease, know, early stage Alzheimer's disease, know, early stage Alzheimer's disease, again, 20 grams, you're giving them in again, 20 grams, you're giving them in again, 20 grams, you're giving them in the 20 g range of creatine, it's the 20 g range of creatine, it's the 20 g range of creatine, it's improving their cognitive function. improving their cognitive function. improving their cognitive function. Why is that? Well, creatine is important Why is that? Well, creatine is important Why is that? Well, creatine is important to make energy. And when your brain to make energy. And when your brain to make energy. And when your brain cells are stressed out, right? I mean, cells are stressed out, right? I mean, cells are stressed out, right? I mean, like energy energetic demand goes up, like energy energetic demand goes up, like energy energetic demand goes up, and if you have more creatine, it's and if you have more creatine, it's and if you have more creatine, it's going to make things easier. There's going to make things easier. There's going to make things easier. There's also some inflammation that's being also some inflammation that's being also some inflammation that's being generated in that stressed state, and it generated in that stressed state, and it generated in that stressed state, and it seems as though creatine is also having seems as though creatine is also having seems as though creatine is also having both an indirect and direct effect on both an indirect and direct effect on both an indirect and direct effect on inflammatory processes as well. inflammatory processes as well. inflammatory processes as well. This is all early data. Like like This is all early data. Like like This is all early data. Like like more needs to be done, more needs to be done, more needs to be done, but I think there's enough safety data but I think there's enough safety data but I think there's enough safety data out there now where it's like, well, out there now where it's like, well, out there now where it's like, well, it's really it's really it's really not harmful to take 10 g a day. I take not harmful to take 10 g a day. I take not harmful to take 10 g a day. I take 10 g a day every day. 10 g a day every day. 10 g a day every day. &gt;&gt; You spread it out? &gt;&gt; You spread it out? &gt;&gt; You spread it out? &gt;&gt; I do it in two doses. I mean, some &gt;&gt; I do it in two doses. I mean, some &gt;&gt; I do it in two doses. I mean, some people are very sensitive to a 10 g dose people are very sensitive to a 10 g dose people are very sensitive to a 10 g dose where they might like get a GI where they might like get a GI where they might like get a GI irritation effect. irritation effect. irritation effect. &gt;&gt; It can give some people um diarrhea. &gt;&gt; It can give some people um diarrhea. &gt;&gt; It can give some people um diarrhea. &gt;&gt; Diarrhea, exactly. Yeah. So, the very &gt;&gt; Diarrhea, exactly. Yeah. So, the very &gt;&gt; Diarrhea, exactly. Yeah. So, the very scientific way of putting it. scientific way of putting it. scientific way of putting it. But I mean, that So, I do spread it But I mean, that So, I do spread it But I mean, that So, I do spread it out, and I take it I don't take it at out, and I take it I don't take it at out, and I take it I don't take it at night. I like to take mine in the night. I like to take mine in the night. I like to take mine in the morning. And I don't know, Andrew, this might be And I don't know, Andrew, this might be And I don't know, Andrew, this might be a placebo. I feel like a placebo. I feel like a placebo. I feel like I'm constantly in a stressed I'm constantly in a stressed I'm constantly in a stressed I'm constantly in a my brain is under a lot constantly in a my brain is under a lot constantly in a my brain is under a lot of stress. I'm constantly learning, I'm of stress. I'm constantly learning, I'm of stress. I'm constantly learning, I'm reading papers. And like I said, I'm reading papers. And like I said, I'm reading papers. And like I said, I'm extrapolating here. This isn't sleep extrapolating here. This isn't sleep extrapolating here. This isn't sleep deprivation, that's obviously a much deprivation, that's obviously a much deprivation, that's obviously a much more extreme type of stress. more extreme type of stress. more extreme type of stress. But I have noticed that taking my 10 g, I have noticed that taking my 10 g, I have noticed that taking my 10 g, going from 5 to 10, really does seem to going from 5 to 10, really does seem to going from 5 to 10, really does seem to affect my brain functioning like later in the my brain functioning like later in the my brain functioning like later in the day, where I seem to keep going day, where I seem to keep going day, where I seem to keep going better where I just I'm not getting as better where I just I'm not getting as better where I just I'm not getting as tired. And I could be placebo which is tired. And I could be placebo which is tired. And I could be placebo which is fine. Like I said, I am fine with fine. Like I said, I am fine with fine. Like I said, I am fine with placebo effects as long as what I'm placebo effects as long as what I'm placebo effects as long as what I'm ingesting is not actually bad for you. ingesting is not actually bad for you. ingesting is not actually bad for you. Placebo's fine with me. Placebo's fine with me. Placebo's fine with me. But it is working for me. When I travel But it is working for me. When I travel But it is working for me. When I travel I do when I'm going to the East Coast. I do when I'm going to the East Coast. I do when I'm going to the East Coast. I mean, I'm on the West Coast so when I go mean, I'm on the West Coast so when I go mean, I'm on the West Coast so when I go anywhere and I have to give a talk early anywhere and I have to give a talk early anywhere and I have to give a talk early in the morning and I never sleep good in the morning and I never sleep good in the morning and I never sleep good in a hotel. I I'm always sleep deprived. I a hotel. I I'm always sleep deprived. I a hotel. I I'm always sleep deprived. I mean, I don't know that a time that I mean, I don't know that a time that I mean, I don't know that a time that I haven't been traveling haven't been traveling haven't been traveling and I'm going to start traveling with my and I'm going to start traveling with my and I'm going to start traveling with my pill like you do cuz that's brilliant pill like you do cuz that's brilliant pill like you do cuz that's brilliant cuz that's like one of my that's one of cuz that's like one of my that's one of cuz that's like one of my that's one of my problems. But there's many problems my problems. But there's many problems my problems. But there's many problems in hotel rooms that lead to me not in hotel rooms that lead to me not in hotel rooms that lead to me not sleeping as good, right? So I take 20 sleeping as good, right? So I take 20 sleeping as good, right? So I take 20 sometimes 25 g of creatine in those sometimes 25 g of creatine in those sometimes 25 g of creatine in those situations and they're it's like, you situations and they're it's like, you situations and they're it's like, you know, it's not all the time. know, it's not all the time. know, it's not all the time. But it seems to help me again and like I it seems to help me again and like I it seems to help me again and like I said, I'm okay with placebo which is said, I'm okay with placebo which is said, I'm okay with placebo which is fine. But we do have some evidence that fine. But we do have some evidence that fine. But we do have some evidence that it might. it might. it might. And I think this is kind of where people And I think this is kind of where people And I think this is kind of where people are already interested in creatine and are already interested in creatine and are already interested in creatine and so when you start to go, well, maybe so when you start to go, well, maybe so when you start to go, well, maybe it's going to be beneficial for the it's going to be beneficial for the it's going to be beneficial for the brain. If it's going to improve brain. If it's going to improve brain. If it's going to improve cognitive function, that's really cognitive function, that's really cognitive function, that's really something that people are interested in. something that people are interested in. something that people are interested in. Now again, I don't know that it's like Now again, I don't know that it's like Now again, I don't know that it's like if you're just some young healthy person if you're just some young healthy person if you're just some young healthy person that gets all their you're getting your that gets all their you're getting your that gets all their you're getting your sleeping well, you're exercising, sleeping well, you're exercising, sleeping well, you're exercising, everything's great. You know, and I everything's great. You know, and I everything's great. You know, and I mostly sleep well and exercise great. mostly sleep well and exercise great. mostly sleep well and exercise great. I'm extrapolating here but like, you I'm extrapolating here but like, you I'm extrapolating here but like, you know, Alzheimer's disease on the extreme know, Alzheimer's disease on the extreme know, Alzheimer's disease on the extreme end, TBI also on the extreme end. That's end, TBI also on the extreme end. That's end, TBI also on the extreme end. That's real time aging, right? And there's some real time aging, right? And there's some real time aging, right? And there's some evidence it may be helpful for that as evidence it may be helpful for that as evidence it may be helpful for that as well. There's been some studies with well. There's been some studies with well. There's been some studies with children looking at creatine children looking at creatine children looking at creatine supplementation after supplementation after supplementation after a TBI and it seems to help with their a TBI and it seems to help with their a TBI and it seems to help with their recovery. their recovery. their recovery. Um I am probably experiencing brain aging. I am probably experiencing brain aging. I am probably experiencing brain aging. So I'm just kind [clears throat] of So I'm just kind [clears throat] of So I'm just kind [clears throat] of &gt;&gt; I'm going to interrupt there. I don't &gt;&gt; I'm going to interrupt there. I don't &gt;&gt; I'm going to interrupt there. I don't think so. I'm not trying to just be think so. I'm not trying to just be think so. I'm not trying to just be complimentary. You know, I complimentary. You know, I complimentary. You know, I paid close attention to the data and it paid close attention to the data and it paid close attention to the data and it seems like in certain fields like math seems like in certain fields like math seems like in certain fields like math and physics people tend to and physics people tend to and physics people tend to peak with their contributions early. peak with their contributions early. peak with their contributions early. There's a reason why the Fields Medal is There's a reason why the Fields Medal is There's a reason why the Fields Medal is only given to people, you know, like I only given to people, you know, like I only given to people, you know, like I think it's 40 or younger. My dad's a think it's 40 or younger. My dad's a think it's 40 or younger. My dad's a physicist, so he can check me on this physicist, so he can check me on this physicist, so he can check me on this one, but biologists, at least the ones I one, but biologists, at least the ones I one, but biologists, at least the ones I know that took good care of themselves, know that took good care of themselves, know that took good care of themselves, they're known to make great discoveries, they're known to make great discoveries, they're known to make great discoveries, be cognitively sharp, intellectually be cognitively sharp, intellectually be cognitively sharp, intellectually strong well into their 70s and 80s. I strong well into their 70s and 80s. I strong well into their 70s and 80s. I mean, Torsten Wiesel, who mean, Torsten Wiesel, who mean, Torsten Wiesel, who co-recipient of the Nobel Prize for co-recipient of the Nobel Prize for co-recipient of the Nobel Prize for brain plasticity and vision, he's still brain plasticity and vision, he's still brain plasticity and vision, he's still alive and he was I think he still alive and he was I think he still alive and he was I think he still runs. He's in his late 90s. runs. He's in his late 90s. runs. He's in his late 90s. And he paints and he's and he's sharp. And he paints and he's and he's sharp. And he paints and he's and he's sharp. So, I just I made a point to only So, I just I made a point to only So, I just I made a point to only interrupt here. People are going to interrupt here. People are going to interrupt here. People are going to check the data on the previous check the data on the previous check the data on the previous portions of the podcast, but and just portions of the podcast, but and just portions of the podcast, but and just say, I actually think that cognitively say, I actually think that cognitively say, I actually think that cognitively I'm using biologists as an example. It's I'm using biologists as an example. It's I'm using biologists as an example. It's possible in possible in possible in aspects of life where you're aspects of life where you're aspects of life where you're where you're building a base of data to where you're building a base of data to where you're building a base of data to pull from, which is what biology really pull from, which is what biology really pull from, which is what biology really is, it's just an example here, that to is, it's just an example here, that to is, it's just an example here, that to get cognitively stronger and stronger get cognitively stronger and stronger get cognitively stronger and stronger with age. with age. with age. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; I It is a theory, but I see you as that. &gt;&gt; I It is a theory, but I see you as that. &gt;&gt; I It is a theory, but I see you as that. And I'm again, I'm not just saying it to And I'm again, I'm not just saying it to And I'm again, I'm not just saying it to be complimentary, although it is a be complimentary, although it is a be complimentary, although it is a compliment. I It seems like you're compliment. I It seems like you're compliment. I It seems like you're picking up steam, you're thinking you're picking up steam, you're thinking you're picking up steam, you're thinking about things, you're not forgetting about things, you're not forgetting about things, you're not forgetting things from way back when, you're things from way back when, you're things from way back when, you're building on the concepts and building on the concepts and building on the concepts and knowledge from way back when. So, I knowledge from way back when. So, I knowledge from way back when. So, I find it reassuring that you find it reassuring that you find it reassuring that you biologists in particular seem to have biologists in particular seem to have biologists in particular seem to have this, you know, up and to the right this, you know, up and to the right this, you know, up and to the right trajectory for cognition. trajectory for cognition. trajectory for cognition. &gt;&gt; It's interesting. My my late mentor, Dr. &gt;&gt; It's interesting. My my late mentor, Dr. &gt;&gt; It's interesting. My my late mentor, Dr. Bruce Ames, was every bit of that. I Bruce Ames, was every bit of that. I Bruce Ames, was every bit of that. I mean, you know, he passed away a little mean, you know, he passed away a little mean, you know, he passed away a little over a year ago. He's 96, but you know, over a year ago. He's 96, but you know, over a year ago. He's 96, but you know, some of his most He claims some of his some of his most He claims some of his some of his most He claims some of his best work was done, you know, in his best work was done, you know, in his best work was done, you know, in his late 80s. late 80s. late 80s. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; you don't see that in math or physics. &gt;&gt; you don't see that in math or physics. &gt;&gt; you don't see that in math or physics. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, that's interesting. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, that's interesting. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, that's interesting. And and you know, I don't know exactly the you know, I don't know exactly the you know, I don't know exactly the difference. I mean, I don't know how difference. I mean, I don't know how difference. I mean, I don't know how much learning goes into math and physics as learning goes into math and physics as learning goes into math and physics as you're as you're Like I just don't you're as you're Like I just don't you're as you're Like I just don't know, but like with biology, and I mean, know, but like with biology, and I mean, know, but like with biology, and I mean, we're constantly learning new things and we're constantly learning new things and we're constantly learning new things and reading new papers and then I think and reading new papers and then I think and reading new papers and then I think even just the novelty of learning new even just the novelty of learning new even just the novelty of learning new things, I mean, that's brain-derived things, I mean, that's brain-derived things, I mean, that's brain-derived neurotrophic factor, right? Like that's neurotrophic factor, right? Like that's neurotrophic factor, right? Like that's like you're increasing like you're increasing like you're increasing synaptic connections and neuroplasticity synaptic connections and neuroplasticity synaptic connections and neuroplasticity and you're keeping your brain younger in and you're keeping your brain younger in and you're keeping your brain younger in that way, too, right? So, that way, too, right? So, that way, too, right? So, uh I think the learning process is uh I think the learning process is uh I think the learning process is super important, whether it's biology or super important, whether it's biology or super important, whether it's biology or whatever you're passionate about, right? whatever you're passionate about, right? whatever you're passionate about, right? Like you learn new languages, whatever. Like you learn new languages, whatever. Like you learn new languages, whatever. Like the learning process itself is Like the learning process itself is Like the learning process itself is something that is so important for something that is so important for something that is so important for brain aging as well. brain aging as well. brain aging as well. Um and yeah, so I would agree with Um and yeah, so I would agree with Um and yeah, so I would agree with you that but brain aging in general, you that but brain aging in general, you that but brain aging in general, yeah, I'm obviously chronologically yeah, I'm obviously chronologically yeah, I'm obviously chronologically aging and there is some degree of aging and there is some degree of aging and there is some degree of aging going on in my brain. But, you know, so going on in my brain. But, you know, so going on in my brain. But, you know, so that's I think where the creatine that's I think where the creatine that's I think where the creatine craze has come from is the interest in craze has come from is the interest in craze has come from is the interest in and I and I've definitely played a role and I and I've definitely played a role and I and I've definitely played a role in some of this, you know, by in some of this, you know, by in some of this, you know, by &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; by &gt;&gt; by &gt;&gt; by &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; you know, talking about my &gt;&gt; you know, talking about my &gt;&gt; you know, talking about my experience and being super experience and being super experience and being super interested in it because it's like it's interested in it because it's like it's interested in it because it's like it's felt good for me and I've noticed this felt good for me and I've noticed this felt good for me and I've noticed this experience and this is completely experience and this is completely experience and this is completely anecdota again. anecdota again. anecdota again. But, in addition with the small studies But, in addition with the small studies But, in addition with the small studies and they are small. Like, I don't know and they are small. Like, I don't know and they are small. Like, I don't know if you've looked at them, but they're if you've looked at them, but they're if you've looked at them, but they're you can you can they're you can you can they're you can you can &gt;&gt; Subject numbers are not &gt;&gt; Subject numbers are not &gt;&gt; Subject numbers are not &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're small and you can poke &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're small and you can poke &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're small and you can poke holes in them and you would be holes in them and you would be holes in them and you would be completely, you know, okay poking holes completely, you know, okay poking holes completely, you know, okay poking holes because it's they're small, you know, because it's they're small, you know, because it's they're small, you know, sample sizes. But, it is kind of a sample sizes. But, it is kind of a sample sizes. But, it is kind of a consistent trend line where we're seeing consistent trend line where we're seeing consistent trend line where we're seeing more studies come out and show the same more studies come out and show the same more studies come out and show the same thing, same thing. It's like, okay, you thing, same thing. It's like, okay, you thing, same thing. It's like, okay, you know, to a certain point, um know, to a certain point, um know, to a certain point, um maybe there's something here. I think maybe there's something here. I think maybe there's something here. I think that more research is going to come out that more research is going to come out that more research is going to come out on it. And I feel great doing it. So, I on it. And I feel great doing it. So, I on it. And I feel great doing it. So, I mean, and even to the point where mean, and even to the point where mean, and even to the point where if I don't have my 10 g and it's only if I don't have my 10 g and it's only if I don't have my 10 g and it's only five, like I'll notice. five, like I'll notice. five, like I'll notice. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, but again, it could be that &gt;&gt; Yeah, but again, it could be that &gt;&gt; Yeah, but again, it could be that you know, placebo nocebo thing where who you know, placebo nocebo thing where who you know, placebo nocebo thing where who knows? Who knows? But, you know, let's knows? Who knows? But, you know, let's knows? Who knows? But, you know, let's just say it is real, you know, for me. just say it is real, you know, for me. just say it is real, you know, for me. I got to have I got to have my 10 g I got to have I got to have my 10 g I got to have I got to have my 10 g of creatine for my brain. Um you know, of creatine for my brain. Um you know, of creatine for my brain. Um you know, who knows? I may in 5 years be like, I who knows? I may in 5 years be like, I who knows? I may in 5 years be like, I was wrong. We'll see new data come out, was wrong. We'll see new data come out, was wrong. We'll see new data come out, but I don't think so. I think I think but I don't think so. I think I think but I don't think so. I think I think we're going to have I think this is like we're going to have I think this is like we're going to have I think this is like the next a lot of people doing creatine the next a lot of people doing creatine the next a lot of people doing creatine research. It's it's the new thing. They're really It's it's the new thing. They're really It's it's the new thing. They're really cuz there's been a lot of work on cuz there's been a lot of work on cuz there's been a lot of work on exercise physiology and exercise physiology and exercise physiology and &gt;&gt; Yeah, but the safety data are there, so &gt;&gt; Yeah, but the safety data are there, so &gt;&gt; Yeah, but the safety data are there, so it's not like you have to get a lot of it's not like you have to get a lot of it's not like you have to get a lot of &gt;&gt; The safety data is there. The safety &gt;&gt; The safety data is there. The safety &gt;&gt; The safety data is there. The safety data is I mean it's the most data is I mean it's the most data is I mean it's the most well-studied, you know, one of the most well-studied, you know, one of the most well-studied, you know, one of the most well-studied supplements out there, like well-studied supplements out there, like well-studied supplements out there, like you said. I mean you were taking it you said. I mean you were taking it you said. I mean you were taking it when you were 18 and they were studied when you were 18 and they were studied when you were 18 and they were studied back then. Yeah, and it's just been back then. Yeah, and it's just been back then. Yeah, and it's just been studied the, you know, for all the years studied the, you know, for all the years studied the, you know, for all the years that you've been taking it. So, I that you've been taking it. So, I that you've been taking it. So, I mean if it was unsafe, like we really mean if it was unsafe, like we really mean if it was unsafe, like we really would know. And again, I don't want to would know. And again, I don't want to would know. And again, I don't want to get into all the data on get into all the data on get into all the data on the safety, but I think that it's pretty the safety, but I think that it's pretty the safety, but I think that it's pretty solid that it's Now, of course, pretty solid that it's Now, of course, pretty solid that it's Now, of course, like if you're going to go like mainline like if you're going to go like mainline like if you're going to go like mainline 50 g a day, I mean I don't know, that's 50 g a day, I mean I don't know, that's 50 g a day, I mean I don't know, that's a little much, but a little much, but a little much, but &gt;&gt; Someone on the internet will do that. &gt;&gt; Someone on the internet will do that. &gt;&gt; Someone on the internet will do that. They will dry What do they dry scoop? I They will dry What do they dry scoop? I They will dry What do they dry scoop? I mean people have died dry scooping mean people have died dry scooping mean people have died dry scooping energy drinks. I mean there's always a energy drinks. I mean there's always a energy drinks. I mean there's always a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] or two out there that are going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] or two out there that are going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] or two out there that are going to take things to the extreme and harm take things to the extreme and harm take things to the extreme and harm themselves doing something that no one themselves doing something that no one themselves doing something that no one else is dumb enough to do, but I think else is dumb enough to do, but I think else is dumb enough to do, but I think we look at the center of mass we look at the center of mass we look at the center of mass for things. You know what, as we're for things. You know what, as we're for things. You know what, as we're talking about creatine, talking about creatine, talking about creatine, I want to talk about some other I want to talk about some other I want to talk about some other supplements. Um, supplements. Um, supplements. Um, but it occurs to me that but it occurs to me that but it occurs to me that if there's some if there's some if there's some data, ideally from animal studies and humans, ideally from animal studies and humans, ideally from animal studies and humans, and something is safe, I think the question something is safe, I think the question something is safe, I think the question nowadays, because of how broadly health nowadays, because of how broadly health nowadays, because of how broadly health and supplement and other kinds of and supplement and other kinds of and supplement and other kinds of information goes in the world, I think information goes in the world, I think information goes in the world, I think the question that everyone should ask the question that everyone should ask the question that everyone should ask themselves is themselves is themselves is okay, do I want to be in the okay, do I want to be in the okay, do I want to be in the experimental or the control group? experimental or the control group? experimental or the control group? That's how I think about it. So, like if That's how I think about it. So, like if That's how I think about it. So, like if there's a study about creatine there's a study about creatine there's a study about creatine or some new molecule, I'm going to or some new molecule, I'm going to or some new molecule, I'm going to ask you about magnesium in a moment, ask you about magnesium in a moment, ask you about magnesium in a moment, right? I look at the safety margins on right? I look at the safety margins on right? I look at the safety margins on magnesium, okay. But I'm comfortable magnesium, okay. But I'm comfortable magnesium, okay. But I'm comfortable with those safety margins, so that with those safety margins, so that with those safety margins, so that should always be question number one. should always be question number one. should always be question number one. And then it's do I want to be in the And then it's do I want to be in the And then it's do I want to be in the experimental or the control group? And I experimental or the control group? And I experimental or the control group? And I think that these days people are who are think that these days people are who are think that these days people are who are against supplements or against supplements or against supplements or against something, they'll say, "Well, the something, they'll say, "Well, the something, they'll say, "Well, the effect isn't nearly as big as you get effect isn't nearly as big as you get effect isn't nearly as big as you get from exercise." Totally, absolutely. But from exercise." Totally, absolutely. But from exercise." Totally, absolutely. But that's not really what we're talking that's not really what we're talking that's not really what we're talking about. People love this in the cannabis about. People love this in the cannabis about. People love this in the cannabis and alcohol thing whenever I make a and alcohol thing whenever I make a and alcohol thing whenever I make a point about alcohol or cannabis, they'll point about alcohol or cannabis, they'll point about alcohol or cannabis, they'll say, "Well, alcohol is worse." Like, say, "Well, alcohol is worse." Like, say, "Well, alcohol is worse." Like, yeah, I like and you know, I mean, these yeah, I like and you know, I mean, these yeah, I like and you know, I mean, these are two separate entities. So, I think are two separate entities. So, I think are two separate entities. So, I think that people should just ask themselves, that people should just ask themselves, that people should just ask themselves, are you comfortable with the safety are you comfortable with the safety are you comfortable with the safety margins? And do you want to be in the And do you want to be in the And do you want to be in the experimental or the control group? And experimental or the control group? And experimental or the control group? And then, of course, there's the do can I then, of course, there's the do can I then, of course, there's the do can I afford to be in the experimental group afford to be in the experimental group afford to be in the experimental group if I do something. But, that those are if I do something. But, that those are if I do something. But, that those are the really the only questions. There's the really the only questions. There's the really the only questions. There's no one saying that creatine's no one saying that creatine's no one saying that creatine's better than anything else or worse than better than anything else or worse than better than anything else or worse than anything else. anything else. anything else. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; But, somehow the messaging gets all &gt;&gt; But, somehow the messaging gets all &gt;&gt; But, somehow the messaging gets all messed up. And then, all these news messed up. And then, all these news messed up. And then, all these news articles get generated about what articles get generated about what articles get generated about what creatine is and it isn't. And creatine is and it isn't. And creatine is and it isn't. And I find it like um I find it like um I find it like um kind of frustrating because that's that kind of frustrating because that's that kind of frustrating because that's that the issue is not whether or not creatine the issue is not whether or not creatine the issue is not whether or not creatine is better than exercise and good sleep. is better than exercise and good sleep. is better than exercise and good sleep. Question is, do you want to be in the Question is, do you want to be in the Question is, do you want to be in the experimental or the control group and experimental or the control group and experimental or the control group and can you afford to be in the experimental can you afford to be in the experimental can you afford to be in the experimental group? &gt;&gt; Right. I like that. I like that &gt;&gt; Right. I like that. I like that &gt;&gt; Right. I like that. I like that framework especially if it's like, well, framework especially if it's like, well, framework especially if it's like, well, we know it's safe. Okay, so I can we know it's safe. Okay, so I can we know it's safe. Okay, so I can potentially be in the experimental group potentially be in the experimental group potentially be in the experimental group cuz that's question number one. You have cuz that's question number one. You have cuz that's question number one. You have to have that answer first, right? At to have that answer first, right? At to have that answer first, right? At least in my book. But, yeah, I mean, least in my book. But, yeah, I mean, least in my book. But, yeah, I mean, there's flaws with all sorts of studies there's flaws with all sorts of studies there's flaws with all sorts of studies and creatine studies included, right? and creatine studies included, right? and creatine studies included, right? And people make all sorts of claims And people make all sorts of claims And people make all sorts of claims about it and you know, you got to tone about it and you know, you got to tone about it and you know, you got to tone it down a little bit. I mean, it's not it down a little bit. I mean, it's not it down a little bit. I mean, it's not like the best performance enhancer ever. like the best performance enhancer ever. like the best performance enhancer ever. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; But, it seems pretty good at, &gt;&gt; But, it seems pretty good at, &gt;&gt; But, it seems pretty good at, you know, improving exercise volume you know, improving exercise volume you know, improving exercise volume recovery as well. I mean, that's like recovery as well. I mean, that's like recovery as well. I mean, that's like also something that's been shown and also something that's been shown and also something that's been shown and then helping with the stressed-out then helping with the stressed-out then helping with the stressed-out brain. &gt;&gt; On the basis of our last conversation &gt;&gt; On the basis of our last conversation &gt;&gt; On the basis of our last conversation some years ago on this podcast, I um some years ago on this podcast, I um some years ago on this podcast, I um started taking Lovaza, started taking Lovaza, started taking Lovaza, which is a as you know, a prescription which is a as you know, a prescription which is a as you know, a prescription omega-3, so very high concentration omega-3, so very high concentration omega-3, so very high concentration omega-3 cuz I was getting it from, you omega-3 cuz I was getting it from, you omega-3 cuz I was getting it from, you know, standard sources and I thought, know, standard sources and I thought, know, standard sources and I thought, well, I'm hitting 50 and you know, up my well, I'm hitting 50 and you know, up my well, I'm hitting 50 and you know, up my omega-3 and I want clean omega-3. I omega-3 and I want clean omega-3. I omega-3 and I want clean omega-3. I don't I don't want it contaminated with don't I don't want it contaminated with don't I don't want it contaminated with mercury and other things. So, mercury and other things. So, mercury and other things. So, I'll take I'll take I'll take um omega-3s in the form of Lovaza. It's omega-3s in the form of Lovaza. It's omega-3s in the form of Lovaza. It's available in generic form now, so it's available in generic form now, so it's available in generic form now, so it's pretty inexpensive. And I have to say my pretty inexpensive. And I have to say my pretty inexpensive. And I have to say my blood profiles were pretty good, but my blood profiles were pretty good, but my blood profiles were pretty good, but they improved pretty dramatically when I they improved pretty dramatically when I they improved pretty dramatically when I started taking Lovaza. So, I'm grateful started taking Lovaza. So, I'm grateful started taking Lovaza. So, I'm grateful to you for to you for to you for encouraging the omega-3 encouraging the omega-3 encouraging the omega-3 uh you know, take the omega-3 path. you know, take the omega-3 path. you know, take the omega-3 path. &gt;&gt; Have you ever had an omega-3 index test &gt;&gt; Have you ever had an omega-3 index test &gt;&gt; Have you ever had an omega-3 index test done? &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; To measure the &gt;&gt; To measure the &gt;&gt; To measure the &gt;&gt; Oh, oh, if it's on the function test, &gt;&gt; Oh, oh, if it's on the function test, &gt;&gt; Oh, oh, if it's on the function test, then it would be in then it would be in then it would be in it's in normal range. I know it wasn't it's in normal range. I know it wasn't it's in normal range. I know it wasn't flagged, but I don't recall what the flagged, but I don't recall what the flagged, but I don't recall what the what the level was. what the level was. what the level was. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You want to be in the high index, &gt;&gt; Yeah. You want to be in the high index, &gt;&gt; Yeah. You want to be in the high index, not the low, right? Well, obviously if not the low, right? Well, obviously if not the low, right? Well, obviously if you're taking it, you're not going to be you're taking it, you're not going to be you're taking it, you're not going to be in the low. in the low. in the low. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Usually it's around 2 g a day to get you &gt;&gt; Usually it's around 2 g a day to get you &gt;&gt; Usually it's around 2 g a day to get you from low to high. from low to high. from low to high. And I and I do think that's one of the And I and I do think that's one of the And I and I do think that's one of the low-hanging fruits in terms of like low-hanging fruits in terms of like low-hanging fruits in terms of like something powerful in having an outsize something powerful in having an outsize something powerful in having an outsize effect on your health that people can do effect on your health that people can do effect on your health that people can do that's not that much effort. It's not that's not that much effort. It's not that's not that much effort. It's not like exercise and exercise effort and like exercise and exercise effort and like exercise and exercise effort and &gt;&gt; or eating salmon. I don't like fish. &gt;&gt; or eating salmon. I don't like fish. &gt;&gt; or eating salmon. I don't like fish. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and you know, a lot of people &gt;&gt; Yeah, and you know, a lot of people &gt;&gt; Yeah, and you know, a lot of people don't like fish. And also, there's now don't like fish. And also, there's now don't like fish. And also, there's now microplastic contamination in our in microplastic contamination in our in microplastic contamination in our in our, you know, seafood sources. There's our, you know, seafood sources. There's our, you know, seafood sources. There's the heavy metals, PCBs, contaminants. I the heavy metals, PCBs, contaminants. I the heavy metals, PCBs, contaminants. I mean, I still eat salmon, but like you mean, I still eat salmon, but like you mean, I still eat salmon, but like you know, it's know, it's know, it's not like it used to be. So, there not like it used to be. So, there not like it used to be. So, there are other there are other cleaner ways are other there are other cleaner ways are other there are other cleaner ways to get your omega-3 levels higher. And to get your omega-3 levels higher. And to get your omega-3 levels higher. And omega-3 is very important for cardiovas- omega-3 is very important for cardiovas- omega-3 is very important for cardiovas- It's one of the most important It's one of the most important It's one of the most important I would I would say the most powerful I would I would say the most powerful I would I would say the most powerful naturally occurring dietary compounds naturally occurring dietary compounds naturally occurring dietary compounds for suppressing inflammation and for suppressing inflammation and for suppressing inflammation and resolving inflammation would be a better resolving inflammation would be a better resolving inflammation would be a better way of putting it, right? I mean, and way of putting it, right? I mean, and way of putting it, right? I mean, and that's again at the core of aging. And that's again at the core of aging. And that's again at the core of aging. And if you look at any sort of measure of if you look at any sort of measure of if you look at any sort of measure of aging, whether it's even these aging, whether it's even these aging, whether it's even these epigenetic aging clocks, they're very epigenetic aging clocks, they're very epigenetic aging clocks, they're very sensitive to inflammation. And that's sensitive to inflammation. And that's sensitive to inflammation. And that's why there's so many studies coming out why there's so many studies coming out why there's so many studies coming out now showing omega-3 can slow this, you now showing omega-3 can slow this, you now showing omega-3 can slow this, you know, biological aging as measured by know, biological aging as measured by know, biological aging as measured by these epigenetic aging clocks. And these epigenetic aging clocks. And these epigenetic aging clocks. And that's I think even in randomized that's I think even in randomized that's I think even in randomized controlled trials showing this that it's controlled trials showing this that it's controlled trials showing this that it's doing that. And that leads to it's doing that. And that leads to it's doing that. And that leads to functional outcomes as well. So, like even outcomes as well. So, like even outcomes as well. So, like even if you're only slowing the clock, let's if you're only slowing the clock, let's if you're only slowing the clock, let's say, by 3 months, say, by 3 months, say, by 3 months, um you're still having outcomes like um you're still having outcomes like um you're still having outcomes like where, for example, three months where, for example, three months where, for example, three months slowing the epigenetic aging clock by slowing the epigenetic aging clock by slowing the epigenetic aging clock by omega-3 only omega-3 only omega-3 only is going to get you like, you know, 16% is going to get you like, you know, 16% is going to get you like, you know, 16% lower pre-frailty. Or if you add in lower pre-frailty. Or if you add in lower pre-frailty. Or if you add in vitamin D and resistance training, cuz vitamin D and resistance training, cuz vitamin D and resistance training, cuz the study showed it a synergy between the study showed it a synergy between the study showed it a synergy between the three, then you're talking about the three, then you're talking about the three, then you're talking about like lowering the chance of invasive like lowering the chance of invasive like lowering the chance of invasive cancer by 66%. Even cancer by 66%. Even cancer by 66%. Even &gt;&gt; No, you're only getting &gt;&gt; No, you're only getting &gt;&gt; No, you're only getting &gt;&gt; 66. Yeah. Even though you're only &gt;&gt; 66. Yeah. Even though you're only &gt;&gt; 66. Yeah. Even though you're only getting &gt;&gt; D, resistance training, and &gt;&gt; D, resistance training, and &gt;&gt; D, resistance training, and &gt;&gt; and omega-3. &gt;&gt; and omega-3. &gt;&gt; and omega-3. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And this was this was um &gt;&gt; Yeah. And this was this was um &gt;&gt; Yeah. And this was this was um the trial was actually out of the trial was actually out of the trial was actually out of Switzerland, I believe. And it looked at Switzerland, I believe. And it looked at Switzerland, I believe. And it looked at omega-3, vitamin D alone, or resistance training vitamin D alone, or resistance training vitamin D alone, or resistance training alone. And the only thing that actually alone. And the only thing that actually alone. And the only thing that actually slowed the vi- the uh aging of the slowed the vi- the uh aging of the slowed the vi- the uh aging of the clocks was by was omega-3. Now, I'll say clocks was by was omega-3. Now, I'll say clocks was by was omega-3. Now, I'll say that with a caveat, okay? The baseline that with a caveat, okay? The baseline that with a caveat, okay? The baseline exercise in this Switzerland group, in this Switzerland group, in this Switzerland group, 88% of these people are physically 88% of these people are physically 88% of these people are physically active, like doing exercise. So, adding, active, like doing exercise. So, adding, active, like doing exercise. So, adding, you know, 30 minutes three times a you know, 30 minutes three times a you know, 30 minutes three times a week of resistance training on top of week of resistance training on top of week of resistance training on top of that didn't slow the clock more. And I that didn't slow the clock more. And I that didn't slow the clock more. And I wouldn't expect it to, to be honest, wouldn't expect it to, to be honest, wouldn't expect it to, to be honest, when you're already physically active when you're already physically active when you're already physically active and that's your baseline. Um clearly and that's your baseline. Um clearly and that's your baseline. Um clearly [snorts] they weren't eating enough [snorts] they weren't eating enough [snorts] they weren't eating enough omega-3, because that did slow the omega-3, because that did slow the omega-3, because that did slow the epigenetic aging clock. Other studies epigenetic aging clock. Other studies epigenetic aging clock. Other studies have shown if you're vitamin D have shown if you're vitamin D have shown if you're vitamin D deficient, severely vitamin D deficient, severely vitamin D deficient, severely vitamin D deficient, like African-Americans, for example, who like African-Americans, for example, who like African-Americans, for example, who are obese or overweight, if they add in are obese or overweight, if they add in are obese or overweight, if they add in vitamin D and supplement with 4,000 IUs vitamin D and supplement with 4,000 IUs vitamin D and supplement with 4,000 IUs a day for six um six weeks, they can a day for six um six weeks, they can a day for six um six weeks, they can actually slow their actually slow their actually slow their reverse their epigenetic aging as well. reverse their epigenetic aging as well. reverse their epigenetic aging as well. So, I think it again, it's all like So, I think it again, it's all like So, I think it again, it's all like where you're starting from. But the where you're starting from. But the where you're starting from. But the point is that the omega-3 alone did slow point is that the omega-3 alone did slow point is that the omega-3 alone did slow the aging of these clocks. Um and you the aging of these clocks. Um and you the aging of these clocks. Um and you add in the resistance training and add in the resistance training and add in the resistance training and vitamin D, those alone didn't do it, but vitamin D, those alone didn't do it, but vitamin D, those alone didn't do it, but when you add it with the omega-3, there when you add it with the omega-3, there when you add it with the omega-3, there was synergy, so it kept going down. was synergy, so it kept going down. was synergy, so it kept going down. And when the three combined, it slowed And when the three combined, it slowed And when the three combined, it slowed the epigenetic aging by like 3.8 months. the epigenetic aging by like 3.8 months. the epigenetic aging by like 3.8 months. but that translated to like 66% but that translated to like 66% but that translated to like 66% less likely to get invasive cancer. less likely to get invasive cancer. less likely to get invasive cancer. And then the pre-frailty was the omega-3 And then the pre-frailty was the omega-3 And then the pre-frailty was the omega-3 alone and there was another marker I alone and there was another marker I alone and there was another marker I can't remember. I covered this in the can't remember. I covered this in the can't remember. I covered this in the newsletter a while back, but like you newsletter a while back, but like you newsletter a while back, but like you know, this and this is like this isn't know, this and this is like this isn't know, this and this is like this isn't the first study to show this with the first study to show this with the first study to show this with omega-3. Omega-3s are really I'm omega-3. Omega-3s are really I'm omega-3. Omega-3s are really I'm went on this tangent. I'm sorry I'm went on this tangent. I'm sorry I'm went on this tangent. I'm sorry Andrew, you got me on one of my favorite Andrew, you got me on one of my favorite Andrew, you got me on one of my favorite topics. &gt;&gt; excited cuz I take Lovaza, I take &gt;&gt; excited cuz I take Lovaza, I take &gt;&gt; excited cuz I take Lovaza, I take vitamin D, vitamin D, vitamin D, D3. I take a lot. I take 5 to 8,000 I use I take a lot. I take 5 to 8,000 I use I take a lot. I take 5 to 8,000 I use per day and I get sunlight. People per day and I get sunlight. People per day and I get sunlight. People actually ask me this is just a quick actually ask me this is just a quick actually ask me this is just a quick window into the messaging around window into the messaging around window into the messaging around sunlight. Some people will say if I take sunlight. Some people will say if I take sunlight. Some people will say if I take vitamin D, do I still need sunlight? And vitamin D, do I still need sunlight? And vitamin D, do I still need sunlight? And you know, a big part of my messaging is you know, a big part of my messaging is you know, a big part of my messaging is trying to tell people sunlight does a trying to tell people sunlight does a trying to tell people sunlight does a bunch of other things, but I take bunch of other things, but I take bunch of other things, but I take vitamin D at that level, I take the vitamin D at that level, I take the vitamin D at that level, I take the Lovaza and of course I resistance train Lovaza and of course I resistance train Lovaza and of course I resistance train and the Lovaza move and actually and the Lovaza move and actually and the Lovaza move and actually increasing the vitamin D was on the increasing the vitamin D was on the increasing the vitamin D was on the basis of yes blood work, but also our basis of yes blood work, but also our basis of yes blood work, but also our prior conversation. I feel much better. prior conversation. I feel much better. prior conversation. I feel much better. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Much better with the &gt;&gt; Much better with the &gt;&gt; Much better with the &gt;&gt; about 5,000 I use a day as well and I do &gt;&gt; about 5,000 I use a day as well and I do &gt;&gt; about 5,000 I use a day as well and I do get sunlight and I know I agree with you get sunlight and I know I agree with you get sunlight and I know I agree with you sunlight's important for sunlight's not sunlight's important for sunlight's not sunlight's important for sunlight's not and vitamin D production is not the only and vitamin D production is not the only and vitamin D production is not the only thing that sunlight is doing. Obviously, thing that sunlight is doing. Obviously, thing that sunlight is doing. Obviously, you've talked in great, you know, depth you've talked in great, you know, depth you've talked in great, you know, depth about that. depth about that. depth about that. &gt;&gt; to go into the grave. I actually want a &gt;&gt; to go into the grave. I actually want a &gt;&gt; to go into the grave. I actually want a little window over my grave. It'll be a little window over my grave. It'll be a little window over my grave. It'll be a little morbid so I can get morning little morbid so I can get morning little morbid so I can get morning sunlight. I'm just kidding, folks. And sunlight. I'm just kidding, folks. And sunlight. I'm just kidding, folks. And when I'm in the ground, I'm in the when I'm in the ground, I'm in the when I'm in the ground, I'm in the ground. Um no, I think the omega-3 literature Um no, I think the omega-3 literature Um no, I think the omega-3 literature has been greatly assisted by your has been greatly assisted by your has been greatly assisted by your messaging around it because it got messaging around it because it got messaging around it because it got pretty confusing out there for a while. pretty confusing out there for a while. pretty confusing out there for a while. There was the usual pushback that There was the usual pushback that There was the usual pushback that comes after supplement to the year is comes after supplement to the year is comes after supplement to the year is released. It's a joke, folks. Is the oh released. It's a joke, folks. Is the oh released. It's a joke, folks. Is the oh no, it's actually bad for us. You know, no, it's actually bad for us. You know, no, it's actually bad for us. You know, there's always a few of those and then there's always a few of those and then there's always a few of those and then we eventually arrive at sanity again and we eventually arrive at sanity again and we eventually arrive at sanity again and you go, no, the bulk of studies point in you go, no, the bulk of studies point in you go, no, the bulk of studies point in the direction of this being healthy. the direction of this being healthy. the direction of this being healthy. &gt;&gt; control trials showing it improves &gt;&gt; control trials showing it improves &gt;&gt; control trials showing it improves cardiovascular health, lowers the cardiovascular health, lowers the cardiovascular health, lowers the incidence of, you know, cardiovascular incidence of, you know, cardiovascular incidence of, you know, cardiovascular events including heart attacks and events including heart attacks and events including heart attacks and strokes, right? These are the gold strokes, right? These are the gold strokes, right? These are the gold standard. We've got the observational standard. We've got the observational standard. We've got the observational data. We have now looking at the data. We have now looking at the data. We have now looking at the molecular events. We like you know, molecular events. We like you know, molecular events. We like you know, epigenetic aging. We know that it's epigenetic aging. We know that it's epigenetic aging. We know that it's really good at resolving inflammation really good at resolving inflammation really good at resolving inflammation cuz you want your immune system to be cuz you want your immune system to be cuz you want your immune system to be active, but you don't want it to be active, but you don't want it to be active, but you don't want it to be overactive. You want it to be active and overactive. You want it to be active and overactive. You want it to be active and then turn off, right? And so the omega-3 turn off, right? And so the omega-3 turn off, right? And so the omega-3 fatty acids like DHA and EPA which are fatty acids like DHA and EPA which are fatty acids like DHA and EPA which are in Lovaza or Lavaza are what the meta in Lovaza or Lavaza are what the meta in Lovaza or Lavaza are what the meta [clears throat] they're when they're [clears throat] they're when they're [clears throat] they're when they're metabolized they're forming these metabolized they're forming these metabolized they're forming these molecules, resolvins, protectins. These molecules, resolvins, protectins. These molecules, resolvins, protectins. These things are resolving inflammation. And things are resolving inflammation. And things are resolving inflammation. And so I think that so I think that so I think that um it's just it's one of the easiest um it's just it's one of the easiest um it's just it's one of the easiest ways that you can you can increase your ways that you can you can increase your ways that you can you can increase your anti-inflammatory response and exercise anti-inflammatory response and exercise anti-inflammatory response and exercise obviously being another very powerful obviously being another very powerful obviously being another very powerful one. But the omega-3s it's always easier one. But the omega-3s it's always easier one. But the omega-3s it's always easier to take a supplement. So like I have my to take a supplement. So like I have my to take a supplement. So like I have my parents taking it. You know, anyone that parents taking it. You know, anyone that parents taking it. You know, anyone that I care about it's like you know, easy I care about it's like you know, easy I care about it's like you know, easy done. You know, take your 2 g a easy done. You know, take your 2 g a easy done. You know, take your 2 g a day. I say 2 g a day because you know, day. I say 2 g a day because you know, day. I say 2 g a day because you know, Lovaza is prescribed at 4 g a day. You Lovaza is prescribed at 4 g a day. You Lovaza is prescribed at 4 g a day. You know, so 2 g is pretty on the know, so 2 g is pretty on the know, so 2 g is pretty on the conservative side and that's really conservative side and that's really conservative side and that's really what's been shown by um Dr. Bill Harris what's been shown by um Dr. Bill Harris what's been shown by um Dr. Bill Harris and some of his colleagues that can and some of his colleagues that can and some of his colleagues that can basically you can take someone from a basically you can take someone from a basically you can take someone from a low omega-3 index of 4% up to a high low omega-3 index of 4% up to a high low omega-3 index of 4% up to a high omega-3 index of 8% by supplementing omega-3 index of 8% by supplementing omega-3 index of 8% by supplementing with about 2 g a day. So um and by the with about 2 g a day. So um and by the with about 2 g a day. So um and by the way there's all sorts of data on that front there's all sorts of data on that front there's all sorts of data on that front with the omega-3 index and I think we with the omega-3 index and I think we with the omega-3 index and I think we talked about this last time, but talked about this last time, but talked about this last time, but you know, 5-year increased life you know, 5-year increased life you know, 5-year increased life expectancy if you're on the high end. Um expectancy if you're on the high end. Um expectancy if you're on the high end. Um you're talking about 90% reduction in you're talking about 90% reduction in you're talking about 90% reduction in sudden cardiac death. sudden cardiac death. sudden cardiac death. &gt;&gt; Brain weight in children if pregnant &gt;&gt; Brain weight in children if pregnant &gt;&gt; Brain weight in children if pregnant women are taking. Yeah. women are taking. Yeah. women are taking. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean it's important throughout &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean it's important throughout &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean it's important throughout the lifespan. It's you know, from in the lifespan. It's you know, from in the lifespan. It's you know, from in utero development throughout childhood utero development throughout childhood utero development throughout childhood all the way through adult life and into all the way through adult life and into all the way through adult life and into old age. You know, these omega-3 fatty old age. You know, these omega-3 fatty old age. You know, these omega-3 fatty acids are acids are acids are I'm talking about the resolving I'm talking about the resolving I'm talking about the resolving inflammation, but they're also very inflammation, but they're also very inflammation, but they're also very important for important for important for they're incorporated into our cell they're incorporated into our cell they're incorporated into our cell membranes DHA and to some degree EPA. membranes DHA and to some degree EPA. membranes DHA and to some degree EPA. And that has a very important role in And that has a very important role in And that has a very important role in the fluidity of our cell membranes. the fluidity of our cell membranes. the fluidity of our cell membranes. And this is important for if you think And this is important for if you think And this is important for if you think about our endothelial cells lining our about our endothelial cells lining our about our endothelial cells lining our vascular system, our arteries our vascular system, our arteries our vascular system, our arteries you want them to be fluid and more you want them to be fluid and more you want them to be fluid and more flexible, right? That's very important flexible, right? That's very important flexible, right? That's very important for being able to respond to a stressful for being able to respond to a stressful for being able to respond to a stressful situation. In fact, the stiffening of situation. In fact, the stiffening of situation. In fact, the stiffening of our heart with age, you know, the our heart with age, you know, the our heart with age, you know, the collagen that surrounds our the collagen that surrounds our the collagen that surrounds our pericardium or that's surrounding our pericardium or that's surrounding our pericardium or that's surrounding our heart pericardium and our myocardium, heart pericardium and our myocardium, heart pericardium and our myocardium, like that's increases the risk of like that's increases the risk of like that's increases the risk of a heart attack, you know, a heart attack, you know, a heart attack, you know, a cardiovascular event. Um you want your cardiovascular event. Um you want your cardiovascular event. Um you want your cells to be more flexible. So, that's cells to be more flexible. So, that's cells to be more flexible. So, that's what, you know, these omega-3s are also what, you know, these omega-3s are also what, you know, these omega-3s are also doing and that's why they're also really doing and that's why they're also really doing and that's why they're also really important for cardiovascular health in important for cardiovascular health in important for cardiovascular health in addition. And in the brain as well. I addition. And in the brain as well. I addition. And in the brain as well. I mean, these all of our transporters, all mean, these all of our transporters, all mean, these all of our transporters, all of our receptors, right? They're of our receptors, right? They're of our receptors, right? They're embedded in the cell membrane and the embedded in the cell membrane and the embedded in the cell membrane and the fluidity of that membrane is the fluidity of that membrane is the fluidity of that membrane is important for the structure and function important for the structure and function important for the structure and function of these things. And that's why omega-3 of these things. And that's why omega-3 of these things. And that's why omega-3 affects dopamine, serotonin, right? It's affects dopamine, serotonin, right? It's affects dopamine, serotonin, right? It's why it's affecting It's not the only why it's affecting It's not the only why it's affecting It's not the only reason. Inflammation is also, but part reason. Inflammation is also, but part reason. Inflammation is also, but part of the reason is because it's of the reason is because it's of the reason is because it's changing the way our cell is like, you changing the way our cell is like, you changing the way our cell is like, you know, structurally composed. And if you know, structurally composed. And if you know, structurally composed. And if you think about trans fats, like that's they think about trans fats, like that's they think about trans fats, like that's they do the opposite, right? They stiffen the do the opposite, right? They stiffen the do the opposite, right? They stiffen the cell membranes and that's why it's like cell membranes and that's why it's like cell membranes and that's why it's like the worst thing you could do for your the worst thing you could do for your the worst thing you could do for your cardio One of the worst things you could cardio One of the worst things you could cardio One of the worst things you could do for your cardiovascular health is eat do for your cardiovascular health is eat do for your cardiovascular health is eat a bunch of trans fats. Smoking is a bunch of trans fats. Smoking is a bunch of trans fats. Smoking is another one. Smoking's terrible for your another one. Smoking's terrible for your another one. Smoking's terrible for your cardiovascular health. cardiovascular health. cardiovascular health. &gt;&gt; Do people still eat trans fats? &gt;&gt; Do people still eat trans fats? &gt;&gt; Do people still eat trans fats? &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; No. &gt;&gt; I feel like trans fats got executed in &gt;&gt; I feel like trans fats got executed in &gt;&gt; I feel like trans fats got executed in When when was it that trans fats got When when was it that trans fats got When when was it that trans fats got executed? &gt;&gt; became I think it was 2018. I mean, &gt;&gt; became I think it was 2018. I mean, &gt;&gt; became I think it was 2018. I mean, something when they're all like something when they're all like something when they're all like &gt;&gt; Yeah, they were sentenced to death. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they were sentenced to death. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they were sentenced to death. Yeah. &gt;&gt; No, it's the point is that we all &gt;&gt; No, it's the point is that we all &gt;&gt; No, it's the point is that we all know trans fats are bad for our know trans fats are bad for our know trans fats are bad for our heart, but we don't think about why. And heart, but we don't think about why. And heart, but we don't think about why. And they stiffen I mean, the they stiffen I mean, the they stiffen I mean, the research is doing it know. I mean, it's research is doing it know. I mean, it's research is doing it know. I mean, it's stiffen it's stiffening your cell, your stiffen it's stiffening your cell, your stiffen it's stiffening your cell, your endothelial cells. endothelial cells. endothelial cells. &gt;&gt; Well, donuts, right? As in like if you &gt;&gt; Well, donuts, right? As in like if you &gt;&gt; Well, donuts, right? As in like if you go get a donut, isn't a donut have a go get a donut, isn't a donut have a go get a donut, isn't a donut have a bunch Fried foods, fried foods. Fried foods, fried foods. Fried foods, fried foods. &gt;&gt; some amount of trans fat that's like &gt;&gt; some amount of trans fat that's like &gt;&gt; some amount of trans fat that's like below that's threshold of being below that's threshold of being below that's threshold of being &gt;&gt; only bad food I miss. &gt;&gt; only bad food I miss. &gt;&gt; only bad food I miss. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; The late night donut, right? &gt;&gt; The late night donut, right? &gt;&gt; The late night donut, right? &gt;&gt; I had so much margarine &gt;&gt; I had so much margarine &gt;&gt; I had so much margarine as a kid. My mom used to buy it by the as a kid. My mom used to buy it by the as a kid. My mom used to buy it by the tub. I remember it as like this She tub. I remember it as like this She tub. I remember it as like this She used go to Costco and get like this big used go to Costco and get like this big used go to Costco and get like this big yellow tub of margarine yellow tub of margarine yellow tub of margarine and everything was cooked in it and I and everything was cooked in it and I and everything was cooked in it and I mean it was like on our toast and mean it was like on our toast and mean it was like on our toast and &gt;&gt; This was a battle in my home. Actually, &gt;&gt; This was a battle in my home. Actually, &gt;&gt; This was a battle in my home. Actually, I'm going to I'm going to re- I'm going I'm going to I'm going to re- I'm going I'm going to I'm going to re- I'm going to resurrect some family battles of to resurrect some family battles of to resurrect some family battles of the butter the butter margarine battle the butter the butter margarine battle the butter the butter margarine battle was a battle. was a battle. was a battle. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Butter won. &gt;&gt; Butter won. &gt;&gt; Butter won. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it doesn't taste the same. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it doesn't taste the same. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it doesn't taste the same. But, you know, that was that was the But, you know, that was that was the But, you know, that was that was the craze. It was the loaf like the fat was craze. It was the loaf like the fat was craze. It was the loaf like the fat was bad and butter was bad and margarine was bad and butter was bad and margarine was bad and butter was bad and margarine was good and it turns out nope. good and it turns out nope. good and it turns out nope. Trans fats are really bad. Um but the Trans fats are really bad. Um but the Trans fats are really bad. Um but the point I was trying to make was to help point I was trying to make was to help point I was trying to make was to help contrast for people to understand. contrast for people to understand. contrast for people to understand. Sometimes when I talk self fluidity Sometimes when I talk self fluidity Sometimes when I talk self fluidity people are like What? people are like What? people are like What? &gt;&gt; good that people I mean, I think it's &gt;&gt; good that people I mean, I think it's &gt;&gt; good that people I mean, I think it's very important that people understand very important that people understand very important that people understand some of the cellular molecular some of the cellular molecular some of the cellular molecular underpinnings of protocols because underpinnings of protocols because underpinnings of protocols because I strongly believe that understanding I strongly believe that understanding I strongly believe that understanding mechanism even just a little bit or mechanism even just a little bit or mechanism even just a little bit or striving to understand it embeds the striving to understand it embeds the striving to understand it embeds the information for people makes it more information for people makes it more information for people makes it more likely that they'll do the behaviors likely that they'll do the behaviors likely that they'll do the behaviors and gives them a logic to work from when and gives them a logic to work from when and gives them a logic to work from when they have to make choices because life they have to make choices because life they have to make choices because life isn't perfect. isn't perfect. isn't perfect. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; That's I know that to be certain. &gt;&gt; That's I know that to be certain. &gt;&gt; That's I know that to be certain. &gt;&gt; I completely agree with you. I it's &gt;&gt; I completely agree with you. I it's &gt;&gt; I completely agree with you. I it's certainly for me, but I that is certainly for me, but I that is certainly for me, but I that is also my hope. I think that if people also my hope. I think that if people also my hope. I think that if people kind of understand somewhat of the why kind of understand somewhat of the why kind of understand somewhat of the why it's motivating to try to adopt the it's motivating to try to adopt the it's motivating to try to adopt the healthy habit. But also, I think it the healthy habit. But also, I think it the healthy habit. But also, I think it helps them remember like why it's helps them remember like why it's helps them remember like why it's important, right? important, right? important, right? &gt;&gt; it's how the brain learns. It's a it's &gt;&gt; it's how the brain learns. It's a it's &gt;&gt; it's how the brain learns. It's a it's the secret is context. The way to the secret is context. The way to the secret is context. The way to remember something is context. People remember something is context. People remember something is context. People always say it's story. No, it's context always say it's story. No, it's context always say it's story. No, it's context and anyway, you and I know that to be and anyway, you and I know that to be and anyway, you and I know that to be true from our background. If I may, true from our background. If I may, true from our background. If I may, I'd like to ask about magnesium. I'm I'd like to ask about magnesium. I'm I'd like to ask about magnesium. I'm very bullish on magnesium in particular very bullish on magnesium in particular very bullish on magnesium in particular magnesium 3 and 8 before sleep. For magnesium 3 and 8 before sleep. For magnesium 3 and 8 before sleep. For sleep, I take AG1 cuz I helped them sleep, I take AG1 cuz I helped them sleep, I take AG1 cuz I helped them build it. It just has a bunch of things build it. It just has a bunch of things build it. It just has a bunch of things like magnesium 3 and 8 and saffron and like magnesium 3 and 8 and saffron and like magnesium 3 and 8 and saffron and tart cherry. The things that tart cherry. The things that tart cherry. The things that have either been shown or are you know, have either been shown or are you know, have either been shown or are you know, gradually there's amassing of uh gradually there's amassing of uh gradually there's amassing of uh research data to research data to research data to uh other people um studies out there to uh other people um studies out there to uh other people um studies out there to support that it can facilitate either support that it can facilitate either support that it can facilitate either transition to sleep or sleep or but transition to sleep or sleep or but transition to sleep or sleep or but magnesium threonate and magnesium threonate and magnesium threonate and magnesium bisglycinate to me are interchangeable bisglycinate to me are interchangeable bisglycinate to me are interchangeable uh with respect to sleep. But magnesium uh with respect to sleep. But magnesium uh with respect to sleep. But magnesium threonate I'm aware there are some threonate I'm aware there are some threonate I'm aware there are some studies that there may be some cognitive studies that there may be some cognitive studies that there may be some cognitive benefits. So magnesium obviously could benefits. So magnesium obviously could benefits. So magnesium obviously could be split into a number of things but be split into a number of things but be split into a number of things but maybe we just start there with threonate maybe we just start there with threonate maybe we just start there with threonate bisglycinate. I have a feeling that bisglycinate. I have a feeling that bisglycinate. I have a feeling that you're aware of some additional you're aware of some additional you're aware of some additional differences between them and I'd like to differences between them and I'd like to differences between them and I'd like to know what you prefer for sleep or for know what you prefer for sleep or for know what you prefer for sleep or for cognitive benefits and then maybe we get cognitive benefits and then maybe we get cognitive benefits and then maybe we get into the other magnesiums. into the other magnesiums. into the other magnesiums. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so if we if we're &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so if we if we're &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so if we if we're comparing mis- magnesium bisglycinate or comparing mis- magnesium bisglycinate or comparing mis- magnesium bisglycinate or magnesium glycinate depending on how magnesium glycinate depending on how magnesium glycinate depending on how many molecules of glycine are attached many molecules of glycine are attached many molecules of glycine are attached to the magnesium compared to magnesium to the magnesium compared to magnesium to the magnesium compared to magnesium L-threonate the main difference here and this is the main difference here and this is the main difference here and this is based on very limited amount of data a based on very limited amount of data a based on very limited amount of data a lot of it animal data with respect to lot of it animal data with respect to lot of it animal data with respect to the magnesium threonate is that the magnesium threonate is that the magnesium threonate is that form of magnesium is supposed to get form of magnesium is supposed to get form of magnesium is supposed to get into and cross the blood brain barrier into and cross the blood brain barrier into and cross the blood brain barrier more readily and get into the brain more readily and get into the brain more readily and get into the brain better and then in the brain it's you better and then in the brain it's you better and then in the brain it's you know helping facilitate know helping facilitate know helping facilitate neurotransmission etc. right helping neurotransmission etc. right helping neurotransmission etc. right helping improve cognitive function. improve cognitive function. improve cognitive function. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; And so &gt;&gt; And so &gt;&gt; And so whereas magnesium glycinate or whereas magnesium glycinate or whereas magnesium glycinate or bisglycinate you're having the magnesium bisglycinate you're having the magnesium bisglycinate you're having the magnesium attached to the glycine attached to the glycine attached to the glycine um glycine also is great to take for um glycine also is great to take for um glycine also is great to take for sleep so I like to take magnesium sleep so I like to take magnesium sleep so I like to take magnesium bisglycinate or glycinate for sleep bisglycinate or glycinate for sleep bisglycinate or glycinate for sleep and um and um and um so that I would say if you're if you're so that I would say if you're if you're so that I would say if you're if you're interested in more the cognition aspect interested in more the cognition aspect interested in more the cognition aspect &gt;&gt; Well the studies I think you're &gt;&gt; Well the studies I think you're &gt;&gt; Well the studies I think you're referring to the Guosong Liu's data referring to the Guosong Liu's data referring to the Guosong Liu's data um you know show some in mice some um you know show some in mice some um you know show some in mice some cognitive enhancement or at least some cognitive enhancement or at least some cognitive enhancement or at least some offsetting of cognitive decline. Those offsetting of cognitive decline. Those offsetting of cognitive decline. Those are different but related obviously. In are different but related obviously. In are different but related obviously. In anticipation of today's discussion I was anticipation of today's discussion I was anticipation of today's discussion I was able to find one study able to find one study able to find one study seems okay it's not a huge sample seems okay it's not a huge sample seems okay it's not a huge sample size showing a um positive reports on size showing a um positive reports on size showing a um positive reports on sleep quality after magnesium sleep quality after magnesium sleep quality after magnesium L-threonine. So, the studies are L-threonine. So, the studies are L-threonine. So, the studies are starting to show up. starting to show up. starting to show up. &gt;&gt; to show up. &gt;&gt; to show up. &gt;&gt; to show up. &gt;&gt; But, there aren't a lot of studies on &gt;&gt; But, there aren't a lot of studies on &gt;&gt; But, there aren't a lot of studies on magnesium for specific outcomes in magnesium for specific outcomes in magnesium for specific outcomes in humans. And I think it's because it hits humans. And I think it's because it hits humans. And I think it's because it hits like what? 3,000 plus pathways. You like what? 3,000 plus pathways. You like what? 3,000 plus pathways. You know, yeah. know, yeah. know, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a cofactor for many enzymes. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a cofactor for many enzymes. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a cofactor for many enzymes. &gt;&gt; So, if you're taking bisglycinate before &gt;&gt; So, if you're taking bisglycinate before &gt;&gt; So, if you're taking bisglycinate before sleep, are you taking it a half hour or sleep, are you taking it a half hour or sleep, are you taking it a half hour or 60 minutes before sleep? 60 minutes before sleep? 60 minutes before sleep? &gt;&gt; I'm usually taking it, I would say like &gt;&gt; I'm usually taking it, I would say like &gt;&gt; I'm usually taking it, I would say like couple hours before bed. You couple hours before bed. You couple hours before bed. You know, sometimes I add a little bit more know, sometimes I add a little bit more know, sometimes I add a little bit more magnesium in the in the mix. Depends on magnesium in the in the mix. Depends on magnesium in the in the mix. Depends on the day and if I exercise more the day and if I exercise more the day and if I exercise more because you do sweat out magnesium. And because you do sweat out magnesium. And because you do sweat out magnesium. And so, if you're pretty athletic, your so, if you're pretty athletic, your so, if you're pretty athletic, your requirements can go up by even as much requirements can go up by even as much requirements can go up by even as much as 20%. as 20%. as 20%. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; Uh but yeah, the magnesium L-threonine, &gt;&gt; Uh but yeah, the magnesium L-threonine, &gt;&gt; Uh but yeah, the magnesium L-threonine, it's interesting. I very recently got it's interesting. I very recently got it's interesting. I very recently got interested in experimenting with it. You interested in experimenting with it. You interested in experimenting with it. You know, there's a little bit of human know, there's a little bit of human know, there's a little bit of human evidence as well that it improves evidence as well that it improves evidence as well that it improves cognition. Not strong, but again, cognition. Not strong, but again, cognition. Not strong, but again, it's that you know, we just don't have a it's that you know, we just don't have a it's that you know, we just don't have a lot of people researching it. And we lot of people researching it. And we lot of people researching it. And we have the animal data. The animal data is have the animal data. The animal data is have the animal data. The animal data is a little stronger. a little stronger. a little stronger. Don't have a lot of human data, but it Don't have a lot of human data, but it Don't have a lot of human data, but it seems to signal it might be important. seems to signal it might be important. seems to signal it might be important. It might help with cognition, right? And It might help with cognition, right? And It might help with cognition, right? And so, I kind of got interested in so, I kind of got interested in so, I kind of got interested in experimenting with the magnesium experimenting with the magnesium experimenting with the magnesium L-threonine, which I haven't use it's L-threonine, which I haven't use it's L-threonine, which I haven't use it's a new thing for me. I've been doing it's a new thing for me. I've been doing it's a new thing for me. I've been doing magnesium glycinate for a while. magnesium glycinate for a while. magnesium glycinate for a while. &gt;&gt; I think the study actually looked at the &gt;&gt; I think the study actually looked at the &gt;&gt; I think the study actually looked at the Magtein version. I have no financial Magtein version. I have no financial Magtein version. I have no financial relationship to Magtein. You know, we relationship to Magtein. You know, we relationship to Magtein. You know, we want to be very clear. I just mentioned want to be very clear. I just mentioned want to be very clear. I just mentioned that cuz that's a common one out there. that cuz that's a common one out there. that cuz that's a common one out there. And as far as I know, I'll double check, And as far as I know, I'll double check, And as far as I know, I'll double check, but they weren't paid by Magtein, but they weren't paid by Magtein, but they weren't paid by Magtein, but &gt;&gt; I think Magtein did fund the study. &gt;&gt; I think Magtein did fund the study. &gt;&gt; I think Magtein did fund the study. &gt;&gt; Oh, they did? &gt;&gt; Oh, they did? &gt;&gt; Oh, they did? &gt;&gt; So, yeah. &gt;&gt; So, yeah. &gt;&gt; So, yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. All right. We'll put a link &gt;&gt; Okay. All right. We'll put a link &gt;&gt; Okay. All right. We'll put a link to it. to it. to it. &gt;&gt; Doesn't discredit it unless &gt;&gt; Doesn't discredit it unless &gt;&gt; Doesn't discredit it unless there's some, you know, bad things going there's some, you know, bad things going there's some, you know, bad things going on, which I like to think not. I mean, on, which I like to think not. I mean, on, which I like to think not. I mean, you know, you know, you know, &gt;&gt; It's supposed to be done independently. &gt;&gt; It's supposed to be done independently. &gt;&gt; It's supposed to be done independently. I mean, when they pay for a group to do I mean, when they pay for a group to do I mean, when they pay for a group to do I mean, by law, they're supposed to I mean, by law, they're supposed to I mean, by law, they're supposed to blind the data and not bias the blind the data and not bias the blind the data and not bias the outcomes. One hopes that's what they do. outcomes. One hopes that's what they do. outcomes. One hopes that's what they do. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think to the most part, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think to the most part, &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think to the most part, you're for the most part, you're for the most part, you're for the most part, you're probably okay. But, it is something to probably okay. But, it is something to probably okay. But, it is something to consider if there is a potential COI, consider if there is a potential COI, consider if there is a potential COI, right? Um, but yeah, so I don't know so that Um, but yeah, so I don't know so that Um, but yeah, so I don't know so that was the first part of your question was the first part of your question was the first part of your question was the difference between the difference between the difference between &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; the glycinate and the threonate. And &gt;&gt; the glycinate and the threonate. And &gt;&gt; the glycinate and the threonate. And then and then the concern that then and then the concern that then and then the concern that I might have which might be something I might have which might be something I might have which might be something you're not thinking about is okay, well, you're not thinking about is okay, well, you're not thinking about is okay, well, I need to fulfill my magnesium I need to fulfill my magnesium I need to fulfill my magnesium requirements, right? And so our daily requirements, right? And so our daily requirements, right? And so our daily magnesium requirements again based on magnesium requirements again based on magnesium requirements again based on our gender and our physical activity our gender and our physical activity our gender and our physical activity it's a range. It's a sliding scale. So, it's a range. It's a sliding scale. So, it's a range. It's a sliding scale. So, you know, women 300 350 milligrams a day you know, women 300 350 milligrams a day you know, women 300 350 milligrams a day men 350 400 milligrams a day really men 350 400 milligrams a day really men 350 400 milligrams a day really depending on how physically active you depending on how physically active you depending on how physically active you are. And this is just And this is just And this is just you know, your daily requirements to you know, your daily requirements to you know, your daily requirements to have enough magnesium to run have enough magnesium to run have enough magnesium to run you know, repairing DNA damage to run you know, repairing DNA damage to run you know, repairing DNA damage to run you need magnesium to make energy to you need magnesium to make energy to you need magnesium to make energy to utilize energy. You need it for utilize energy. You need it for utilize energy. You need it for neurotransmission. Like it's there's so neurotransmission. Like it's there's so neurotransmission. Like it's there's so many different, you know, many different, you know, many different, you know, important functions in our body that important functions in our body that important functions in our body that require magnesium to work to make require magnesium to work to make require magnesium to work to make vitamin to convert vitamin D3 into the vitamin to convert vitamin D3 into the vitamin to convert vitamin D3 into the active steroid hormone. And this to active steroid hormone. And this to active steroid hormone. And this to me is like to some degree me is like to some degree me is like to some degree vindicating but also I'm super annoyed vindicating but also I'm super annoyed vindicating but also I'm super annoyed by it because you know, we have all by it because you know, we have all by it because you know, we have all these different these different these different um, studies out there on vitamin D um, studies out there on vitamin D um, studies out there on vitamin D supplementation and does it is it supplementation and does it is it supplementation and does it is it important? And I mean there's so many important? And I mean there's so many important? And I mean there's so many negative data out there. Well, it negative data out there. Well, it negative data out there. Well, it doesn't do what we thought. It's not doesn't do what we thought. It's not doesn't do what we thought. It's not doing anything. doing anything. doing anything. Um, but half the US population Um, but half the US population Um, but half the US population doesn't get enough magnesium and so doesn't get enough magnesium and so doesn't get enough magnesium and so those enzymes [clears throat] that are those enzymes [clears throat] that are those enzymes [clears throat] that are important for converting the D3 that important for converting the D3 that important for converting the D3 that you're taking into the active steroid you're taking into the active steroid you're taking into the active steroid hormone are not working properly. Um, so hormone are not working properly. Um, so hormone are not working properly. Um, so anyways, I'm not going to go on that anyways, I'm not going to go on that anyways, I'm not going to go on that tangent but I'm just saying magnesium is tangent but I'm just saying magnesium is tangent but I'm just saying magnesium is doing a lot of things. So, um, if you doing a lot of things. So, um, if you doing a lot of things. So, um, if you are taking the magnesium threonate and are taking the magnesium threonate and are taking the magnesium threonate and let's say it is getting it's going into let's say it is getting it's going into let's say it is getting it's going into the blood, you know, more the blood, you know, more the blood, you know, more sorry, the brain more readily sorry, the brain more readily sorry, the brain more readily then the concern would be well, that not then the concern would be well, that not then the concern would be well, that not enough of it is around for, you know, enough of it is around for, you know, enough of it is around for, you know, DNA repair in other organs and stuff and DNA repair in other organs and stuff and DNA repair in other organs and stuff and so you might want to get another source so you might want to get another source so you might want to get another source of magnesium. It's all theoretical, of magnesium. It's all theoretical, of magnesium. It's all theoretical, [snorts] right? And like that's not I [snorts] right? And like that's not I [snorts] right? And like that's not I would there's no data on that. So, just would there's no data on that. So, just would there's no data on that. So, just mostly because no one's looking at it. mostly because no one's looking at it. mostly because no one's looking at it. No one's No one's No one's &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's not a lot of incentive. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's not a lot of incentive. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's not a lot of incentive. It's funny when people will always say, It's funny when people will always say, It's funny when people will always say, "Well, there's no incentive cuz the drug "Well, there's no incentive cuz the drug "Well, there's no incentive cuz the drug companies can't make a lot of money on companies can't make a lot of money on companies can't make a lot of money on it." And I sometimes that's true, but I it." And I sometimes that's true, but I it." And I sometimes that's true, but I have to chuckle cuz as scientists, I have to chuckle cuz as scientists, I have to chuckle cuz as scientists, I will tell you folks will tell you folks will tell you folks and like I wish I could just like paint this like I wish I could just like paint this like I wish I could just like paint this across the sky, but then I get accused across the sky, but then I get accused across the sky, but then I get accused of being like a chem trail person or of being like a chem trail person or of being like a chem trail person or something. Um the reason there's no studies on the reason there's no studies on the reason there's no studies on BPC-157, the reason there's no like RCTs BPC-157, the reason there's no like RCTs BPC-157, the reason there's no like RCTs on a randomized control on different on a randomized control on different on a randomized control on different forms of magnesium and large sample forms of magnesium and large sample forms of magnesium and large sample sizes because we barely have enough sizes because we barely have enough sizes because we barely have enough money to fund the current research. money to fund the current research. money to fund the current research. Like I I'm not trying to get make this Like I I'm not trying to get make this Like I I'm not trying to get make this political. Like we just had a 1% political. Like we just had a 1% political. Like we just had a 1% increase in the NIH budget, but like increase in the NIH budget, but like increase in the NIH budget, but like there isn't an infinite amount of money there isn't an infinite amount of money there isn't an infinite amount of money to run studies. And so, scientists are to run studies. And so, scientists are to run studies. And so, scientists are if they already work on magnesium or if they already work on magnesium or if they already work on magnesium or becomes interesting to them because it becomes interesting to them because it becomes interesting to them because it came up in a screen of pathways, people came up in a screen of pathways, people came up in a screen of pathways, people aren't they're not a lot of scientists aren't they're not a lot of scientists aren't they're not a lot of scientists sitting around going, "Oh, like maybe I sitting around going, "Oh, like maybe I sitting around going, "Oh, like maybe I should study compare magnesium malate should study compare magnesium malate should study compare magnesium malate bisglycinate 3 and 8 in sleep in 2,000 bisglycinate 3 and 8 in sleep in 2,000 bisglycinate 3 and 8 in sleep in 2,000 subjects, male, female, like pregnant subjects, male, female, like pregnant subjects, male, female, like pregnant and perimenopausal." Like no. No, and perimenopausal." Like no. No, and perimenopausal." Like no. No, there's no money to do it. Like So, there's no money to do it. Like So, there's no money to do it. Like So, that's where I get back to that's where I get back to that's where I get back to is it safe? is it safe? is it safe? Do you want to be in the experimental or Do you want to be in the experimental or Do you want to be in the experimental or the control group? Can you afford to be the control group? Can you afford to be the control group? Can you afford to be in the experimental or the control in the experimental or the control in the experimental or the control group? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I feel like that's the that's like all &gt;&gt; I feel like that's the that's like all &gt;&gt; I feel like that's the that's like all we've got. And I'm only I'm chuckling we've got. And I'm only I'm chuckling we've got. And I'm only I'm chuckling out of it's a it's sort of like a out of it's a it's sort of like a out of it's a it's sort of like a laughter of pain because I get where laughter of pain because I get where laughter of pain because I get where people are coming from, but the drug people are coming from, but the drug people are coming from, but the drug companies are not like avoiding studying companies are not like avoiding studying companies are not like avoiding studying magnesium because there's no money to magnesium because there's no money to magnesium because there's no money to make. It's because I don't know what make. It's because I don't know what make. It's because I don't know what would that even look like. What would that even look like. What would that even look like. What endpoint? What disease? What like Yeah. endpoint? What disease? What like Yeah. endpoint? What disease? What like Yeah. Anyway, forgive me for editorializing, Anyway, forgive me for editorializing, Anyway, forgive me for editorializing, but &gt;&gt; You're not going to cure &gt;&gt; You're not going to cure &gt;&gt; You're not going to cure you know, cardiovascular disease or you know, cardiovascular disease or you know, cardiovascular disease or cancer by taking a magnesium supplement. cancer by taking a magnesium supplement. cancer by taking a magnesium supplement. I mean, that these nutraceuticals, I mean, that these nutraceuticals, I mean, that these nutraceuticals, these vitamins and minerals, they're these vitamins and minerals, they're these vitamins and minerals, they're about prevention, really. And they're about prevention, really. And they're about prevention, really. And and giving your body the right and giving your body the right and giving your body the right nutrients that it needs to do and nutrients that it needs to do and nutrients that it needs to do and function properly, you know, whether function properly, you know, whether function properly, you know, whether that is, you know, getting enough sleep. that is, you know, getting enough sleep. that is, you know, getting enough sleep. You know, when you're when you're You know, when you're when you're You know, when you're when you're stressed, when your cortisol goes up, stressed, when your cortisol goes up, stressed, when your cortisol goes up, you know, chronically, you're depleting you know, chronically, you're depleting you know, chronically, you're depleting magnesium. You know, it's magnesium. You know, it's magnesium. You know, it's very like magnesium is being used to very like magnesium is being used to very like magnesium is being used to deal with that stress, right? So, deal with that stress, right? So, deal with that stress, right? So, there there's a reason that we need there there's a reason that we need there there's a reason that we need things like magnesium and, you know, things like magnesium and, you know, things like magnesium and, you know, vitamin D. It's just it gets converted vitamin D. It's just it gets converted vitamin D. It's just it gets converted into steroid hormone changing 5% of our, into steroid hormone changing 5% of our, into steroid hormone changing 5% of our, you know, our genome. So, you know, our genome. So, you know, our genome. So, it yeah, it's different. It's not like a it yeah, it's different. It's not like a it yeah, it's different. It's not like a pharmaceutical where you're you don't pharmaceutical where you're you don't pharmaceutical where you're you don't need this, you know, to function need this, you know, to function need this, you know, to function optimally, but it might It's it's the optimally, but it might It's it's the optimally, but it might It's it's the whole like, okay, I'm sick whole like, okay, I'm sick whole like, okay, I'm sick and now I need this, you know, or I'm or and now I need this, you know, or I'm or and now I need this, you know, or I'm or I'm overweight, right? We got the I'm overweight, right? We got the I'm overweight, right? We got the GLP-1s, right? I'm fat I'm obese GLP-1s, right? I'm fat I'm obese GLP-1s, right? I'm fat I'm obese um and I need to, you know, help fix um and I need to, you know, help fix um and I need to, you know, help fix that. And so, that's kind of a different that. And so, that's kind of a different that. And so, that's kind of a different paradigm. &gt;&gt; Specific endpoint type stuff. &gt;&gt; Specific endpoint type stuff. &gt;&gt; Specific endpoint type stuff. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's super important for &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's super important for &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's super important for people to hear that. Oh, by the way, I people to hear that. Oh, by the way, I people to hear that. Oh, by the way, I should just say um for your for your should just say um for your for your should just say um for your for your sake um and for the listeners, I divide sake um and for the listeners, I divide sake um and for the listeners, I divide supplements into basically four supplements into basically four supplements into basically four categories like categories like categories like um food replacement like whey protein or um food replacement like whey protein or um food replacement like whey protein or a protein bar or you know, obvious sort a protein bar or you know, obvious sort a protein bar or you know, obvious sort of general support, specific effects, of general support, specific effects, of general support, specific effects, and then experimental maybe. and then experimental maybe. and then experimental maybe. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Um and so, I think what we're talking &gt;&gt; Um and so, I think what we're talking &gt;&gt; Um and so, I think what we're talking about here with magnesium is kind of about here with magnesium is kind of about here with magnesium is kind of combination of maybe helps with sleep, combination of maybe helps with sleep, combination of maybe helps with sleep, um some specific effects that you're um some specific effects that you're um some specific effects that you're aware of like required and you're trying aware of like required and you're trying aware of like required and you're trying to top off, you're trying to make sure to top off, you're trying to make sure to top off, you're trying to make sure that you're covering a deficiency. that you're covering a deficiency. that you're covering a deficiency. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Yes, you're trying to make sure you're &gt;&gt; Yes, you're trying to make sure you're &gt;&gt; Yes, you're trying to make sure you're getting enough of the magnesium, getting enough of the magnesium, getting enough of the magnesium, exactly. &gt;&gt; Are there any other things that you take &gt;&gt; Are there any other things that you take &gt;&gt; Are there any other things that you take that are just trying to make sure that are just trying to make sure that are just trying to make sure that you're not you're not you're not deficient anywhere um or for specific deficient anywhere um or for specific deficient anywhere um or for specific reasons. We've talked about a few along reasons. We've talked about a few along reasons. We've talked about a few along the way here, glutamine, vitamin D, uh the way here, glutamine, vitamin D, uh the way here, glutamine, vitamin D, uh omega-3s, creatine. omega-3s, creatine. omega-3s, creatine. &gt;&gt; I take a multivitamin &gt;&gt; I take a multivitamin &gt;&gt; I take a multivitamin and that is to cover my bases because, and that is to cover my bases because, and that is to cover my bases because, you know, there's a lot of you know, there's a lot of you know, there's a lot of things in a multivitamin. You have to things in a multivitamin. You have to things in a multivitamin. You have to find a obviously a good quality one, but find a obviously a good quality one, but find a obviously a good quality one, but um and um and um and anyone that tells you that multivitamins anyone that tells you that multivitamins anyone that tells you that multivitamins are useless, they're wrong. I'm going to are useless, they're wrong. I'm going to are useless, they're wrong. I'm going to tell you that. They're wrong because I tell you that. They're wrong because I tell you that. They're wrong because I think now we have think now we have think now we have pretty strong data. Three very large pretty strong data. Three very large pretty strong data. Three very large randomized control trials, part of the randomized control trials, part of the randomized control trials, part of the COSMOS trials. Have you heard of these COSMOS trials. Have you heard of these COSMOS trials. Have you heard of these studies? &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And it's really I think pretty clear &gt;&gt; And it's really I think pretty clear &gt;&gt; And it's really I think pretty clear that in these studies older adults, so that in these studies older adults, so that in these studies older adults, so we're talking 65 years and older that we're talking 65 years and older that we're talking 65 years and older that are taking a multivitamin supplement for are taking a multivitamin supplement for are taking a multivitamin supplement for you know, what was it a year? I think it you know, what was it a year? I think it you know, what was it a year? I think it was. Um it could be two, but I think it was a Um it could be two, but I think it was a Um it could be two, but I think it was a year. And it was by the way Centrum year. And it was by the way Centrum year. And it was by the way Centrum Silver. It was like your standard, you Silver. It was like your standard, you Silver. It was like your standard, you know, anyone could afford it get in get know, anyone could afford it get in get know, anyone could afford it get in get it at Walmart type of vitamin. Um and it at Walmart type of vitamin. Um and it at Walmart type of vitamin. Um and after a year of taking this multivitamin after a year of taking this multivitamin after a year of taking this multivitamin it globally reduced brain aging by about it globally reduced brain aging by about it globally reduced brain aging by about 2.1 years from like three trials. 2.1 years from like three trials. 2.1 years from like three trials. Globally reduced brain aging by 2.1 Globally reduced brain aging by 2.1 Globally reduced brain aging by 2.1 years. Battery of tests that are done, years. Battery of tests that are done, years. Battery of tests that are done, right? I mean it's you know, right? I mean it's you know, right? I mean it's you know, I'm just talking about general here. And I'm just talking about general here. And I'm just talking about general here. And it also reduced episodic brain aging by it also reduced episodic brain aging by it also reduced episodic brain aging by 4.9 years. 4.9 years. 4.9 years. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; So that would be, you know, as people &gt;&gt; So that would be, you know, as people &gt;&gt; So that would be, you know, as people probably already familiar with that probably already familiar with that probably already familiar with that listen to this podcast, you know, listen to this podcast, you know, listen to this podcast, you know, episodic memory, that's the part of episodic memory, that's the part of episodic memory, that's the part of memory that's involved in like memory that's involved in like memory that's involved in like remembering events and people and remembering events and people and remembering events and people and like experiences. Am I right? I mean like experiences. Am I right? I mean like experiences. Am I right? I mean it's sort of like not as much as it's sort of like not as much as it's sort of like not as much as that. &gt;&gt; Yeah, sequence of things. &gt;&gt; Yeah, sequence of things. &gt;&gt; Yeah, sequence of things. &gt;&gt; Sequence of things, yeah. And so, you &gt;&gt; Sequence of things, yeah. And so, you &gt;&gt; Sequence of things, yeah. And so, you know, that's a big effect for just a know, that's a big effect for just a know, that's a big effect for just a daily multivitamin, you know? And so uh daily multivitamin, you know? And so uh daily multivitamin, you know? And so uh for that reason, you know, I mean I've for that reason, you know, I mean I've for that reason, you know, I mean I've been taking it before this these studies been taking it before this these studies been taking it before this these studies came out, but that my parents, you know, came out, but that my parents, you know, came out, but that my parents, you know, that anyone that's older adult should be anyone that's older adult should be anyone that's older adult should be taking a multivitamin. So that's another taking a multivitamin. So that's another taking a multivitamin. So that's another one that I take. one that I take. one that I take. Um and I take it to cover my bases as Um and I take it to cover my bases as Um and I take it to cover my bases as well. I'm obviously not an older adult well. I'm obviously not an older adult well. I'm obviously not an older adult and who knows, it might not have the and who knows, it might not have the and who knows, it might not have the same effect on me, but um you know, it's same effect on me, but um you know, it's same effect on me, but um you know, it's one of those that it's not harmful. one of those that it's not harmful. one of those that it's not harmful. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um if I'm, you know, it's a little bit &gt;&gt; Um if I'm, you know, it's a little bit &gt;&gt; Um if I'm, you know, it's a little bit of an expensive urine, fine, but I mean of an expensive urine, fine, but I mean of an expensive urine, fine, but I mean there are it is covering some of my there are it is covering some of my there are it is covering some of my bases in terms of some of the bases in terms of some of the bases in terms of some of the micronutrients in it, right? micronutrients in it, right? micronutrients in it, right? The other ones that I take in besides The other ones that I take in besides The other ones that I take in besides the one that you mentioned, which is the one that you mentioned, which is the one that you mentioned, which is vitamin D, omega-3, I do creatine, vitamin D, omega-3, I do creatine, vitamin D, omega-3, I do creatine, magnesium. I do I do magnesium magnesium. I do I do magnesium magnesium. I do I do magnesium glycinate. I should look into the bis glycinate. I should look into the bis glycinate. I should look into the bis glycinate cuz I definitely would like glycinate cuz I definitely would like glycinate cuz I definitely would like another molecule of glycine I like for another molecule of glycine I like for another molecule of glycine I like for my sleep. my sleep. my sleep. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; But I also sometimes take another form &gt;&gt; But I also sometimes take another form &gt;&gt; But I also sometimes take another form of magnesium, which is it's like a of magnesium, which is it's like a of magnesium, which is it's like a mixture of magnesium malate and uh mixture of magnesium malate and uh mixture of magnesium malate and uh taurate, I think, are the and taurate, I think, are the and taurate, I think, are the and glycinate is also in that, but glycinate is also in that, but glycinate is also in that, but sometimes I take that for sleep. sometimes I take that for sleep. sometimes I take that for sleep. And then I take ubiquinol And then I take ubiquinol And then I take ubiquinol um for mitochondrial health. um for mitochondrial health. um for mitochondrial health. &gt;&gt; You like You like the data on that, &gt;&gt; You like You like the data on that, &gt;&gt; You like You like the data on that, obviously, if you're taking it. obviously, if you're taking it. obviously, if you're taking it. &gt;&gt; there's stronger data, I think, on &gt;&gt; there's stronger data, I think, on &gt;&gt; there's stronger data, I think, on ubiquinone, which is the oxidized form. ubiquinone, which is the oxidized form. ubiquinone, which is the oxidized form. It's more stable. It's more stable. It's more stable. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; There's just When I say stronger, I mean &gt;&gt; There's just When I say stronger, I mean &gt;&gt; There's just When I say stronger, I mean more data. more data. more data. &gt;&gt; Do you take coenzyme Q10? &gt;&gt; Do you take coenzyme Q10? &gt;&gt; Do you take coenzyme Q10? &gt;&gt; So co- co-Q10 is Yeah, co-Q10 is &gt;&gt; So co- co-Q10 is Yeah, co-Q10 is &gt;&gt; So co- co-Q10 is Yeah, co-Q10 is ubiquinol. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so and so I'm taking the &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so and so I'm taking the &gt;&gt; Yeah. And so and so I'm taking the reduced form of it, which is ubiquinol. reduced form of it, which is ubiquinol. reduced form of it, which is ubiquinol. The more stable form would be The more stable form would be The more stable form would be ubiquinone. &gt;&gt; Are those trademark names? Cuz I take &gt;&gt; Are those trademark names? Cuz I take &gt;&gt; Are those trademark names? Cuz I take coenzyme Q10. coenzyme Q10. coenzyme Q10. &gt;&gt; Yeah, you're taking &gt;&gt; Yeah, you're taking &gt;&gt; Yeah, you're taking &gt;&gt; if I took a closer look at the bottle, &gt;&gt; if I took a closer look at the bottle, &gt;&gt; if I took a closer look at the bottle, I'd see that you ubiquinone. I'd see that you ubiquinone. I'd see that you ubiquinone. &gt;&gt; It's ubiquinol, yeah. &gt;&gt; It's ubiquinol, yeah. &gt;&gt; It's ubiquinol, yeah. &gt;&gt; Ubiquinol. &gt;&gt; Ubiquinol. &gt;&gt; Ubiquinol. &gt;&gt; The ubiquinol [clears throat] is a &gt;&gt; The ubiquinol [clears throat] is a &gt;&gt; The ubiquinol [clears throat] is a little bit more bioavailable, but yeah. little bit more bioavailable, but yeah. little bit more bioavailable, but yeah. So I I'm pretty convinced that So I I'm pretty convinced that So I I'm pretty convinced that helps with mitochondrial function. helps with mitochondrial function. helps with mitochondrial function. Um you know, it's not like you could always you know, it's not like you could always you know, it's not like you could always have more data, right? So we'll just have more data, right? So we'll just have more data, right? So we'll just leave it at that. The other one I take leave it at that. The other one I take leave it at that. The other one I take is Now I'm taking urolithin A is Now I'm taking urolithin A is Now I'm taking urolithin A &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; in the form of I'm taking MitoPure, by &gt;&gt; in the form of I'm taking MitoPure, by &gt;&gt; in the form of I'm taking MitoPure, by the way. I have nothing to do with these the way. I have nothing to do with these the way. I have nothing to do with these companies. But there's now I've just been over the But there's now I've just been over the But there's now I've just been over the years increasingly interested. And so years increasingly interested. And so years increasingly interested. And so urolithin A is something that is formed urolithin A is something that is formed urolithin A is something that is formed from a type of polyphenol that's found from a type of polyphenol that's found from a type of polyphenol that's found in some in some in some fruits, uh like pomegranate being the fruits, uh like pomegranate being the fruits, uh like pomegranate being the main one, I think. main one, I think. main one, I think. And raspberries may also have some. I And raspberries may also have some. I And raspberries may also have some. I think walnuts also, but it's think walnuts also, but it's think walnuts also, but it's ellagitannin is the polyphenol, and ellagitannin is the polyphenol, and ellagitannin is the polyphenol, and these ellagitannins get metabolized by these ellagitannins get metabolized by these ellagitannins get metabolized by the gut microbiome, and the metabolites the gut microbiome, and the metabolites the gut microbiome, and the metabolites that are formed, one of them is called that are formed, one of them is called that are formed, one of them is called urolithin A. urolithin A. urolithin A. And so urolithin A is a compound that And so urolithin A is a compound that And so urolithin A is a compound that seems to stimulate the process of seems to stimulate the process of seems to stimulate the process of mitophagy, which is a very specific form mitophagy, which is a very specific form mitophagy, which is a very specific form of autophagy that's only for of autophagy that's only for of autophagy that's only for mitochondria. And you know, that's been mitochondria. And you know, that's been mitochondria. And you know, that's been shown in there have been randomized shown in there have been randomized shown in there have been randomized control trials showing this in humans. control trials showing this in humans. control trials showing this in humans. It does stimulate mitophagy um It does stimulate mitophagy um It does stimulate mitophagy um blood cells as well as muscle biopsy, blood cells as well as muscle biopsy, blood cells as well as muscle biopsy, but that's an important cleanup process but that's an important cleanup process but that's an important cleanup process for how our mitochondria repair for how our mitochondria repair for how our mitochondria repair themselves. There's no repair enzymes, themselves. There's no repair enzymes, themselves. There's no repair enzymes, right? Like they're you know, part of right? Like they're you know, part of right? Like they're you know, part of that repair process is mitophagy where that repair process is mitophagy where that repair process is mitophagy where they're getting rid of selectively can they're getting rid of selectively can they're getting rid of selectively can get rid of parts of mitochondria that get rid of parts of mitochondria that get rid of parts of mitochondria that are damaged. So, it's really a are damaged. So, it's really a are damaged. So, it's really a rejuvenation and some of this the rejuvenation and some of this the rejuvenation and some of this the clinical data, I would say is emerging. clinical data, I would say is emerging. clinical data, I would say is emerging. More needs to be done, but it seems to More needs to be done, but it seems to More needs to be done, but it seems to in some cases improve endurance in some cases improve endurance in some cases improve endurance performance, which makes sense cuz they performance, which makes sense cuz they performance, which makes sense cuz they rely heavily on mitochondria. But even rely heavily on mitochondria. But even rely heavily on mitochondria. But even also um help with the immune system and also um help with the immune system and also um help with the immune system and this whole inflammaging. So, it and this whole inflammaging. So, it and this whole inflammaging. So, it helps keep immune cells It seems like helps keep immune cells It seems like helps keep immune cells It seems like it's helping keeping immune cells it's helping keeping immune cells it's helping keeping immune cells {quote} {unquote} younger. {quote} {unquote} younger. {quote} {unquote} younger. So, again, emerging data, but it's I'm So, again, emerging data, but it's I'm So, again, emerging data, but it's I'm in that I'm like I'm the experiment in that I'm like I'm the experiment in that I'm like I'm the experiment group. It seems to be safe and I'm not group. It seems to be safe and I'm not group. It seems to be safe and I'm not taking too high of a dose. So, that's taking too high of a dose. So, that's taking too high of a dose. So, that's another one of that I'm supplementing another one of that I'm supplementing another one of that I'm supplementing with. The other one that I'm taking also is uh The other one that I'm taking also is uh The other one that I'm taking also is uh a very a form of I would say I'm going a very a form of I would say I'm going a very a form of I would say I'm going to call it sulforaphane, but it's not to call it sulforaphane, but it's not to call it sulforaphane, but it's not sulforaphane. It's the precursor to sulforaphane. It's the precursor to sulforaphane. It's the precursor to sulforaphane, glucoraphanin. sulforaphane, glucoraphanin. sulforaphane, glucoraphanin. Cuz that's more stable. And so, I take Cuz that's more stable. And so, I take Cuz that's more stable. And so, I take something called Avmacol something called Avmacol something called Avmacol um which um which um which the reason I take that one is because the reason I take that one is because the reason I take that one is because there's oh, it's 13 now. And new stages came oh, it's 13 now. And new stages came oh, it's 13 now. And new stages came out. 13 studies using that form. Um out. 13 studies using that form. Um out. 13 studies using that form. Um and sulforaphane is also one of those and sulforaphane is also one of those and sulforaphane is also one of those plant phytochemicals. It's formed It's plant phytochemicals. It's formed It's plant phytochemicals. It's formed It's found in cruciferous vegetables. As you found in cruciferous vegetables. As you found in cruciferous vegetables. As you know, we've talked about this before, so know, we've talked about this before, so know, we've talked about this before, so I'll try to leave make it brief. I'll try to leave make it brief. I'll try to leave make it brief. But um so, glucoraphanin is in these But um so, glucoraphanin is in these But um so, glucoraphanin is in these cruciferous vegetables like broccoli. cruciferous vegetables like broccoli. cruciferous vegetables like broccoli. Broccoli sprouts are really great Broccoli sprouts are really great Broccoli sprouts are really great source of it. And when the plant is source of it. And when the plant is source of it. And when the plant is crushed, you know, like when you eat it crushed, you know, like when you eat it crushed, you know, like when you eat it eat broccoli or chew it, whatever, eat broccoli or chew it, whatever, eat broccoli or chew it, whatever, the an enzyme is activated that converts the an enzyme is activated that converts the an enzyme is activated that converts glucoraphanin into sulforaphane. The glucoraphanin into sulforaphane. The glucoraphanin into sulforaphane. The reason I take it is because I've been reason I take it is because I've been reason I take it is because I've been now convinced by I would say the limited now convinced by I would say the limited now convinced by I would say the limited number of human studies, clinical number of human studies, clinical number of human studies, clinical studies, but also the totality of studies, but also the totality of studies, but also the totality of evidence looking at cruciferous evidence looking at cruciferous evidence looking at cruciferous vegetables in general, and then also vegetables in general, and then also vegetables in general, and then also animal data that it's really important. animal data that it's really important. animal data that it's really important. It's probably the best It's probably the best It's probably the best naturally occurring dietary activator of naturally occurring dietary activator of naturally occurring dietary activator of a stress response pathway that is a stress response pathway that is a stress response pathway that is important for detoxification. And that important for detoxification. And that important for detoxification. And that pathway is the NRF2 pathway. I'm that pathway is the NRF2 pathway. I'm that pathway is the NRF2 pathway. I'm sure you've heard of that pathway. sure you've heard of that pathway. sure you've heard of that pathway. Sulforaphane is a very, very powerful Sulforaphane is a very, very powerful Sulforaphane is a very, very powerful activator of that pathway. And what I activator of that pathway. And what I activator of that pathway. And what I mean by pathway is that gene is turning mean by pathway is that gene is turning mean by pathway is that gene is turning on and turning off many, many other on and turning off many, many other on and turning off many, many other genes. What we know about it is that genes. What we know about it is that genes. What we know about it is that it's very important for activating the it's very important for activating the it's very important for activating the detoxification the detoxification the detoxification genes that are involved in detoxifying genes that are involved in detoxifying genes that are involved in detoxifying things that are that are harmful to us. things that are that are harmful to us. things that are that are harmful to us. And so the classic studies that have And so the classic studies that have And so the classic studies that have been done, some of them most of them in been done, some of them most of them in been done, some of them most of them in China where air pollution is very high, China where air pollution is very high, China where air pollution is very high, is that if you take, you know, this is that if you take, you know, this is that if you take, you know, this broccoli sprout sulforaphane extract, broccoli sprout sulforaphane extract, broccoli sprout sulforaphane extract, you can start to excrete compounds that you can start to excrete compounds that you can start to excrete compounds that are found in air pollution like benzene are found in air pollution like benzene are found in air pollution like benzene that are carcinogenic, right? And you that are carcinogenic, right? And you that are carcinogenic, right? And you can start to excrete it after 24 hours can start to excrete it after 24 hours can start to excrete it after 24 hours by like 60% by like 60% by like 60% &gt;&gt; Great. What about plastics? &gt;&gt; Great. What about plastics? &gt;&gt; Great. What about plastics? &gt;&gt; So that's my that's my thing. &gt;&gt; So that's my that's my thing. &gt;&gt; So that's my that's my thing. That's why I'm taking it, my whole That's why I'm taking it, my whole That's why I'm taking it, my whole family. Because the same enzymes that family. Because the same enzymes that family. Because the same enzymes that are activated by um by the are activated by um by the are activated by um by the sulforaphane that detoxify that detoxify that detoxify benzene. So basically you're benzene. So basically you're benzene. So basically you're detoxifying it. What I mean is you're detoxifying it. What I mean is you're detoxifying it. What I mean is you're basically making it water soluble so you basically making it water soluble so you basically making it water soluble so you can excrete it through urine. can excrete it through urine. can excrete it through urine. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. The same ones That's exactly what BP The same ones That's exactly what BP The same ones That's exactly what BP those enzymes do to BPA. They make it those enzymes do to BPA. They make it those enzymes do to BPA. They make it water soluble and help you excrete it water soluble and help you excrete it water soluble and help you excrete it through urine. There's no human data through urine. There's no human data through urine. There's no human data showing this yet. I want someone to do showing this yet. I want someone to do showing this yet. I want someone to do the study. But we do have animal the study. But we do have animal the study. But we do have animal evidence where you know, animals are evidence where you know, animals are evidence where you know, animals are given a high dose of BPA and given a high dose of BPA and given a high dose of BPA and sulforaphane and it protects against the sulforaphane and it protects against the sulforaphane and it protects against the toxicity. I basically think that if someone's I basically think that if someone's I basically think that if someone's going to show it and it's going to be going to show it and it's going to be going to show it and it's going to be clear because the enzymes that are, clear because the enzymes that are, clear because the enzymes that are, you know, involved are activated by this you know, involved are activated by this you know, involved are activated by this you know, by sulforaphane and that's you know, by sulforaphane and that's you know, by sulforaphane and that's been shown with benzene and acrolein been shown with benzene and acrolein been shown with benzene and acrolein excretion, right? So, why wouldn't it be excretion, right? So, why wouldn't it be excretion, right? So, why wouldn't it be BPA? &gt;&gt; Yeah, the mechanistic logic is there. &gt;&gt; Yeah, the mechanistic logic is there. &gt;&gt; Yeah, the mechanistic logic is there. &gt;&gt; exactly, exactly. So, that's another &gt;&gt; exactly, exactly. So, that's another &gt;&gt; exactly, exactly. So, that's another reason why also it increases um it's reason why also it increases um it's reason why also it increases um it's been shown in human studies to very been shown in human studies to very been shown in human studies to very powerfully increase glutathione in both powerfully increase glutathione in both powerfully increase glutathione in both the plasma and the brain and that's also the plasma and the brain and that's also the plasma and the brain and that's also through the NRF2 pathway. It activates through the NRF2 pathway. It activates through the NRF2 pathway. It activates the powerful antioxidant pathway. It the powerful antioxidant pathway. It the powerful antioxidant pathway. It also deactivates phase one also deactivates phase one also deactivates phase one biotransformation enzymes that are biotransformation enzymes that are biotransformation enzymes that are involved in um turning a procarcinogen involved in um turning a procarcinogen involved in um turning a procarcinogen into a carcinogen. So, those are things into a carcinogen. So, those are things into a carcinogen. So, those are things like you're eating, you know, you're like you're eating, you know, you're like you're eating, you know, you're grilling your meat at a high you're grilling your meat at a high you're grilling your meat at a high temperature and you're getting temperature and you're getting temperature and you're getting heterocyclic amines, right? I mean, heterocyclic amines, right? I mean, heterocyclic amines, right? I mean, these things can be harmful and these things can be harmful and these things can be harmful and &gt;&gt; Uh we had &gt;&gt; Uh we had &gt;&gt; Uh we had &gt;&gt; But our body can deal with it. &gt;&gt; But our body can deal with it. &gt;&gt; But our body can deal with it. &gt;&gt; had a cancer doc on here recently and I &gt;&gt; had a cancer doc on here recently and I &gt;&gt; had a cancer doc on here recently and I was scared to ask him the question cuz I was scared to ask him the question cuz I was scared to ask him the question cuz I didn't want the answer but I did want didn't want the answer but I did want didn't want the answer but I did want the answer but, you know, the char the answer but, you know, the char the answer but, you know, the char on meat. And he's like it's pretty on meat. And he's like it's pretty on meat. And he's like it's pretty serious carcinogen. That's real. pretty serious carcinogen. That's real. pretty serious carcinogen. That's real. I mean, the occasional thing isn't going I mean, the occasional thing isn't going I mean, the occasional thing isn't going to be a problem. You'll be relieved to be a problem. You'll be relieved to be a problem. You'll be relieved to know and this is not a promotional that know and this is not a promotional that know and this is not a promotional that they can that you're drinking out of they can that you're drinking out of they can that you're drinking out of these are intentionally BPA, BPS, and these are intentionally BPA, BPS, and these are intentionally BPA, BPS, and PFAS free. We got that we tested them. PFAS free. We got that we tested them. PFAS free. We got that we tested them. I'd be happy to send you the results. I'd be happy to send you the results. I'd be happy to send you the results. &gt;&gt; I already know. I already knew about &gt;&gt; I already know. I already knew about &gt;&gt; I already know. I already knew about that. &gt;&gt; I know that you and I are both I am &gt;&gt; I know that you and I are both I am &gt;&gt; I know that you and I are both I am wary of the BPAs and um and wary of the BPAs and um and wary of the BPAs and um and the rest. I think it's wild that 10 the rest. I think it's wild that 10 the rest. I think it's wild that 10 years ago people like Charles Poliquin years ago people like Charles Poliquin years ago people like Charles Poliquin were saying don't handle receipts and were saying don't handle receipts and were saying don't handle receipts and you know, and everyone was like this is you know, and everyone was like this is you know, and everyone was like this is really kooky. Or actually back then no really kooky. Or actually back then no really kooky. Or actually back then no one even heard what he was saying. It one even heard what he was saying. It one even heard what he was saying. It was a such a niche thing. Then people was a such a niche thing. Then people was a such a niche thing. Then people were very I think disparaging of people were very I think disparaging of people were very I think disparaging of people saying be wary of receipts. Now, I think saying be wary of receipts. Now, I think saying be wary of receipts. Now, I think the microplastics um the microplastics um the microplastics um and the BPA, BPS, uh PFAS and the BPA, BPS, uh PFAS and the BPA, BPS, uh PFAS concern is really taking hold more concern is really taking hold more concern is really taking hold more broadly and I think that, you know, broadly and I think that, you know, broadly and I think that, you know, the tables have turned. the tables have turned. the tables have turned. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and really obviously you can't &gt;&gt; Yeah, and really obviously you can't &gt;&gt; Yeah, and really obviously you can't eliminate them completely. It's eliminate them completely. It's eliminate them completely. It's impossible. They're everywhere. They're impossible. They're everywhere. They're impossible. They're everywhere. They're everywhere. I mean, we're everywhere. I mean, we're everywhere. I mean, we're &gt;&gt; Clothing I heard is the main &gt;&gt; Clothing I heard is the main &gt;&gt; Clothing I heard is the main &gt;&gt; It's the main source of microplastics in &gt;&gt; It's the main source of microplastics in &gt;&gt; It's the main source of microplastics in the ocean, right? Because they're washed the ocean, right? Because they're washed the ocean, right? Because they're washed We're washing our clothes and there's We're washing our clothes and there's We're washing our clothes and there's They're every this cute shirt that I'm They're every this cute shirt that I'm They're every this cute shirt that I'm wearing, I mean, it's got wearing, I mean, it's got wearing, I mean, it's got microplastics in it for sure. Um and microplastics in it for sure. Um and microplastics in it for sure. Um and so every time you're washing your so every time you're washing your so every time you're washing your clothes, your all the microplastics are clothes, your all the microplastics are clothes, your all the microplastics are coming out and getting into the coming out and getting into the coming out and getting into the ocean. And also then when you put your ocean. And also then when you put your ocean. And also then when you put your clothes in the dryer, and if your dryer clothes in the dryer, and if your dryer clothes in the dryer, and if your dryer is ventilating anywhere in your house, is ventilating anywhere in your house, is ventilating anywhere in your house, the microplastic You're breathing those the microplastic You're breathing those the microplastic You're breathing those in, the microplastics. in, the microplastics. in, the microplastics. &gt;&gt; these traps. When I did the episode on &gt;&gt; these traps. When I did the episode on &gt;&gt; these traps. When I did the episode on microplastics, I found out that they're microplastics, I found out that they're microplastics, I found out that they're online and you can I think it costs It's online and you can I think it costs It's online and you can I think it costs It's not It's not cheap cheap, but it's like not It's not cheap cheap, but it's like not It's not cheap cheap, but it's like considering they last a while, I think considering they last a while, I think considering they last a while, I think they're somewhere with refill somewhere they're somewhere with refill somewhere they're somewhere with refill somewhere in the neighborhood of I want to say in the neighborhood of I want to say in the neighborhood of I want to say something like $70, but it traps something like $70, but it traps something like $70, but it traps supposedly traps the microplastics. supposedly traps the microplastics. supposedly traps the microplastics. &gt;&gt; In the wash In the washing machine. &gt;&gt; In the wash In the washing machine. &gt;&gt; In the wash In the washing machine. &gt;&gt; washing machine. And in Europe, I think &gt;&gt; washing machine. And in Europe, I think &gt;&gt; washing machine. And in Europe, I think this is actually built in or is required this is actually built in or is required this is actually built in or is required in a in a number of countries. Like in a in a number of countries. Like in a in a number of countries. Like they're way ahead of us. they're way ahead of us. they're way ahead of us. They're way ahead of us on a number of They're way ahead of us on a number of They're way ahead of us on a number of things. I mean, on a few things they're things. I mean, on a few things they're things. I mean, on a few things they're really they're far behind, I must say, really they're far behind, I must say, really they're far behind, I must say, uh with respect to health, but on uh with respect to health, but on uh with respect to health, but on many things they are way ahead of us. many things they are way ahead of us. many things they are way ahead of us. &gt;&gt; Yeah, well, clearly with the Switzerland &gt;&gt; Yeah, well, clearly with the Switzerland &gt;&gt; Yeah, well, clearly with the Switzerland People in Switzerland being 80% Like 88% People in Switzerland being 80% Like 88% People in Switzerland being 80% Like 88% of them being physically active, they're of them being physically active, they're of them being physically active, they're way ahead of us on that. way ahead of us on that. way ahead of us on that. &gt;&gt; I'm excited to share with you that &gt;&gt; I'm excited to share with you that &gt;&gt; I'm excited to share with you that Mateena, the yerba mate drink that I Mateena, the yerba mate drink that I Mateena, the yerba mate drink that I helped create, is now available at helped create, is now available at helped create, is now available at Sprouts Market nationwide. Longtime Sprouts Market nationwide. Longtime Sprouts Market nationwide. Longtime listeners of the Huberman Lab Podcast listeners of the Huberman Lab Podcast listeners of the Huberman Lab Podcast know that yerba mate is my preferred know that yerba mate is my preferred know that yerba mate is my preferred caffeine source. It provides a smooth caffeine source. It provides a smooth caffeine source. It provides a smooth energy lift without giving you the energy lift without giving you the energy lift without giving you the jitters, and it has many other benefits jitters, and it has many other benefits jitters, and it has many other benefits such as helping regulate blood sugar, such as helping regulate blood sugar, such as helping regulate blood sugar, improving digestion, mild appetite improving digestion, mild appetite improving digestion, mild appetite suppression, and more. Mateena is my suppression, and more. Mateena is my suppression, and more. Mateena is my absolute favorite of all the yerba mate absolute favorite of all the yerba mate absolute favorite of all the yerba mate brands out there, and believe me, I've brands out there, and believe me, I've brands out there, and believe me, I've tried them all. The flavors are tried them all. The flavors are tried them all. The flavors are fantastic. I drink at least three cans fantastic. I drink at least three cans fantastic. I drink at least three cans of Mateena every single day. You'll of Mateena every single day. You'll of Mateena every single day. You'll often see them on the table during our often see them on the table during our often see them on the table during our podcast recordings. I absolutely love podcast recordings. I absolutely love podcast recordings. I absolutely love the product, and I'm proud to now have the product, and I'm proud to now have the product, and I'm proud to now have it sold at Sprouts Market. Also, there's it sold at Sprouts Market. Also, there's it sold at Sprouts Market. Also, there's a great new offer. They are giving away a great new offer. They are giving away a great new offer. They are giving away a free can of Mateena to anyone who buys a free can of Mateena to anyone who buys a free can of Mateena to anyone who buys it at Sprouts and sends in a photo of it at Sprouts and sends in a photo of it at Sprouts and sends in a photo of their receipt. To more about how you their receipt. To more about how you their receipt. To more about how you can get a free can of Matina, go to can get a free can of Matina, go to can get a free can of Matina, go to drinkmatina.com/offer. Again, that's drinkmatina.com/offer Again, that's drinkmatina.com/offer Again, that's drinkmatina.com/offer to get a can of Matina for free at your to get a can of Matina for free at your to get a can of Matina for free at your local Sprouts Market. What is your local Sprouts Market. What is your local Sprouts Market. What is your threshold for you? threshold for you? threshold for you? And what do you think is kind of And what do you think is kind of And what do you think is kind of reasonable levels of what's actionable reasonable levels of what's actionable reasonable levels of what's actionable for you? Like how do you set that? I for you? Like how do you set that? I for you? Like how do you set that? I think it will help people kind of think it will help people kind of think it will help people kind of understand how you're approaching stuff. understand how you're approaching stuff. understand how you're approaching stuff. &gt;&gt; What's actionable in terms of improving &gt;&gt; What's actionable in terms of improving &gt;&gt; What's actionable in terms of improving what I'm interested in improving my what I'm interested in improving my what I'm interested in improving my health? &gt;&gt; Like &gt;&gt; Like &gt;&gt; Like &gt;&gt; Yeah, like I mean without picking any &gt;&gt; Yeah, like I mean without picking any &gt;&gt; Yeah, like I mean without picking any specific example, like when you look at specific example, like when you look at specific example, like when you look at the literature and you see, let's say the literature and you see, let's say the literature and you see, let's say let's take BPC 157. It's kind of a fun let's take BPC 157. It's kind of a fun let's take BPC 157. It's kind of a fun one because everyone's excited about one because everyone's excited about one because everyone's excited about this now except the physicians um who this now except the physicians um who this now except the physicians um who don't like working with peptides besides don't like working with peptides besides don't like working with peptides besides GLPs or other FDA approved peptides. GLPs or other FDA approved peptides. GLPs or other FDA approved peptides. They're like freaking out online. They're like freaking out online. They're like freaking out online. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; from them all the time. Compounding &gt;&gt; from them all the time. Compounding &gt;&gt; from them all the time. Compounding pharmacies just got the green light that pharmacies just got the green light that pharmacies just got the green light that they're going to be able to do basically they're going to be able to do basically they're going to be able to do basically whatever except sell retatrutide, whatever except sell retatrutide, whatever except sell retatrutide, which is under patent. Um which is under patent. Um which is under patent. Um so there are many, many animal studies on there are many, many animal studies on there are many, many animal studies on BPC 157 showing BPC 157 showing BPC 157 showing accelerated cartilage growth, nerve accelerated cartilage growth, nerve accelerated cartilage growth, nerve growth after injury, and on and on and growth after injury, and on and on and growth after injury, and on and on and on and on. And angio- angiogenesis. So on and on. And angio- angiogenesis. So on and on. And angio- angiogenesis. So there's some potential cancer risk there's some potential cancer risk there's some potential cancer risk there, right? But basically zero human there, right? But basically zero human there, right? But basically zero human data. There's one study, weak study, There's one study, weak study, There's one study, weak study, self-report. There's actually a clinical self-report. There's actually a clinical self-report. There's actually a clinical trial where they I'm not making this up, trial where they I'm not making this up, trial where they I'm not making this up, folks. It's BPC enemas. Very high dose folks. It's BPC enemas. Very high dose folks. It's BPC enemas. Very high dose it for a it for a it for a for some sort of bowel disease or bowel for some sort of bowel disease or bowel for some sort of bowel disease or bowel inflammation. And the study was like I inflammation. And the study was like I inflammation. And the study was like I don't think the study was completed or don't think the study was completed or don't think the study was completed or something like that. Don't ask me why. something like that. Don't ask me why. something like that. Don't ask me why. No, I'm not making this up. Um but No, I'm not making this up. Um but No, I'm not making this up. Um but that's pretty much the only human data that's pretty much the only human data that's pretty much the only human data that I'm aware of. that I'm aware of. that I'm aware of. Um but tons of people injecting and but tons of people injecting and but tons of people injecting and swallowing BPC swallowing BPC swallowing BPC and saying, "Yeah, it helped me recover, and saying, "Yeah, it helped me recover, and saying, "Yeah, it helped me recover, you know, heal more quickly." How do you know, heal more quickly." How do you know, heal more quickly." How do you think about something like that? think about something like that? think about something like that? Like that current condition. Like that current condition. Like that current condition. &gt;&gt; First of all, if you're not doing it, &gt;&gt; First of all, if you're not doing it, &gt;&gt; First of all, if you're not doing it, you're not going to be doing this every you're not going to be doing this every you're not going to be doing this every day forever, right? Like this is a short day forever, right? Like this is a short day forever, right? Like this is a short defined period of time where you're defined period of time where you're defined period of time where you're going to do your injections. Okay, going to do your injections. Okay, going to do your injections. Okay, really? Okay. really? Okay. really? Okay. &gt;&gt; I know I know I you I mean I don't know &gt;&gt; I know I know I you I mean I don't know &gt;&gt; I know I know I you I mean I don't know what people do. Unfortunately, I think what people do. Unfortunately, I think what people do. Unfortunately, I think some people like to take it everyday, some people like to take it everyday, some people like to take it everyday, but let's assume for but let's assume for but let's assume for let's assume two months maximum to work let's assume two months maximum to work let's assume two months maximum to work around an injury or through an injury. around an injury or through an injury. around an injury or through an injury. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I like for the people that I know &gt;&gt; Yeah, I like for the people that I know &gt;&gt; Yeah, I like for the people that I know that have experimented with it, it's that have experimented with it, it's that have experimented with it, it's been like 3 months. been like 3 months. been like 3 months. And a period of time and they did have And a period of time and they did have And a period of time and they did have improvements and they could have been improvements and they could have been improvements and they could have been through placebo which I will, you know, through placebo which I will, you know, through placebo which I will, you know, say is possible, but for me it really say is possible, but for me it really say is possible, but for me it really comes down to like is it safe? comes down to like is it safe? comes down to like is it safe? Is it safe? Okay, if it's safe Is it safe? Okay, if it's safe Is it safe? Okay, if it's safe you obviously have to get the good you obviously have to get the good you obviously have to get the good source because if it's all these source because if it's all these source because if it's all these pharmacies now, I mean that's a problem pharmacies now, I mean that's a problem pharmacies now, I mean that's a problem because we do know that that's a big because we do know that that's a big because we do know that that's a big area of I would say concern with any area of I would say concern with any area of I would say concern with any sort of nutraceutical sort of nutraceutical sort of nutraceutical you know, sort of thing and I would put you know, sort of thing and I would put you know, sort of thing and I would put this into that category this into that category this into that category is that, you know, people are putting is that, you know, people are putting is that, you know, people are putting things in the products that are not things in the products that are not things in the products that are not necessarily what's supposed to be in necessarily what's supposed to be in necessarily what's supposed to be in there and they're not really paying there and they're not really paying there and they're not really paying attention to quality because it's not attention to quality because it's not attention to quality because it's not regulated, right? So, regulated, right? So, regulated, right? So, so if you can get a good source of it so if you can get a good source of it so if you can get a good source of it and you trust the source of it and you trust the source of it and you trust the source of it and you have maybe someone who is and you have maybe someone who is and you have maybe someone who is qualified to prescribe it to you cuz qualified to prescribe it to you cuz qualified to prescribe it to you cuz there are, you know, naturopaths and there are, you know, naturopaths and there are, you know, naturopaths and stuff like that, functional medicine stuff like that, functional medicine stuff like that, functional medicine practitioners. There are people that are practitioners. There are people that are practitioners. There are people that are prescribing them. prescribing them. prescribing them. &gt;&gt; And some MDs, some board certified board &gt;&gt; And some MDs, some board certified board &gt;&gt; And some MDs, some board certified board certified did their residency, did all certified did their residency, did all certified did their residency, did all the thing. I know because I'm friends the thing. I know because I'm friends the thing. I know because I'm friends with some of them and a lot of doctors with some of them and a lot of doctors with some of them and a lot of doctors are happy to prescribe peptides off are happy to prescribe peptides off are happy to prescribe peptides off sort of off label like sermorelin for sort of off label like sermorelin for sort of off label like sermorelin for purposes other than what it was FDA purposes other than what it was FDA purposes other than what it was FDA approved for. I mean I'm not taking it, approved for. I mean I'm not taking it, approved for. I mean I'm not taking it, you know, as I mentioned earlier, but you know, as I mentioned earlier, but you know, as I mentioned earlier, but &gt;&gt; But you've tried it. &gt;&gt; But you've tried it. &gt;&gt; But you've tried it. &gt;&gt; It very quickly spiked my PSA and nuked &gt;&gt; It very quickly spiked my PSA and nuked &gt;&gt; It very quickly spiked my PSA and nuked my REM sleep my REM sleep my REM sleep and increased my deep sleep. So I was and increased my deep sleep. So I was and increased my deep sleep. So I was like I don't want to I don't I'm not like I don't want to I don't I'm not like I don't want to I don't I'm not interested in those effects and I do interested in those effects and I do interested in those effects and I do worry about tickling the growth hormone worry about tickling the growth hormone worry about tickling the growth hormone pathway too much or too long because of you too much or too long because of you too much or too long because of you know, I don't you know, hopefully I know, I don't you know, hopefully I know, I don't you know, hopefully I don't have any tumors sitting around, don't have any tumors sitting around, don't have any tumors sitting around, but if I do, I don't want to vascularize but if I do, I don't want to vascularize but if I do, I don't want to vascularize them or grow them. them or grow them. them or grow them. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah, so for me, I mean, I'm always more Yeah, so for me, I mean, I'm always more Yeah, so for me, I mean, I'm always more on the cautious side, to be honest. And on the cautious side, to be honest. And on the cautious side, to be honest. And so, for me, the safety thing has to be so, for me, the safety thing has to be so, for me, the safety thing has to be checked first. And then, at that point, checked first. And then, at that point, checked first. And then, at that point, if I can check the safety thing, then if I can check the safety thing, then if I can check the safety thing, then it's like you said. I mean, I can't I'll it's like you said. I mean, I can't I'll it's like you said. I mean, I can't I'll try it. Like, I mean, I'm I'll try it. Like, I mean, I'm I'll try it. Like, I mean, I'm doing like some of these supplements doing like some of these supplements doing like some of these supplements that I like MitoPure for one, like the that I like MitoPure for one, like the that I like MitoPure for one, like the urolithin A. I mean, there's not like urolithin A. I mean, there's not like urolithin A. I mean, there's not like tons and tons of data on it, but it tons and tons of data on it, but it tons and tons of data on it, but it seems to be safe. And, you know, I'm seems to be safe. And, you know, I'm seems to be safe. And, you know, I'm experimenting with it. experimenting with it. experimenting with it. I'm also experiencing [clears throat] I'm also experiencing [clears throat] I'm also experiencing [clears throat] experimenting with a lot of other experimenting with a lot of other experimenting with a lot of other things. So, I have It's hard to know things. So, I have It's hard to know things. So, I have It's hard to know what's working. what's working. what's working. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Nicotinamide riboside is another one I &gt;&gt; Nicotinamide riboside is another one I &gt;&gt; Nicotinamide riboside is another one I take. Um back on to the what I what I take. Um back on to the what I what I take. Um back on to the what I what I take cuz I was take cuz I was take cuz I was &gt;&gt; for a longevity effect? I mean, I take &gt;&gt; for a longevity effect? I mean, I take &gt;&gt; for a longevity effect? I mean, I take it a sublingual NMN. No relationship it a sublingual NMN. No relationship it a sublingual NMN. No relationship to any company that sells NMN. At least to any company that sells NMN. At least to any company that sells NMN. At least the one I take is from They hate it when the one I take is from They hate it when the one I take is from They hate it when I do this, but from Renew by Science. I do this, but from Renew by Science. I do this, but from Renew by Science. It's the cheapest version. That's not It's the cheapest version. That's not It's the cheapest version. That's not why I take it. I just like the powder, why I take it. I just like the powder, why I take it. I just like the powder, put it under my tongue. I like the put it under my tongue. I like the put it under my tongue. I like the energy effect. I will say this, and I've energy effect. I will say this, and I've energy effect. I will say this, and I've done the control experiment on myself, done the control experiment on myself, done the control experiment on myself, and I family members have done it, too. and I family members have done it, too. and I family members have done it, too. It makes my hair grow crazy fast, and my It makes my hair grow crazy fast, and my It makes my hair grow crazy fast, and my nails grow crazy fast. I know it's cuz nails grow crazy fast. I know it's cuz nails grow crazy fast. I know it's cuz if I stop, that halts. Those aren't if I stop, that halts. Those aren't if I stop, that halts. Those aren't really effects I'm looking for, and it really effects I'm looking for, and it really effects I'm looking for, and it worries me a little bit cuz what else is worries me a little bit cuz what else is worries me a little bit cuz what else is it making grow crazy fast? it making grow crazy fast? it making grow crazy fast? Again, I don't think I have a tumor, but Again, I don't think I have a tumor, but Again, I don't think I have a tumor, but what else is it, you know, if I have what else is it, you know, if I have what else is it, you know, if I have like a polyp or something, is it making like a polyp or something, is it making like a polyp or something, is it making that grow crazy fast? I don't know. that grow crazy fast? I don't know. that grow crazy fast? I don't know. &gt;&gt; I asked that question to uh Dr. &gt;&gt; I asked that question to uh Dr. &gt;&gt; I asked that question to uh Dr. Charles Brenner when I had him on Charles Brenner when I had him on Charles Brenner when I had him on podcast because I There was a study on podcast because I There was a study on podcast because I There was a study on NMN in mice that they had The mice had NMN in mice that they had The mice had NMN in mice that they had The mice had tumors, and then they you know, gave tumors, and then they you know, gave tumors, and then they you know, gave them I think they injected them with NMN them I think they injected them with NMN them I think they injected them with NMN or maybe it was oral gavage. I don't or maybe it was oral gavage. I don't or maybe it was oral gavage. I don't remember which way it was, but it remember which way it was, but it remember which way it was, but it accelerated the growth of those rare accelerated the growth of those rare accelerated the growth of those rare type of pancreatic cancer cells. And so, type of pancreatic cancer cells. And so, type of pancreatic cancer cells. And so, I was, you know, obviously, energy, yes. I was, you know, obviously, energy, yes. I was, you know, obviously, energy, yes. Cancer cells have energy, too, right? Cancer cells have energy, too, right? Cancer cells have energy, too, right? &gt;&gt; like NMN? And I will take NR sometimes. &gt;&gt; like NMN? And I will take NR sometimes. &gt;&gt; like NMN? And I will take NR sometimes. I do take True Niagen. I do take True Niagen. I do take True Niagen. &gt;&gt; it doesn't I mean, either way. So, it's &gt;&gt; it doesn't I mean, either way. So, it's &gt;&gt; it doesn't I mean, either way. So, it's the same end point here. We're the same end point here. We're the same end point here. We're increasing NAD, right? So, the question increasing NAD, right? So, the question increasing NAD, right? So, the question is then, okay, well, should I be worried is then, okay, well, should I be worried is then, okay, well, should I be worried about cancer? And um he pointed me to about cancer? And um he pointed me to about cancer? And um he pointed me to some study out of Australia where I some study out of Australia where I some study out of Australia where I think it was maybe might have been think it was maybe might have been think it was maybe might have been nicotinamide that basically prevented some kind of it that basically prevented some kind of it that basically prevented some kind of it wasn't melanoma but it was another type wasn't melanoma but it was another type wasn't melanoma but it was another type of skin cancer. And so it was like of skin cancer. And so it was like of skin cancer. And so it was like okay well that seems sort of okay well that seems sort of okay well that seems sort of &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; the point here. I am experimenting with &gt;&gt; the point here. I am experimenting with &gt;&gt; the point here. I am experimenting with it. Why? First of all I became it. Why? First of all I became it. Why? First of all I became interested in it because the effects on interested in it because the effects on interested in it because the effects on mitochondrial health. There is effects mitochondrial health. There is effects mitochondrial health. There is effects on fertility on fertility on fertility you know energy recovery when I started you know energy recovery when I started you know energy recovery when I started it just you know and then again you can it just you know and then again you can it just you know and then again you can find a couple of studies where like find a couple of studies where like find a couple of studies where like maybe you know you're not as insulin sensitive you know you're not as insulin sensitive you know you're not as insulin sensitive and who knows like it's not there's not and who knows like it's not there's not and who knows like it's not there's not enough data there so I would say caution enough data there so I would say caution enough data there so I would say caution I'm cautiously experimenting with it. I'm cautiously experimenting with it. I'm cautiously experimenting with it. But um so far I love it and I don't But um so far I love it and I don't But um so far I love it and I don't again you never know what what's placebo again you never know what what's placebo again you never know what what's placebo here. &gt;&gt; So I &gt;&gt; So I &gt;&gt; So I do take do take do take they don't pay me I buy it I do take they don't pay me I buy it I do take they don't pay me I buy it I do take True Niagen NR. True Niagen NR. True Niagen NR. &gt;&gt; That's what I take. &gt;&gt; That's what I take. &gt;&gt; That's what I take. &gt;&gt; NR and on the data sheet they include &gt;&gt; NR and on the data sheet they include &gt;&gt; NR and on the data sheet they include some human studies. I have a family some human studies. I have a family some human studies. I have a family member I'll just say my sister take it member I'll just say my sister take it member I'll just say my sister take it she like loves it. She's convinced. Now she like loves it. She's convinced. Now she like loves it. She's convinced. Now that could be placebo but she is so that could be placebo but she is so that could be placebo but she is so convinced she texts me about it. I feel convinced she texts me about it. I feel convinced she texts me about it. I feel so much better I have so much energy. I so much better I have so much energy. I so much better I have so much energy. I have no idea she has no idea if it's have no idea she has no idea if it's have no idea she has no idea if it's placebo but Brenner is a very good placebo but Brenner is a very good placebo but Brenner is a very good scientist I will say he's a he's scientist I will say he's a he's scientist I will say he's a he's you know what we call in our business you know what we call in our business you know what we call in our business you and me a serious scientist. I just you and me a serious scientist. I just you and me a serious scientist. I just don't think any of that's going to make don't think any of that's going to make don't think any of that's going to make me have a direct effect on living me have a direct effect on living me have a direct effect on living longer. &gt;&gt; I don't know that it is. I don't know &gt;&gt; I don't know that it is. I don't know &gt;&gt; I don't know that it is. I don't know that it's the it's not one of my like if that it's the it's not one of my like if that it's the it's not one of my like if I had to like if I had to like if I had to like you know shrink down to my core you know shrink down to my core you know shrink down to my core supplements like it wouldn't be in there supplements like it wouldn't be in there supplements like it wouldn't be in there and you know there's many other things and you know there's many other things and you know there's many other things that are important I think before that are important I think before that are important I think before &gt;&gt; So if you were budget limited it &gt;&gt; So if you were budget limited it &gt;&gt; So if you were budget limited it wouldn't get above the above threshold. wouldn't get above the above threshold. wouldn't get above the above threshold. Like if someone out there had like just Like if someone out there had like just Like if someone out there had like just like a hundred bucks or two hundred bucks to a hundred bucks or two hundred bucks to a hundred bucks or two hundred bucks to spend on supplements they which is a to spend on supplements they which is a to spend on supplements they which is a lot for a lot of people. lot for a lot of people. lot for a lot of people. &gt;&gt; I don't know that it's going to help you &gt;&gt; I don't know that it's going to help you &gt;&gt; I don't know that it's going to help you live longer either. Now it might help live longer either. Now it might help live longer either. Now it might help with your exercise recovery a bit right with your exercise recovery a bit right with your exercise recovery a bit right it might it might help improve it might it might help improve it might it might help improve mitochondrial function. I mean maybe mitochondrial function. I mean maybe mitochondrial function. I mean maybe it's going to help with repleting some it's going to help with repleting some it's going to help with repleting some of the NAD stores. I mean if you can of the NAD stores. I mean if you can of the NAD stores. I mean if you can improve mitochondrial health and improve mitochondrial health and improve mitochondrial health and you know, you're improving things like you know, you're improving things like you know, you're improving things like on a small scale, right? So, on a small scale, right? So, on a small scale, right? So, mitochondrial health is at the core of mitochondrial health is at the core of mitochondrial health is at the core of everything. So, that that's something to everything. So, that that's something to everything. So, that that's something to consider, but yeah, I'm not convinced consider, but yeah, I'm not convinced consider, but yeah, I'm not convinced it's the end all be all either, but I do it's the end all be all either, but I do it's the end all be all either, but I do take it. And it is something I'm take it. And it is something I'm take it. And it is something I'm experimenting with. I think it is seems experimenting with. I think it is seems experimenting with. I think it is seems to be safe and there's a lot of emerging to be safe and there's a lot of emerging to be safe and there's a lot of emerging data that got caught my interest. But, data that got caught my interest. But, data that got caught my interest. But, um, omega-3s is the top, right? Like that's omega-3s is the top, right? Like that's omega-3s is the top, right? Like that's there's nothing NAD, the that's there's nothing NAD, the that's there's nothing NAD, the nicotinamide riboside or NMN, if you can nicotinamide riboside or NMN, if you can nicotinamide riboside or NMN, if you can find a good source of it that's not find a good source of it that's not find a good source of it that's not comparable in my books. not comparable in my books. not comparable in my books. &gt;&gt; Have you experimented with, um, &gt;&gt; Have you experimented with, um, &gt;&gt; Have you experimented with, um, L-carnitine because of the mitochondrial L-carnitine because of the mitochondrial L-carnitine because of the mitochondrial effects? Cuz I was able to find some effects? Cuz I was able to find some effects? Cuz I was able to find some good studies on good studies on good studies on sperm and egg quality on my which are sperm and egg quality on my which are sperm and egg quality on my which are thought to be downstream of thought to be downstream of thought to be downstream of mitochondrial health. mitochondrial health. mitochondrial health. &gt;&gt; Right. It sounds right. If you can &gt;&gt; Right. It sounds right. If you can &gt;&gt; Right. It sounds right. If you can improve mitochondrial health, fertility, improve mitochondrial health, fertility, improve mitochondrial health, fertility, which is why NR is now involved with which is why NR is now involved with which is why NR is now involved with fertility. It seems to be improving fertility. It seems to be improving fertility. It seems to be improving fertility. It's right. If you can fertility. It's right. If you can fertility. It's right. If you can improve mitochondrial health, then improve mitochondrial health, then improve mitochondrial health, then you're going to improve fertility, sperm you're going to improve fertility, sperm you're going to improve fertility, sperm health, right? Egg health, right? Um, health, right? Egg health, right? Um, health, right? Egg health, right? Um, [snorts] yeah, carnitine a lot of those [snorts] yeah, carnitine a lot of those [snorts] yeah, carnitine a lot of those studies came out of my mentor's lab, studies came out of my mentor's lab, studies came out of my mentor's lab, Bruce Ames. So, he was he looked at the Bruce Ames. So, he was he looked at the Bruce Ames. So, he was he looked at the combination of L-carnitine and combination of L-carnitine and combination of L-carnitine and alpha-lipoic acid improving alpha-lipoic acid improving alpha-lipoic acid improving mitochondrial health. And came up with mitochondrial health. And came up with mitochondrial health. And came up with the supplement that it's called the supplement that it's called the supplement that it's called Juvenon now, but it's L-carnitine with Juvenon now, but it's L-carnitine with Juvenon now, but it's L-carnitine with alpha-lipoic acid. alpha-lipoic acid. alpha-lipoic acid. &gt;&gt; It's a pill. &gt;&gt; It's a pill. &gt;&gt; It's a pill. &gt;&gt; It's a supplement, yeah. &gt;&gt; It's a supplement, yeah. &gt;&gt; It's a supplement, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And, um, so yes, I have experimented &gt;&gt; And, um, so yes, I have experimented &gt;&gt; And, um, so yes, I have experimented with that. And in fact, my husband takes with that. And in fact, my husband takes with that. And in fact, my husband takes it. But, I mean, I it. But, I mean, I it. But, I mean, I just can't take so many supplements. just can't take so many supplements. just can't take so many supplements. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, so we &gt;&gt; You know, so we &gt;&gt; You know, so we &gt;&gt; just I was just curious. &gt;&gt; just I was just curious. &gt;&gt; just I was just curious. &gt;&gt; We have our Yeah, but I it is you know, &gt;&gt; We have our Yeah, but I it is you know, &gt;&gt; We have our Yeah, but I it is you know, you can find you can find evidence that you can find you can find evidence that you can find you can find evidence that it improves it improves it improves uh, mitochondrial health. So, you know, uh, mitochondrial health. So, you know, uh, mitochondrial health. So, you know, it's just a matter of again, it's just a matter of again, it's just a matter of again, like what are what are what are you like what are what are what are you like what are what are what are you looking for? I feel like looking for? I feel like looking for? I feel like I'm doing a lot of high-intensity I'm doing a lot of high-intensity I'm doing a lot of high-intensity interval training, too, and I'm taking interval training, too, and I'm taking interval training, too, and I'm taking the urolithin A. the urolithin A. the urolithin A. That's a lot, you know, I'm doing a lot That's a lot, you know, I'm doing a lot That's a lot, you know, I'm doing a lot of stuff to optimize mitochondrial of stuff to optimize mitochondrial of stuff to optimize mitochondrial health. I mean, at some at some point health. I mean, at some at some point health. I mean, at some at some point you have to like not you can't do you have to like not you can't do you have to like not you can't do everything there is. everything there is. everything there is. &gt;&gt; Sure. No, of course not. &gt;&gt; Sure. No, of course not. &gt;&gt; Sure. No, of course not. &gt;&gt; Yeah, L-carnitine &gt;&gt; Yeah, L-carnitine &gt;&gt; Yeah, L-carnitine &gt;&gt; And then it's budget limited, too. &gt;&gt; And then it's budget limited, too. &gt;&gt; And then it's budget limited, too. &gt;&gt; But, maybe, you know, maybe I should add &gt;&gt; But, maybe, you know, maybe I should add &gt;&gt; But, maybe, you know, maybe I should add the L-carnitine in. I mean, it's the L-carnitine in. I mean, it's the L-carnitine in. I mean, it's possible, right? You know. possible, right? You know. possible, right? You know. &gt;&gt; I I've started experimenting with it, &gt;&gt; I I've started experimenting with it, &gt;&gt; I I've started experimenting with it, but I take it in an injectable form. but I take it in an injectable form. but I take it in an injectable form. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; to shock some people. You can get away &gt;&gt; to shock some people. You can get away &gt;&gt; to shock some people. You can get away with taking much lower milligram count. with taking much lower milligram count. with taking much lower milligram count. Otherwise, you have to take a lot of it Otherwise, you have to take a lot of it Otherwise, you have to take a lot of it because a lot of it just isn't absorbed because a lot of it just isn't absorbed because a lot of it just isn't absorbed if you take it orally. And then I was if you take it orally. And then I was if you take it orally. And then I was told that if you take it orally, you told that if you take it orally, you told that if you take it orally, you also have to do something to offset the also have to do something to offset the also have to do something to offset the increase in TMAO. increase in TMAO. increase in TMAO. And that worried me, so I figured And that worried me, so I figured And that worried me, so I figured needles don't scare me. I'll just inject needles don't scare me. I'll just inject needles don't scare me. I'll just inject it. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. Yeah, the TMAO thing. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. Yeah, the TMAO thing. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. Yeah, the TMAO thing. I mean, so not It depends on your gut I mean, so not It depends on your gut I mean, so not It depends on your gut bacteria whether or not your bacteria whether or not your bacteria whether or not your metabolizing the L-carnitine into TMAO. metabolizing the L-carnitine into TMAO. metabolizing the L-carnitine into TMAO. There's actually a lot of complexity There's actually a lot of complexity There's actually a lot of complexity involved in that whole thing, but you involved in that whole thing, but you involved in that whole thing, but you can get your TMAO measured. So, if can get your TMAO measured. So, if can get your TMAO measured. So, if you're supplementing with it, I mean, you're supplementing with it, I mean, you're supplementing with it, I mean, the same goes for choline, you know, the same goes for choline, you know, the same goes for choline, you know, like if you're worried like choline can like if you're worried like choline can like if you're worried like choline can be converted into TMAO. be converted into TMAO. be converted into TMAO. &gt;&gt; take alpha GPC before a workout &gt;&gt; take alpha GPC before a workout &gt;&gt; take alpha GPC before a workout sometimes or if I need to sometimes or if I need to sometimes or if I need to If I ever need to focus late in the day, If I ever need to focus late in the day, If I ever need to focus late in the day, I don't want caffeine cuz it impedes my I don't want caffeine cuz it impedes my I don't want caffeine cuz it impedes my sleep, but I'll take alpha GPC cuz this sleep, but I'll take alpha GPC cuz this sleep, but I'll take alpha GPC cuz this is kind of a cool effect. Alpha GPC is kind of a cool effect. Alpha GPC is kind of a cool effect. Alpha GPC [clears throat] actually will improve [clears throat] actually will improve [clears throat] actually will improve your REM sleep. It's not a huge effect, your REM sleep. It's not a huge effect, your REM sleep. It's not a huge effect, but you'll notice you'll get more REM but you'll notice you'll get more REM but you'll notice you'll get more REM sleep. So, it's one of the few things I sleep. So, it's one of the few things I sleep. So, it's one of the few things I found that can increase energy late in found that can increase energy late in found that can increase energy late in the day, do a workout or work if I the day, do a workout or work if I the day, do a workout or work if I have to work later into the day, still have to work later into the day, still have to work later into the day, still sleep just fine, and actually sleep just fine, and actually sleep just fine, and actually sleep better. &gt;&gt; What does work later into the day mean &gt;&gt; What does work later into the day mean &gt;&gt; What does work later into the day mean for you? Like working until like 8:00, for you? Like working until like 8:00, for you? Like working until like 8:00, 9:00? &gt;&gt; Yeah, well, I do that often, but I &gt;&gt; Yeah, well, I do that often, but I &gt;&gt; Yeah, well, I do that often, but I don't like to work out after don't like to work out after don't like to work out after 2:00 p.m. because I like caffeine before 2:00 p.m. because I like caffeine before 2:00 p.m. because I like caffeine before I work out. So, but I'll do some I work out. So, but I'll do some I work out. So, but I'll do some cardio in the afternoon or something. cardio in the afternoon or something. cardio in the afternoon or something. But if I really have to push, But if I really have to push, But if I really have to push, or if I've traveled and I really push, or if I've traveled and I really push, or if I've traveled and I really need exercise and I want to get that need exercise and I want to get that need exercise and I want to get that 6:00 p.m. workout, but I also want to 6:00 p.m. workout, but I also want to 6:00 p.m. workout, but I also want to fall asleep at 10:30, fall asleep at 10:30, fall asleep at 10:30, I'll take some alpha GPC. I'll take some alpha GPC. I'll take some alpha GPC. &gt;&gt; I used to take that like I don't know, &gt;&gt; I used to take that like I don't know, &gt;&gt; I used to take that like I don't know, it's been maybe like 10 years. it's been maybe like 10 years. it's been maybe like 10 years. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; But um it's interesting. I might try &gt;&gt; But um it's interesting. I might try &gt;&gt; But um it's interesting. I might try experimenting with that again. I'm experimenting with that again. I'm experimenting with that again. I'm always looking for things that I find a always looking for things that I find a always looking for things that I find a little bit safer. Like I don't do the little bit safer. Like I don't do the little bit safer. Like I don't do the nicotine, as you know, like nicotine, as you know, like nicotine, as you know, like &gt;&gt; It is shocking how many young people are &gt;&gt; It is shocking how many young people are &gt;&gt; It is shocking how many young people are taking nicotine now. taking nicotine now. taking nicotine now. &gt;&gt; Oh, I know. I've never tried it. &gt;&gt; Oh, I know. I've never tried it. &gt;&gt; Oh, I know. I've never tried it. &gt;&gt; First of all, it's highly addictive. &gt;&gt; First of all, it's highly addictive. &gt;&gt; First of all, it's highly addictive. Forget the blood pressure and the Forget the blood pressure and the Forget the blood pressure and the vasoconstriction. That's all bad, you vasoconstriction. That's all bad, you vasoconstriction. That's all bad, you know. I think the big issue is that know. I think the big issue is that know. I think the big issue is that if I take it, if I take it, if I take it, I start getting the spasm in my throat I start getting the spasm in my throat I start getting the spasm in my throat when I don't take it. And that's cuz of when I don't take it. And that's cuz of when I don't take it. And that's cuz of it's I have a friend who works on these it's I have a friend who works on these it's I have a friend who works on these pathways and it's because of the pathways and it's because of the pathways and it's because of the activation of the muscarinic receptors. activation of the muscarinic receptors. activation of the muscarinic receptors. So on smooth muscle, you start So on smooth muscle, you start So on smooth muscle, you start getting a tick and kind of getting a tick and kind of getting a tick and kind of clearing [clears throat] of your throat clearing [clears throat] of your throat clearing [clears throat] of your throat and then you take more nicotine, you and then you take more nicotine, you and then you take more nicotine, you feel fine. So I didn't want to become feel fine. So I didn't want to become feel fine. So I didn't want to become dependent on it. And dependent on it. And dependent on it. And I don't I don't like it. I think it I don't I don't like it. I think it I don't I don't like it. I think it I think it's a I think it's a bad habit think it's a I think it's a bad habit think it's a I think it's a bad habit that a lot of people are going to be that a lot of people are going to be that a lot of people are going to be seeking to quit later. seeking to quit later. seeking to quit later. &gt;&gt; A lot of young people. &gt;&gt; A lot of young people. &gt;&gt; A lot of young people. &gt;&gt; Older people might benefit from it &gt;&gt; Older people might benefit from it &gt;&gt; Older people might benefit from it because of the cognitive enhancement, because of the cognitive enhancement, because of the cognitive enhancement, but that's a whole other story. but that's a whole other story. but that's a whole other story. &gt;&gt; the alpha GPC and the creatine &gt;&gt; the alpha GPC and the creatine &gt;&gt; the alpha GPC and the creatine &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um magnesium L-threonate. &gt;&gt; Um magnesium L-threonate. &gt;&gt; Um magnesium L-threonate. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Alpha GPC is very is very &gt;&gt; Yeah. Alpha GPC is very is very &gt;&gt; Yeah. Alpha GPC is very is very helpful for if you need to really lock helpful for if you need to really lock helpful for if you need to really lock in for a few hours and do something in for a few hours and do something in for a few hours and do something physically or cognitively. I take 600 physically or cognitively. I take 600 physically or cognitively. I take 600 mg. You can take up to 900, but I do mg. You can take up to 900, but I do mg. You can take up to 900, but I do just fine on 600. So I think I'll just fine on 600. So I think I'll just fine on 600. So I think I'll just take it in pure form and take it in pure form and take it in pure form and &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; you know, in a capsule. &gt;&gt; you know, in a capsule. &gt;&gt; you know, in a capsule. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Any of them out there that come from a &gt;&gt; Any of them out there that come from a &gt;&gt; Any of them out there that come from a reputable brand is like going to work. reputable brand is like going to work. reputable brand is like going to work. &gt;&gt; What about like before a podcast or &gt;&gt; What about like before a podcast or &gt;&gt; What about like before a podcast or something like that? Does that Does it something like that? Does that Does it something like that? Does that Does it have any effect or why? have any effect or why? have any effect or why? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it'll put you into a you know, I &gt;&gt; Yeah, it'll put you into a you know, I &gt;&gt; Yeah, it'll put you into a you know, I mean, if you feel like you want to be mean, if you feel like you want to be mean, if you feel like you want to be heightened focus, but I rely on water, heightened focus, but I rely on water, heightened focus, but I rely on water, caffeine, electrolytes, and good caffeine, electrolytes, and good caffeine, electrolytes, and good sleep. There's this wild study. We don't sleep. There's this wild study. We don't sleep. There's this wild study. We don't want to I don't want to take us too want to I don't want to take us too want to I don't want to take us too far off track here. too far off track here. too far off track here. Um but there's a study for out of WashU Um but there's a study for out of WashU Um but there's a study for out of WashU recently, really talented recently, really talented recently, really talented researcher. I want to bring him on this researcher. I want to bring him on this researcher. I want to bring him on this podcast. Does brain imaging and he podcast. Does brain imaging and he podcast. Does brain imaging and he compared um essentially the effects of essentially the effects of essentially the effects of drugs for ADHD versus a good night's drugs for ADHD versus a good night's drugs for ADHD versus a good night's sleep. And basically found that there's sleep. And basically found that there's sleep. And basically found that there's no focus enhancement of Adderall, no focus enhancement of Adderall, no focus enhancement of Adderall, Vyvanse, Ritalin type drugs. They mainly Vyvanse, Ritalin type drugs. They mainly Vyvanse, Ritalin type drugs. They mainly looked at Ritalin. All it's doing is looked at Ritalin. All it's doing is looked at Ritalin. All it's doing is increasing alertness to the level that increasing alertness to the level that increasing alertness to the level that you would get after a good night's you would get after a good night's you would get after a good night's sleep. It may be that these drugs just sleep. It may be that these drugs just sleep. It may be that these drugs just increase alertness, which allows you to increase alertness, which allows you to increase alertness, which allows you to dial in focus. But if you're sleeping dial in focus. But if you're sleeping dial in focus. But if you're sleeping well and enough, you make up the gap. well and enough, you make up the gap. well and enough, you make up the gap. And people with ADHD might just be And people with ADHD might just be And people with ADHD might just be having some serious sleep defects. having some serious sleep defects. having some serious sleep defects. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; So, you know, it speaks to this &gt;&gt; So, you know, it speaks to this &gt;&gt; So, you know, it speaks to this thing like I don't know that there's a thing like I don't know that there's a thing like I don't know that there's a single drug that can actually increase single drug that can actually increase single drug that can actually increase cognition and focus. Most of them cognition and focus. Most of them cognition and focus. Most of them probably just get you in the plane of probably just get you in the plane of probably just get you in the plane of alertness that allows you to dial in alertness that allows you to dial in alertness that allows you to dial in your focus. Some people be like, "That's your focus. Some people be like, "That's your focus. Some people be like, "That's BS." They take modafinil, but this is BS." They take modafinil, but this is BS." They take modafinil, but this is just another form of increasing just another form of increasing just another form of increasing alertness. &gt;&gt; Or reducing anxiety, I think things that &gt;&gt; Or reducing anxiety, I think things that &gt;&gt; Or reducing anxiety, I think things that are anxiolytic help with that as well. are anxiolytic help with that as well. are anxiolytic help with that as well. And I think I was talking about I don't And I think I was talking about I don't And I think I was talking about I don't know if I was telling you or someone know if I was telling you or someone know if I was telling you or someone else before the podcast. One of the else before the podcast. One of the else before the podcast. One of the reasons why I also like that metabolic reasons why I also like that metabolic reasons why I also like that metabolic switch with the ketosis and the switch with the ketosis and the switch with the ketosis and the beta-hydroxybutyrate, and sometimes I'll beta-hydroxybutyrate, and sometimes I'll beta-hydroxybutyrate, and sometimes I'll take exogenous ketones, too. take exogenous ketones, too. take exogenous ketones, too. Although, if you take them in a fasted Although, if you take them in a fasted Although, if you take them in a fasted state, it kind of shuts down the state, it kind of shuts down the state, it kind of shuts down the lipolysis. But anyways, it's because it lipolysis. But anyways, it's because it lipolysis. But anyways, it's because it increases GABA. increases GABA. increases GABA. The beta-hydroxybutyrate increases GABA. The beta-hydroxybutyrate increases GABA. The beta-hydroxybutyrate increases GABA. And for me, it's beneficial because I am And for me, it's beneficial because I am And for me, it's beneficial because I am the phenotype where I like, you know, I the phenotype where I like, you know, I the phenotype where I like, you know, I can have other things going on in my can have other things going on in my can have other things going on in my mind that it's I don't want to It's not mind that it's I don't want to It's not mind that it's I don't want to It's not anxiety, but it's more of that anxious anxiety, but it's more of that anxious anxiety, but it's more of that anxious phenotype, if that makes sense. And so, phenotype, if that makes sense. And so, phenotype, if that makes sense. And so, the increasing GABA really does the increasing GABA really does the increasing GABA really does um help me with focus because it's um help me with focus because it's um help me with focus because it's quieting down quieting down quieting down &gt;&gt; I think. &gt;&gt; I think. &gt;&gt; I think. &gt;&gt; I actually think that a lot of people &gt;&gt; I actually think that a lot of people &gt;&gt; I actually think that a lot of people who are very intellectually engaged, who are very intellectually engaged, who are very intellectually engaged, which clearly you are over many, many which clearly you are over many, many which clearly you are over many, many years, and very physically active and years, and very physically active and years, and very physically active and healthy, there's a lot of capacity there. And there's a lot of capacity there. And there's a lot of capacity there. And unless there's something to really unless there's something to really unless there's something to really absorb all that capacity, you can get absorb all that capacity, you can get absorb all that capacity, you can get multiple tracks going. And we sometimes multiple tracks going. And we sometimes multiple tracks going. And we sometimes think of that as anxiety or even AD Some think of that as anxiety or even AD Some think of that as anxiety or even AD Some people will say it's ADHD. I don't I people will say it's ADHD. I don't I people will say it's ADHD. I don't I don't necessarily think it's that, but don't necessarily think it's that, but don't necessarily think it's that, but it's an uncomfortable state to be in. it's an uncomfortable state to be in. it's an uncomfortable state to be in. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; And so, pleasurable to be like where all &gt;&gt; And so, pleasurable to be like where all &gt;&gt; And so, pleasurable to be like where all one's resources, physical or cognitive one's resources, physical or cognitive one's resources, physical or cognitive or both, are harnessed. It's a It's or both, are harnessed. It's a It's or both, are harnessed. It's a It's a very pleasant state. Earlier you were a very pleasant state. Earlier you were a very pleasant state. Earlier you were saying the GABA increase from the saying the GABA increase from the saying the GABA increase from the ketosis, &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I think more and more we're just &gt;&gt; I think more and more we're just &gt;&gt; I think more and more we're just realizing that people have differing realizing that people have differing realizing that people have differing levels of excitatory to inhibitory levels of excitatory to inhibitory levels of excitatory to inhibitory balance in the brain. And so, some balance in the brain. And so, some balance in the brain. And so, some people like things that bring GABA up. people like things that bring GABA up. people like things that bring GABA up. Some people like things that bring Some people like things that bring Some people like things that bring glutamate up, broadly speaking. And glutamate up, broadly speaking. And glutamate up, broadly speaking. And finding that sweet spot is where you go, finding that sweet spot is where you go, finding that sweet spot is where you go, oh, like I'm alert but calm. oh, like I'm alert but calm. oh, like I'm alert but calm. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; what That's what we want. &gt;&gt; what That's what we want. &gt;&gt; what That's what we want. &gt;&gt; for me. Alert but calm. &gt;&gt; for me. Alert but calm. &gt;&gt; for me. Alert but calm. &gt;&gt; Great. &gt;&gt; Great. &gt;&gt; Great. &gt;&gt; And for me, I'm like and I noticed &gt;&gt; And for me, I'm like and I noticed &gt;&gt; And for me, I'm like and I noticed that there was a few years ago I really that there was a few years ago I really that there was a few years ago I really experimented with the ketogenic diet. I experimented with the ketogenic diet. I experimented with the ketogenic diet. I just can't do that type of diet, but I just can't do that type of diet, but I just can't do that type of diet, but I did experiment with it. And that was the did experiment with it. And that was the did experiment with it. And that was the one of the main things that I noticed is one of the main things that I noticed is one of the main things that I noticed is like, I'm alert but calm. And it's like, I'm alert but calm. And it's like, I'm alert but calm. And it's like, I liked it. I liked it. I liked it. &gt;&gt; Mhm. Well, then don't take nicotine &gt;&gt; Mhm. Well, then don't take nicotine &gt;&gt; Mhm. Well, then don't take nicotine because the reason people like nicotine because the reason people like nicotine because the reason people like nicotine is it's a stimulant that calms you down. is it's a stimulant that calms you down. is it's a stimulant that calms you down. So, I do think that one of the reasons So, I do think that one of the reasons So, I do think that one of the reasons it's so habit-forming is because I know it's so habit-forming is because I know it's so habit-forming is because I know of nothing else that puts you in that of nothing else that puts you in that of nothing else that puts you in that plane of focus of alert but calm that is plane of focus of alert but calm that is plane of focus of alert but calm that is reasonably low cost, that is legal. I've reasonably low cost, that is legal. I've reasonably low cost, that is legal. I've never I'll do I'm clearly I've never I'll do I'm clearly I've never I'll do I'm clearly I've never done amphetamine or cocaine, so I'm not done amphetamine or cocaine, so I'm not done amphetamine or cocaine, so I'm not I wouldn't want to and clearly that's a I wouldn't want to and clearly that's a I wouldn't want to and clearly that's a path to destruction. So, path to destruction. So, path to destruction. So, the reason so many young people are the reason so many young people are the reason so many young people are taking it is because it gets them right taking it is because it gets them right taking it is because it gets them right in that plane of alert but calm, but it in that plane of alert but calm, but it in that plane of alert but calm, but it has all these negative effects that go has all these negative effects that go has all these negative effects that go with it. with it. with it. &gt;&gt; Yeah, and that's why I have stayed away &gt;&gt; Yeah, and that's why I have stayed away &gt;&gt; Yeah, and that's why I have stayed away from it because I know I'd probably love from it because I know I'd probably love from it because I know I'd probably love it. &gt;&gt; I've asked some young folks who ask me &gt;&gt; I've asked some young folks who ask me &gt;&gt; I've asked some young folks who ask me about nicotine, how many milligrams are about nicotine, how many milligrams are about nicotine, how many milligrams are you taking? They'll say 9 milligrams. you taking? They'll say 9 milligrams. you taking? They'll say 9 milligrams. I'll say, how many times per day? I'll say, how many times per day? I'll say, how many times per day? They'll say, eight times per day. They'll say, eight times per day. They'll say, eight times per day. I'm like, oh my god. Like that's crazy. I'm like, oh my god. Like that's crazy. I'm like, oh my god. Like that's crazy. &gt;&gt; start there. Do you have &gt;&gt; start there. Do you have &gt;&gt; start there. Do you have &gt;&gt; just quickly get there. &gt;&gt; just quickly get there. &gt;&gt; just quickly get there. &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I &gt;&gt; Yeah, so I you know, I don't want to sound like you know, I don't want to sound like you know, I don't want to sound like that curmudgeon that's like, don't drink that curmudgeon that's like, don't drink that curmudgeon that's like, don't drink and don't take nicotine and this kind of and don't take nicotine and this kind of and don't take nicotine and this kind of thing, but it's a it's a slippery slope. thing, but it's a it's a slippery slope. thing, but it's a it's a slippery slope. &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah, I mean there's &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah, I mean there's &gt;&gt; Right. Yeah, I mean there's other things that you can other things that you can other things that you can do that maybe it's not going to be as do that maybe it's not going to be as do that maybe it's not going to be as potent, but potent, but potent, but &gt;&gt; Alpha GPC. &gt;&gt; Alpha GPC. &gt;&gt; Alpha GPC. &gt;&gt; Alpha GPC, for me I like doing I like my &gt;&gt; Alpha GPC, for me I like doing I like my &gt;&gt; Alpha GPC, for me I like doing I like my metabolic switch and my ketones my metabolic switch and my ketones my metabolic switch and my ketones and &gt;&gt; Nice. I'll be curious to hear how you &gt;&gt; Nice. I'll be curious to hear how you &gt;&gt; Nice. I'll be curious to hear how you feel on the Alpha GPC. feel on the Alpha GPC. feel on the Alpha GPC. &gt;&gt; I remember liking it. I don't know why &gt;&gt; I remember liking it. I don't know why &gt;&gt; I remember liking it. I don't know why I think I stopped taking it because I think I stopped taking it because I think I stopped taking it because I got pregnant. It's probably what it was. got pregnant. It's probably what it was. got pregnant. It's probably what it was. And then I just It's one of those things And then I just It's one of those things And then I just It's one of those things where you just where you just where you just &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; forget. &gt;&gt; forget. &gt;&gt; forget. &gt;&gt; Yeah. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. [laughter] &gt;&gt; You go back to the basics and then like &gt;&gt; You go back to the basics and then like &gt;&gt; You go back to the basics and then like the &gt;&gt; experiment. &gt;&gt; experiment. &gt;&gt; experiment. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Before I came on here, I did put out a &gt;&gt; Before I came on here, I did put out a &gt;&gt; Before I came on here, I did put out a call for some questions to the world. call for some questions to the world. call for some questions to the world. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Rapid-fire Q&amp;A from &gt;&gt; Rapid-fire Q&amp;A from &gt;&gt; Rapid-fire Q&amp;A from the land of X and Instagram. Oh the land of X and Instagram. Oh the land of X and Instagram. Oh This is this these are the students of This is this these are the students of This is this these are the students of the class of your class. And this way I the class of your class. And this way I the class of your class. And this way I think about it. Actually, I wanted to think about it. Actually, I wanted to think about it. Actually, I wanted to ask about this. So, I'm so grateful that ask about this. So, I'm so grateful that ask about this. So, I'm so grateful that this person asked about nattokinase for this person asked about nattokinase for this person asked about nattokinase for improving blood lipid profiles. Is it improving blood lipid profiles. Is it improving blood lipid profiles. Is it something you're interested in or have something you're interested in or have something you're interested in or have experimented with? experimented with? experimented with? &gt;&gt; It's not something that I've &gt;&gt; It's not something that I've &gt;&gt; It's not something that I've experimented with and I've been more experimented with and I've been more experimented with and I've been more interested in interested in interested in natto than nattokinase. I know some I natto than nattokinase. I know some I natto than nattokinase. I know some I really would have to say I don't have really would have to say I don't have really would have to say I don't have enough data to really have an opinion on enough data to really have an opinion on enough data to really have an opinion on it. Okay. it. Okay. it. Okay. &gt;&gt; Well, I don't have enough data to have &gt;&gt; Well, I don't have enough data to have &gt;&gt; Well, I don't have enough data to have an opinion on it, but I take it anyway. an opinion on it, but I take it anyway. an opinion on it, but I take it anyway. A lot of questions about things we A lot of questions about things we A lot of questions about things we already talked about. So, cold plunge, already talked about. So, cold plunge, already talked about. So, cold plunge, um etc. But an exceptional number of um etc. But an exceptional number of um etc. But an exceptional number of questions about microplastics. And I questions about microplastics. And I questions about microplastics. And I know we touched into it, but on a scale know we touched into it, but on a scale know we touched into it, but on a scale of 1 to 10, 10 being like you're really of 1 to 10, 10 being like you're really of 1 to 10, 10 being like you're really concerned, how concerned are you about concerned, how concerned are you about concerned, how concerned are you about microplastics for mental and physical microplastics for mental and physical microplastics for mental and physical health, longevity, just broadly health, longevity, just broadly health, longevity, just broadly speaking? &gt;&gt; I would say I am less concerned about &gt;&gt; I would say I am less concerned about &gt;&gt; I would say I am less concerned about microplastics than I am about not microplastics than I am about not microplastics than I am about not getting the right nutrients and micronutrients the right nutrients and micronutrients the right nutrients and micronutrients from our from our foods cuz our body can from our from our foods cuz our body can from our from our foods cuz our body can detoxify at least some of the chemicals detoxify at least some of the chemicals detoxify at least some of the chemicals associated with them. The microplastics associated with them. The microplastics associated with them. The microplastics themselves, I mean, I guess it's not we themselves, I mean, I guess it's not we themselves, I mean, I guess it's not we don't really know what they're going to don't really know what they're going to don't really know what they're going to do long-term, but I'm concerned do long-term, but I'm concerned do long-term, but I'm concerned enough to try to avoid uh to sorry, enough to try to avoid uh to sorry, enough to try to avoid uh to sorry, limit my exposure to them as much as limit my exposure to them as much as limit my exposure to them as much as possible. &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, you don't drink out of plastic &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, you don't drink out of plastic &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, you don't drink out of plastic water bottles? water bottles? water bottles? &gt;&gt; I mean, I try not to as much as &gt;&gt; I mean, I try not to as much as &gt;&gt; I mean, I try not to as much as possible. I mean, you know, I possible. I mean, you know, I possible. I mean, you know, I definitely &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; have to at some points, but um I try &gt;&gt; have to at some points, but um I try &gt;&gt; have to at some points, but um I try not to. Yes. And when I do, I just not to. Yes. And when I do, I just not to. Yes. And when I do, I just realize it's the habit and you kind of realize it's the habit and you kind of realize it's the habit and you kind of have to let go. I mean, I know some have to let go. I mean, I know some have to let go. I mean, I know some people that like don't drink. And like people that like don't drink. And like people that like don't drink. And like they're like they're going to they're like they're going to they're like they're going to get their water from their food, their get their water from their food, their get their water from their food, their fruits while they're traveling. Pretty fruits while they're traveling. Pretty fruits while they're traveling. Pretty extreme. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's &gt;&gt; Yeah. But I think mental health is &gt;&gt; Yeah. But I think mental health is &gt;&gt; Yeah. But I think mental health is important. So, I mean, it's like is the important. So, I mean, it's like is the important. So, I mean, it's like is the stress of avoiding the microplastics stress of avoiding the microplastics stress of avoiding the microplastics worse than the actual little bit of worse than the actual little bit of worse than the actual little bit of microplastics you're being exposed to? microplastics you're being exposed to? microplastics you're being exposed to? It might be. It might be. It might be. &gt;&gt; TSA is going to hate me, but I lost a &gt;&gt; TSA is going to hate me, but I lost a &gt;&gt; TSA is going to hate me, but I lost a bet 2 days ago to a member of our bet 2 days ago to a member of our bet 2 days ago to a member of our podcast team. He bet me, we bet that I podcast team. He bet me, we bet that I podcast team. He bet me, we bet that I said one couldn't bring a Mountain said one couldn't bring a Mountain said one couldn't bring a Mountain Valley Spring Water Valley Spring Water Valley Spring Water bottle through security at the airport bottle through security at the airport bottle through security at the airport and he said it that you absolutely can. and he said it that you absolutely can. and he said it that you absolutely can. And I said there's no way. So I made him And I said there's no way. So I made him And I said there's no way. So I made him a bet and I lost. He brought it through. a bet and I lost. He brought it through. a bet and I lost. He brought it through. &gt;&gt; Full of water? &gt;&gt; Full of water? &gt;&gt; Full of water? &gt;&gt; Full of water. You tell them it's for &gt;&gt; Full of water. You tell them it's for &gt;&gt; Full of water. You tell them it's for medical reasons. medical reasons. medical reasons. You don't have to state what they are. You don't have to state what they are. You don't have to state what they are. They open the cap. They open the cap. They open the cap. They take a sample out. They test it. So They take a sample out. They test it. So They take a sample out. They test it. So there's a time constraint and it's going there's a time constraint and it's going there's a time constraint and it's going to create more jobs for TSA. create more jobs for TSA. create more jobs for TSA. Uh sorry, that was sort of a joke, sort Uh sorry, that was sort of a joke, sort Uh sorry, that was sort of a joke, sort of not a joke. TSA has been of not a joke. TSA has been of not a joke. TSA has been you know, in tricky circumstances you know, in tricky circumstances you know, in tricky circumstances lately. And he showed up at the at the lately. And he showed up at the at the lately. And he showed up at the at the gate with it and was like, here's your gate with it and was like, here's your gate with it and was like, here's your water. You absolutely can bring water water. You absolutely can bring water water. You absolutely can bring water through in glass vessels or whatever through in glass vessels or whatever through in glass vessels or whatever vessel, but they're going to test it and vessel, but they're going to test it and vessel, but they're going to test it and it helps if it's a commercial vessel. it helps if it's a commercial vessel. it helps if it's a commercial vessel. It's not like your own glass water It's not like your own glass water It's not like your own glass water bottle. &gt;&gt; Can I pause for a minute because you &gt;&gt; Can I pause for a minute because you &gt;&gt; Can I pause for a minute because you mentioned a specific brand which I also mentioned a specific brand which I also mentioned a specific brand which I also when I when I when I when I when I when I when &gt;&gt; Oh yeah, I know. I don't make money from &gt;&gt; Oh yeah, I know. I don't make money from &gt;&gt; Oh yeah, I know. I don't make money from them. Yeah. them. Yeah. them. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Right. Same. I drink when I'm &gt;&gt; Right. Same. I drink when I'm &gt;&gt; Right. Same. I drink when I'm traveling, that's the brand that traveling, that's the brand that traveling, that's the brand that I go to. And there are there was a study I go to. And there are there was a study I go to. And there are there was a study that came out showing that there's that came out showing that there's that came out showing that there's actually a larger volume of actually a larger volume of actually a larger volume of microplastics in within the study in microplastics in within the study in microplastics in within the study in from glass bottles versus plastic from glass bottles versus plastic from glass bottles versus plastic bottles, which was a very shocking bottles, which was a very shocking bottles, which was a very shocking finding. Um so there's more mice finding. Um so there's more mice finding. Um so there's more mice microplastic number microplastic number microplastic number coming from the glass bottles. It coming from the glass bottles. It coming from the glass bottles. It turns out this was a study out of turns out this was a study out of turns out this was a study out of France. There was a study out of France France. There was a study out of France France. There was a study out of France and also in the US. It's the paint on and also in the US. It's the paint on and also in the US. It's the paint on the lids. You mentioned the lid and the lids. You mentioned the lid and the lids. You mentioned the lid and so it's the paint on the lid that's so it's the paint on the lid that's so it's the paint on the lid that's contaminating getting contaminated in contaminating getting contaminated in contaminating getting contaminated in the bottling of the whole bottling the bottling of the whole bottling the bottling of the whole bottling of this, you know, water of this, you know, water of this, you know, water that is getting into the water, but I do that is getting into the water, but I do that is getting into the water, but I do want to mention that the size was want to mention that the size was want to mention that the size was shown to be larger from the glass shown to be larger from the glass shown to be larger from the glass bottles versus the plastic. So the bottles versus the plastic. So the bottles versus the plastic. So the microplastic size was larger. And as you microplastic size was larger. And as you microplastic size was larger. And as you probably know, larger microplastics are probably know, larger microplastics are probably know, larger microplastics are not well absorbed through the gut not well absorbed through the gut not well absorbed through the gut epithelial cells. So when you're, you epithelial cells. So when you're, you epithelial cells. So when you're, you know, taking them in the gut, they're know, taking them in the gut, they're know, taking them in the gut, they're coming out, they're being excreted coming out, they're being excreted coming out, they're being excreted through your feces. through your feces. through your feces. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And less likely to be taken up into your &gt;&gt; And less likely to be taken up into your &gt;&gt; And less likely to be taken up into your gut and then get into your body. And gut and then get into your body. And gut and then get into your body. And that's actually well known. And so, I'm that's actually well known. And so, I'm that's actually well known. And so, I'm actually more concerned about the size actually more concerned about the size actually more concerned about the size of microplastics. of microplastics. of microplastics. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um and it wasn't like the huge orders of &gt;&gt; Um and it wasn't like the huge orders of &gt;&gt; Um and it wasn't like the huge orders of magnitude difference between the magnitude difference between the magnitude difference between the water from glass versus the plastic. It water from glass versus the plastic. It water from glass versus the plastic. It It's so counterintuitive. You think, It's so counterintuitive. You think, It's so counterintuitive. You think, "Wait, what? Why is it?" So, it's "Wait, what? Why is it?" So, it's "Wait, what? Why is it?" So, it's the paint that's the paint that's the paint that's &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; But anyways, I just want to mention that &gt;&gt; But anyways, I just want to mention that &gt;&gt; But anyways, I just want to mention that I still drink when I'm traveling. I still drink when I'm traveling. I still drink when I'm traveling. I still go for the glass, not the plastic, still go for the glass, not the plastic, still go for the glass, not the plastic, because of the size of the microplastics because of the size of the microplastics because of the size of the microplastics and knowing because the size was much and knowing because the size was much and knowing because the size was much bigger, um that it's very, I would say, bigger, um that it's very, I would say, bigger, um that it's very, I would say, more data is going to come out on this, more data is going to come out on this, more data is going to come out on this, but I would be surprised if you're but I would be surprised if you're but I would be surprised if you're absorbing more of the larger particles absorbing more of the larger particles absorbing more of the larger particles cuz it's known that you absorb the cuz it's known that you absorb the cuz it's known that you absorb the smaller ones. smaller ones. smaller ones. &gt;&gt; Thank you for that. And if you want, you &gt;&gt; Thank you for that. And if you want, you &gt;&gt; Thank you for that. And if you want, you can now take your glass bottle through can now take your glass bottle through can now take your glass bottle through security full. Seed oils, the dreaded security full. Seed oils, the dreaded security full. Seed oils, the dreaded seed oil debate. Where do you land on seed oil debate. Where do you land on seed oil debate. Where do you land on this? &gt;&gt; I try to avoid them. Um &gt;&gt; I try to avoid them. Um &gt;&gt; I try to avoid them. Um mostly because one, if you're avoiding mostly because one, if you're avoiding mostly because one, if you're avoiding seed oils, you're going to avoid a lot seed oils, you're going to avoid a lot seed oils, you're going to avoid a lot of the processed packaged foods that of the processed packaged foods that of the processed packaged foods that they come in, which I know are terrible they come in, which I know are terrible they come in, which I know are terrible for you. for you. for you. Two, because Two, because Two, because I think that cooking them or heating I think that cooking them or heating I think that cooking them or heating them, I mean, is more of my concern them, I mean, is more of my concern them, I mean, is more of my concern because they are, because they are, because they are, you know, polyunsaturated fatty acids, you know, polyunsaturated fatty acids, you know, polyunsaturated fatty acids, which are very prone to oxidation. And which are very prone to oxidation. And which are very prone to oxidation. And when you're heating something that's when you're heating something that's when you're heating something that's prone to oxidation, you're accelerating prone to oxidation, you're accelerating prone to oxidation, you're accelerating that whole process. I don't want to that whole process. I don't want to that whole process. I don't want to consume oxidized lipids. I've seen I've consume oxidized lipids. I've seen I've consume oxidized lipids. I've seen I've looked into that literature. And the looked into that literature. And the looked into that literature. And the last time I looked into it was, I think, last time I looked into it was, I think, last time I looked into it was, I think, 2024. At [snorts] that time, I was pretty At [snorts] that time, I was pretty At [snorts] that time, I was pretty convinced that if you are heating and convinced that if you are heating and convinced that if you are heating and reheating, you know, oils like they do reheating, you know, oils like they do reheating, you know, oils like they do in fast food, for sure, you're in fast food, for sure, you're in fast food, for sure, you're increasing inflammatory markers. That's increasing inflammatory markers. That's increasing inflammatory markers. That's been shown. been shown. been shown. And I think also when you're really And I think also when you're really And I think also when you're really having a higher level of, you know, having a higher level of, you know, having a higher level of, you know, omega-6s and stuff around, I'm not as omega-6s and stuff around, I'm not as omega-6s and stuff around, I'm not as concerned cuz I'm getting a lot of concerned cuz I'm getting a lot of concerned cuz I'm getting a lot of omega-3, but it does also increase your omega-3, but it does also increase your omega-3, but it does also increase your vitamin E requirements as well because vitamin E requirements as well because vitamin E requirements as well because of the oxidation of these of the oxidation of these of the oxidation of these polyunsaturated fatty acids. So, polyunsaturated fatty acids. So, polyunsaturated fatty acids. So, do I think it's like the worst do I think it's like the worst do I think it's like the worst ever? I mean, you can find all this data ever? I mean, you can find all this data ever? I mean, you can find all this data out there showing that, out there showing that, out there showing that, you know, if you replace, you know, you know, if you replace, you know, you know, if you replace, you know, saturated fat with saturated fat with saturated fat with &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; some of these seed oils, there's &gt;&gt; some of these seed oils, there's &gt;&gt; some of these seed oils, there's improvements in lipid profiles. But, at improvements in lipid profiles. But, at improvements in lipid profiles. But, at the end of the day, the question is the end of the day, the question is the end of the day, the question is really what if like you had olive oil really what if like you had olive oil really what if like you had olive oil instead or avocado oil instead? Would it instead or avocado oil instead? Would it instead or avocado oil instead? Would it be even better? be even better? be even better? I think possibly. So, if you're really I think possibly. So, if you're really I think possibly. So, if you're really trying to go for the optimal I avoid trying to go for the optimal I avoid trying to go for the optimal I avoid them as much as I can for that reason. them as much as I can for that reason. them as much as I can for that reason. But, I think there's a little bit more But, I think there's a little bit more But, I think there's a little bit more hype when it comes to the seed oil. hype when it comes to the seed oil. hype when it comes to the seed oil. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; But, if that makes sense, you know, I'm &gt;&gt; But, if that makes sense, you know, I'm &gt;&gt; But, if that makes sense, you know, I'm kind of that's my that's my take. kind of that's my that's my take. kind of that's my that's my take. &gt;&gt; Makes sense to me. For what it's worth, &gt;&gt; Makes sense to me. For what it's worth, &gt;&gt; Makes sense to me. For what it's worth, I stick to olive oil and small amounts of stick to olive oil and small amounts of stick to olive oil and small amounts of butter and butter and butter and that's because I also think seed oils that's because I also think seed oils that's because I also think seed oils taste terrible. How come no one talks taste terrible. How come no one talks taste terrible. How come no one talks about that? But, anyway, and olive oil about that? But, anyway, and olive oil about that? But, anyway, and olive oil and butter are delicious. and butter are delicious. and butter are delicious. &gt;&gt; like I mean, &gt;&gt; like I mean, &gt;&gt; like I mean, had the, you know, seed oil, but yeah. had the, you know, seed oil, but yeah. had the, you know, seed oil, but yeah. &gt;&gt; You know, and no one can convince me &gt;&gt; You know, and no one can convince me &gt;&gt; You know, and no one can convince me that they don't taste bad to me. So, that they don't taste bad to me. So, that they don't taste bad to me. So, then the debate just kind of falls away. then the debate just kind of falls away. then the debate just kind of falls away. How often are you How often are you How often are you doing the sauna nowadays and what does doing the sauna nowadays and what does doing the sauna nowadays and what does the top contour of that protocol look the top contour of that protocol look the top contour of that protocol look like? &gt;&gt; So, I've taken a little pause on the &gt;&gt; So, I've taken a little pause on the &gt;&gt; So, I've taken a little pause on the sauna right now, but typically I'm doing sauna right now, but typically I'm doing sauna right now, but typically I'm doing I was doing it like I would say five I was doing it like I would say five I was doing it like I would say five nights a week. And I say nights cuz I nights a week. And I say nights cuz I nights a week. And I say nights cuz I was usually doing them in the night. And was usually doing them in the night. And was usually doing them in the night. And it was mixed a mixture between either it was mixed a mixture between either it was mixed a mixture between either getting in the sauna or hot getting in the sauna or hot getting in the sauna or hot tub. So, I like I like getting in the tub. So, I like I like getting in the tub. So, I like I like getting in the hot tub head out under the stars there hot tub head out under the stars there hot tub head out under the stars there with my husband. It's like our time. with my husband. It's like our time. with my husband. It's like our time. Um so, yeah, usually it's like 20 Um so, yeah, usually it's like 20 Um so, yeah, usually it's like 20 minutes and temperature-wise, you know, minutes and temperature-wise, you know, minutes and temperature-wise, you know, I don't go that hot. I honestly I'm like I don't go that hot. I honestly I'm like I don't go that hot. I honestly I'm like 180. &gt;&gt; Five nights a week is great. Gosh, I &gt;&gt; Five nights a week is great. Gosh, I &gt;&gt; Five nights a week is great. Gosh, I need to get back on a five-night-a-week need to get back on a five-night-a-week need to get back on a five-night-a-week sauna or hot tub protocol. sauna or hot tub protocol. sauna or hot tub protocol. &gt;&gt; I do like the hot tub especially. I &gt;&gt; I do like the hot tub especially. I &gt;&gt; I do like the hot tub especially. I don't know, there's something about don't know, there's something about don't know, there's something about being outside and I think now there's being outside and I think now there's being outside and I think now there's just there's evidence that the just there's evidence that the just there's evidence that the benefits are really like the same. It's benefits are really like the same. It's benefits are really like the same. It's the deliberate heat exposure, right? the deliberate heat exposure, right? the deliberate heat exposure, right? You're getting that You're getting that You're getting that You're getting that You're getting that You're getting that through the hot tub or through the through the hot tub or through the through the hot tub or through the sauna. &gt;&gt; Creatine for kids, like young kids, like &gt;&gt; Creatine for kids, like young kids, like &gt;&gt; Creatine for kids, like young kids, like younger than 16. younger than 16. younger than 16. Um any data and or ideas about this, Um any data and or ideas about this, Um any data and or ideas about this, good or bad? good or bad? good or bad? &gt;&gt; Yeah, so there is data in the literature &gt;&gt; Yeah, so there is data in the literature &gt;&gt; Yeah, so there is data in the literature showing that if you give younger showing that if you give younger showing that if you give younger children that are doing like, for children that are doing like, for children that are doing like, for example, sports like soccer, example, sports like soccer, example, sports like soccer, it does seem to improve their agility. it does seem to improve their agility. it does seem to improve their agility. And it seems to be safe. I do give my And it seems to be safe. I do give my And it seems to be safe. I do give my son 2 and 1/2 g of creatine, so. A day. 2 and 1/2 g of creatine, so. A day. 2 and 1/2 g of creatine, so. A day. &gt;&gt; Cool. &gt;&gt; Cool. &gt;&gt; Cool. &gt;&gt; So that's how I feel. &gt;&gt; So that's how I feel. &gt;&gt; So that's how I feel. &gt;&gt; There's no better &gt;&gt; There's no better &gt;&gt; There's no better indication of how you of how one feels indication of how you of how one feels indication of how you of how one feels and what they're willing to deliberately and what they're willing to deliberately and what they're willing to deliberately give their kids. give their kids. give their kids. I don't know where this stems from and I don't know where this stems from and I don't know where this stems from and we can cut it if you want, but there's we can cut it if you want, but there's we can cut it if you want, but there's someone asked why did you someone asked why did you someone asked why did you single-handedly ruin bananas? single-handedly ruin bananas? single-handedly ruin bananas? &gt;&gt; Oh. &gt;&gt; Oh. &gt;&gt; Oh. &gt;&gt; For this person. &gt;&gt; For this person. &gt;&gt; For this person. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Uh did you did you ruin bananas? &gt;&gt; Uh did you did you ruin bananas? &gt;&gt; Uh did you did you ruin bananas? &gt;&gt; So I used to put bananas in my smoothies &gt;&gt; So I used to put bananas in my smoothies &gt;&gt; So I used to put bananas in my smoothies and there's an there's an enzyme that is and there's an there's an enzyme that is and there's an there's an enzyme that is produced in bananas that break down produced in bananas that break down produced in bananas that break down polyphenols, particularly ones that are polyphenols, particularly ones that are polyphenols, particularly ones that are found in blueberries. And the reason I found in blueberries. And the reason I found in blueberries. And the reason I was getting my smoothies was one for the was getting my smoothies was one for the was getting my smoothies was one for the greens, but two for the blueberries greens, but two for the blueberries greens, but two for the blueberries because the polyphenols have been shown because the polyphenols have been shown because the polyphenols have been shown to improve coordination. Love to improve coordination. Love to improve coordination. Love blueberries. So, um sorry sorry, don't blueberries. So, um sorry sorry, don't blueberries. So, um sorry sorry, don't mix the blueberry with the banana mix the blueberry with the banana mix the blueberry with the banana smoothie because it has been shown to smoothie because it has been shown to smoothie because it has been shown to decrease the polyphenols, which are decrease the polyphenols, which are decrease the polyphenols, which are important. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the alcohol industry &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the alcohol industry &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the alcohol industry will come for me someday and the banana will come for me someday and the banana will come for me someday and the banana industry will come for you. And uh I industry will come for you. And uh I industry will come for you. And uh I think we're safe for a while. Um think we're safe for a while. Um think we're safe for a while. Um Should we ignore studies that have less Should we ignore studies that have less Should we ignore studies that have less than X number of subjects? I think that's a X number of subjects? I think that's a X number of subjects? I think that's a really good question. Like obviously it really good question. Like obviously it really good question. Like obviously it depends, but when we're talking about depends, but when we're talking about depends, but when we're talking about human studies, where's the line for human studies, where's the line for human studies, where's the line for small study versus large meaningful small study versus large meaningful small study versus large meaningful study for you? Obviously how strongly study for you? Obviously how strongly study for you? Obviously how strongly it's powered, but how do you think about it's powered, but how do you think about it's powered, but how do you think about that? &gt;&gt; Well, I'll tell you when I was first &gt;&gt; Well, I'll tell you when I was first &gt;&gt; Well, I'll tell you when I was first looking at the sauna literature, looking at the sauna literature, looking at the sauna literature, all the studies that I were looking at all the studies that I were looking at all the studies that I were looking at were like were like were like N of 10 or smaller. N of 10 or smaller. N of 10 or smaller. And it's really the aggregate of those And it's really the aggregate of those And it's really the aggregate of those studies and then looking at like studies and then looking at like studies and then looking at like animal data and then you start to you animal data and then you start to you animal data and then you start to you know you start to look at know you start to look at know you start to look at observational data and the totality of observational data and the totality of observational data and the totality of evidence and you put together this evidence and you put together this evidence and you put together this picture. I don't think you should ignore picture. I don't think you should ignore picture. I don't think you should ignore studies that are small. I think that studies that are small. I think that studies that are small. I think that it's part of the story. I think we're it's part of the story. I think we're it's part of the story. I think we're getting a little too caught up and it's getting a little too caught up and it's getting a little too caught up and it's got to be the randomized placebo got to be the randomized placebo got to be the randomized placebo controlled trial. It's got to have lot controlled trial. It's got to have lot controlled trial. It's got to have lot lots of participants and I mean that's lots of participants and I mean that's lots of participants and I mean that's great if we have that data, but we don't great if we have that data, but we don't great if we have that data, but we don't always have that data and I don't know always have that data and I don't know always have that data and I don't know that we will always have that data with that we will always have that data with that we will always have that data with everything that we're interested in everything that we're interested in everything that we're interested in understanding, right? So, the way I look understanding, right? So, the way I look understanding, right? So, the way I look at it is if it's like just one study at it is if it's like just one study at it is if it's like just one study with an N of 10, okay, interesting. Um with an N of 10, okay, interesting. Um with an N of 10, okay, interesting. Um like with the creatine, right? Like I like with the creatine, right? Like I like with the creatine, right? Like I mean these studies have been small mean these studies have been small mean these studies have been small sample sizes. Now there's more than one, sample sizes. Now there's more than one, sample sizes. Now there's more than one, but you know at the end of the day it's but you know at the end of the day it's but you know at the end of the day it's still very I would say in this still very I would say in this still very I would say in this you know pilot study phase, right? Where you know pilot study phase, right? Where you know pilot study phase, right? Where you have just small studies. So, I do you have just small studies. So, I do you have just small studies. So, I do not ignore them, but I also don't hedge not ignore them, but I also don't hedge not ignore them, but I also don't hedge all my bets on them either. I do know all my bets on them either. I do know all my bets on them either. I do know that there were a lot of people that there were a lot of people that there were a lot of people that were criticizing me on my sauna. I mean were criticizing me on my sauna. I mean were criticizing me on my sauna. I mean back in I you know 2014 published an back in I you know 2014 published an back in I you know 2014 published an article on Tim Ferriss's blog, article on Tim Ferriss's blog, article on Tim Ferriss's blog, went on [snorts] Joe Rogan's podcast and went on [snorts] Joe Rogan's podcast and went on [snorts] Joe Rogan's podcast and talked about you know the benefits of talked about you know the benefits of talked about you know the benefits of sauna and I had people that were sauna and I had people that were sauna and I had people that were going your studies your sample sizes are going your studies your sample sizes are going your studies your sample sizes are too small. And now we have so much data too small. And now we have so much data too small. And now we have so much data that has come out since then really kind that has come out since then really kind that has come out since then really kind of validating everything and showing of validating everything and showing of validating everything and showing even more benefits. You kind of have to even more benefits. You kind of have to even more benefits. You kind of have to look at the totality of evidence and look at the totality of evidence and look at the totality of evidence and what is it you're what end points are what is it you're what end points are what is it you're what end points are you looking at and how can you gather you looking at and how can you gather you looking at and how can you gather you know data from different sources, you know data from different sources, you know data from different sources, whether it's clinical studies or whether it's clinical studies or whether it's clinical studies or observational studies or animal studies observational studies or animal studies observational studies or animal studies and try to come up with the bigger and try to come up with the bigger and try to come up with the bigger picture, right? But then also don't be picture, right? But then also don't be picture, right? But then also don't be too confident in your statements. too confident in your statements. too confident in your statements. &gt;&gt; I'm very gratified &gt;&gt; I'm very gratified &gt;&gt; I'm very gratified to know that pretty much every other to know that pretty much every other to know that pretty much every other question you addressed the answer to in question you addressed the answer to in question you addressed the answer to in route to where we are now in the podcast route to where we are now in the podcast route to where we are now in the podcast truly and I'll leave them up so you can truly and I'll leave them up so you can truly and I'll leave them up so you can see them later if you choose. Cold see them later if you choose. Cold see them later if you choose. Cold plunges uh notwithstanding um vitamin D uh notwithstanding um vitamin D uh notwithstanding um vitamin D um exercise in all its contour, exercise in all its contour, exercise in all its contour, specificity, fasting, uh magnesium, specificity, fasting, uh magnesium, specificity, fasting, uh magnesium, lots of questions about supplements, lots of questions about supplements, lots of questions about supplements, which we covered, creatine, lots of which we covered, creatine, lots of which we covered, creatine, lots of questions about inflammation, longevity. questions about inflammation, longevity. questions about inflammation, longevity. And so, I just have to say, first of And so, I just have to say, first of And so, I just have to say, first of all, on behalf of everybody, thank you all, on behalf of everybody, thank you all, on behalf of everybody, thank you so much. This was really an incredible so much. This was really an incredible so much. This was really an incredible tutorial, and so much of it is tutorial, and so much of it is tutorial, and so much of it is actionable, and as you are known for, it actionable, and as you are known for, it actionable, and as you are known for, it was incredibly thorough in terms of was incredibly thorough in terms of was incredibly thorough in terms of setting the context within mechanisms of setting the context within mechanisms of setting the context within mechanisms of what we know, what we still don't know, what we know, what we still don't know, what we know, what we still don't know, and uh I also personally want to thank and uh I also personally want to thank and uh I also personally want to thank you because when you speak, I learn, and you because when you speak, I learn, and you because when you speak, I learn, and when you speak, I also learn things that when you speak, I also learn things that when you speak, I also learn things that change my behavior, and that's a whole change my behavior, and that's a whole change my behavior, and that's a whole other level. Uh since our last other level. Uh since our last other level. Uh since our last conversation, I can think of at least conversation, I can think of at least conversation, I can think of at least four, and probably as many as a dozen four, and probably as many as a dozen four, and probably as many as a dozen things that I do on a daily basis as a things that I do on a daily basis as a things that I do on a daily basis as a consequence of that conversation, and consequence of that conversation, and consequence of that conversation, and just the just the just the gut inflammation health brain body axis gut inflammation health brain body axis gut inflammation health brain body axis uh conversation that uh we had earlier, uh conversation that uh we had earlier, uh conversation that uh we had earlier, I'm going to listen to this again and I'm going to listen to this again and I'm going to listen to this again and take notes because um there's just so take notes because um there's just so take notes because um there's just so much there. Uh and the metabolic much there. Uh and the metabolic much there. Uh and the metabolic flexibility thing as an input that can flexibility thing as an input that can flexibility thing as an input that can come from multiple sources, it's just on come from multiple sources, it's just on come from multiple sources, it's just on and on. and on. and on. So, thank you for doing what you do. So, thank you for doing what you do. So, thank you for doing what you do. Thank you for being you, for being first Thank you for being you, for being first Thank you for being you, for being first in and still going and doing things with in and still going and doing things with in and still going and doing things with such rigor, and really so much such rigor, and really so much such rigor, and really so much grace. It's just awesome. People grace. It's just awesome. People grace. It's just awesome. People love you. love you. love you. Um I certainly do and appreciate you, Um I certainly do and appreciate you, Um I certainly do and appreciate you, and it's just um it it's a wonderful and it's just um it it's a wonderful and it's just um it it's a wonderful thing for me to have a colleague like thing for me to have a colleague like thing for me to have a colleague like you, and you really set the standard. you, and you really set the standard. you, and you really set the standard. So, thank you so much for coming here So, thank you so much for coming here So, thank you so much for coming here and doing this marathon, and uh can't and doing this marathon, and uh can't and doing this marathon, and uh can't wait to do it again. wait to do it again. wait to do it again. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much, Andrew. It's &gt;&gt; Thank you so much, Andrew. It's &gt;&gt; Thank you so much, Andrew. It's really been great. I learned so much really been great. I learned so much really been great. I learned so much from you as well, and appreciate from you as well, and appreciate from you as well, and appreciate everything. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick. To discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick. To discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick. To learn more about her work, please see learn more about her work, please see learn more about her work, please see the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying you're learning from and/or enjoying you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, cost way to support us. In addition, cost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast, or guests or topics that the podcast, or guests or topics that the podcast, or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of protocols in the form of protocols in the form of one-to-three-page PDFs that cover one-to-three-page PDFs that cover one-to-three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your everything from how to optimize your everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, sleep, how to optimize dopamine, sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a deliberate cold exposure. We have a deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that foundational fitness protocol that foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and covers cardiovascular training and covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Rhonda today's discussion with Dr. Rhonda today's discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick. And last, but certainly not Patrick. And last, but certainly not Patrick. And last, but certainly not least, &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; thank you for your interest in science.