Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Brett Contrarus. Dr. Brett today is Dr. Brett Contrarus. Dr. Brett today is Dr. Brett Contrarus. Dr. Brett Contrarus holds a doctorate degree in Contrarus holds a doctorate degree in Contrarus holds a doctorate degree in sports science and is a certified sports science and is a certified sports science and is a certified strength and conditioning specialist. He strength and conditioning specialist. He strength and conditioning specialist. He has over three decades of experience has over three decades of experience has over three decades of experience training everyday people, athletes, and training everyday people, athletes, and training everyday people, athletes, and coaches on how to get stronger and coaches on how to get stronger and coaches on how to get stronger and develop larger muscles. These days, develop larger muscles. These days, develop larger muscles. These days, Brett is best known as the glute guy for Brett is best known as the glute guy for Brett is best known as the glute guy for his pioneering of exercises for women his pioneering of exercises for women his pioneering of exercises for women and men to strengthen and build their and men to strengthen and build their and men to strengthen and build their glutes in order to be able to move glutes in order to be able to move glutes in order to be able to move better, prevent and heal pain and better, prevent and heal pain and better, prevent and heal pain and injuries, and of course, for aesthetic injuries, and of course, for aesthetic injuries, and of course, for aesthetic reasons. Today's discussion is a very reasons. Today's discussion is a very reasons. Today's discussion is a very important one because anyone interested important one because anyone interested important one because anyone interested in their immediate and long-term health in their immediate and long-term health in their immediate and long-term health needs to resistance train. The science needs to resistance train. The science needs to resistance train. The science is extremely clear on that. However, is extremely clear on that. However, is extremely clear on that. However, there are a lot of questions about how there are a lot of questions about how there are a lot of questions about how best to resistance train. Today, Brett best to resistance train. Today, Brett best to resistance train. Today, Brett clarifies how often to resistance train, clarifies how often to resistance train, clarifies how often to resistance train, what movements to do, and how to make what movements to do, and how to make what movements to do, and how to make continual progress, and in particular, continual progress, and in particular, continual progress, and in particular, how to build a resistance training how to build a resistance training how to build a resistance training program that is tailored to your unique program that is tailored to your unique program that is tailored to your unique aesthetic and performance goals. For aesthetic and performance goals. For aesthetic and performance goals. For example, we discuss how to prioritize example, we discuss how to prioritize example, we discuss how to prioritize the growth and strengthening of your the growth and strengthening of your the growth and strengthening of your glutes or arms or shoulders or calves or glutes or arms or shoulders or calves or glutes or arms or shoulders or calves or back. basically whichever body part or back. basically whichever body part or back. basically whichever body part or parts you need to emphasize while not parts you need to emphasize while not parts you need to emphasize while not losing progress in other areas and in losing progress in other areas and in losing progress in other areas and in many cases while still making progress many cases while still making progress many cases while still making progress in other areas. We also explain how to in other areas. We also explain how to in other areas. We also explain how to gain muscle while getting leaner. Why gain muscle while getting leaner. Why gain muscle while getting leaner. Why the speed of your weight movements the speed of your weight movements the speed of your weight movements probably matters less than selecting the probably matters less than selecting the probably matters less than selecting the proper variety of movements to target proper variety of movements to target proper variety of movements to target all parts of a muscle. And Brett all parts of a muscle. And Brett all parts of a muscle. And Brett explains exactly which movements you explains exactly which movements you explains exactly which movements you should do in each workout to ensure should do in each workout to ensure should do in each workout to ensure well-rounded development of the various well-rounded development of the various well-rounded development of the various muscle groups, including, of course, the muscle groups, including, of course, the muscle groups, including, of course, the glutes. Dr. Brett Contreras is glutes. Dr. Brett Contreras is glutes. Dr. Brett Contreras is considered one of the most trusted considered one of the most trusted considered one of the most trusted voices in this entire space and that's voices in this entire space and that's voices in this entire space and that's because he's highly credentialed, because he's highly credentialed, because he's highly credentialed, meaning he knows the science inside out. meaning he knows the science inside out. meaning he knows the science inside out. He also has trained thousands of people He also has trained thousands of people He also has trained thousands of people and he gets them spectacular results. In and he gets them spectacular results. In and he gets them spectacular results. In fact, the before and afters of his fact, the before and afters of his fact, the before and afters of his clients are nothing short of clients are nothing short of clients are nothing short of extraordinary. So, if you currently extraordinary. So, if you currently extraordinary. So, if you currently resistance train or you want to start resistance train or you want to start resistance train or you want to start resistance training and perhaps you're resistance training and perhaps you're resistance training and perhaps you're one of those people who's wary about one of those people who's wary about one of those people who's wary about getting too big or you want to just grow getting too big or you want to just grow getting too big or you want to just grow one part of your legs and not another or one part of your legs and not another or one part of your legs and not another or just your glutes but not have larger just your glutes but not have larger just your glutes but not have larger legs or maybe if you just want to be legs or maybe if you just want to be legs or maybe if you just want to be bigger overall. Today, Dr. Brett bigger overall. Today, Dr. Brett bigger overall. Today, Dr. Brett Contrera shares the knowledge that Contrera shares the knowledge that Contrera shares the knowledge that anyone novice or experienced can anyone novice or experienced can anyone novice or experienced can incorporate into their fitness routine incorporate into their fitness routine incorporate into their fitness routine to achieve better results faster. Before to achieve better results faster. Before to achieve better results faster. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science information about science and science information about science and science related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Brett Contrarus. Dr. discussion with Dr. Brett Contrarus. Dr. discussion with Dr. Brett Contrarus. Dr. Brett Contrarus, welcome. Brett Contrarus, welcome. Brett Contrarus, welcome. &gt;&gt; Dr. Andrew Huberman, it's a it's a &gt;&gt; Dr. Andrew Huberman, it's a it's a &gt;&gt; Dr. Andrew Huberman, it's a it's a pleasure. Thank you so much for inviting pleasure. Thank you so much for inviting pleasure. Thank you so much for inviting me on. me on. me on. &gt;&gt; The pleasure is mine. I've been &gt;&gt; The pleasure is mine. I've been &gt;&gt; The pleasure is mine. I've been following your content for a long time following your content for a long time following your content for a long time now and I and many other people are now and I and many other people are now and I and many other people are super interested in how they can super interested in how they can super interested in how they can resistance train best for the purpose of resistance train best for the purpose of resistance train best for the purpose of getting stronger. And let's admit it, getting stronger. And let's admit it, getting stronger. And let's admit it, most people who do some resistance most people who do some resistance most people who do some resistance training probably want some hypertrophy, training probably want some hypertrophy, training probably want some hypertrophy, some muscle growth perhaps not in their some muscle growth perhaps not in their some muscle growth perhaps not in their entire body, some people do, but in entire body, some people do, but in entire body, some people do, but in specific body parts. They want to grow specific body parts. They want to grow specific body parts. They want to grow bigger arms. They want to grow bigger arms. They want to grow bigger arms. They want to grow bigger glutes. Um, they want to grow bigger glutes. Um, they want to grow bigger glutes. Um, they want to grow bigger calves. That seems to be a theme calves. That seems to be a theme calves. That seems to be a theme nowadays. Glutes and calves seem to be nowadays. Glutes and calves seem to be nowadays. Glutes and calves seem to be the new biceps, as they say. So, let's the new biceps, as they say. So, let's the new biceps, as they say. So, let's start off with the basics. Let's take start off with the basics. Let's take start off with the basics. Let's take the typical, if there were one, there the typical, if there were one, there the typical, if there were one, there isn't one, but let's imagine the isn't one, but let's imagine the isn't one, but let's imagine the typical woman or man in their 30s or 40s typical woman or man in their 30s or 40s typical woman or man in their 30s or 40s who's never really done any resistance who's never really done any resistance who's never really done any resistance training. Maybe done some yoga, some training. Maybe done some yoga, some training. Maybe done some yoga, some running, maybe did a sport in high running, maybe did a sport in high running, maybe did a sport in high school, maybe not. uh and they are school, maybe not. uh and they are school, maybe not. uh and they are interested in building some muscle to interested in building some muscle to interested in building some muscle to shape their body the way they'd like to shape their body the way they'd like to shape their body the way they'd like to shape it. What is the frequency of shape it. What is the frequency of shape it. What is the frequency of workouts that you could give as kind of workouts that you could give as kind of workouts that you could give as kind of across the board? What's too many? across the board? What's too many? across the board? What's too many? What's too few What's too few What's too few per week? per week? per week? &gt;&gt; Yep. So, I would say two times a week &gt;&gt; Yep. So, I would say two times a week &gt;&gt; Yep. So, I would say two times a week full body would be like the minimum. full body would be like the minimum. full body would be like the minimum. Now, you could see results training just Now, you could see results training just Now, you could see results training just one day a week. Imagine if you, you one day a week. Imagine if you, you one day a week. Imagine if you, you know, and if you tracked your weights know, and if you tracked your weights know, and if you tracked your weights and like if you had a coach that was and like if you had a coach that was and like if you had a coach that was that knew what they were doing, you that knew what they were doing, you that knew what they were doing, you could get good results just lifting could get good results just lifting could get good results just lifting weights one day a week. It would be a weights one day a week. It would be a weights one day a week. It would be a brutal day, but it would be full body. brutal day, but it would be full body. brutal day, but it would be full body. You'd hit mostly, you know, the big You'd hit mostly, you know, the big You'd hit mostly, you know, the big basic multi- joint movements. But if you basic multi- joint movements. But if you basic multi- joint movements. But if you stuck to that, you would see a lot of stuck to that, you would see a lot of stuck to that, you would see a lot of gains and you could keep seeing gains and you could keep seeing gains and you could keep seeing gains for, you know, theoretically an entire for, you know, theoretically an entire for, you know, theoretically an entire year or two. If you want to maximize year or two. If you want to maximize year or two. If you want to maximize your gains, you need to hit a muscle your gains, you need to hit a muscle your gains, you need to hit a muscle probably twice a week. probably twice a week. probably twice a week. There's some evidence that you that you There's some evidence that you that you There's some evidence that you that you know maybe three times a week is best, know maybe three times a week is best, know maybe three times a week is best, but that's hard to recover from. But I but that's hard to recover from. But I but that's hard to recover from. But I would say for the majority of listeners would say for the majority of listeners would say for the majority of listeners who are eager to get started, you get so who are eager to get started, you get so who are eager to get started, you get so much of your results from the first set, much of your results from the first set, much of your results from the first set, &gt;&gt; the first set you do, &gt;&gt; the first set you do, &gt;&gt; the first set you do, &gt;&gt; the first work set after &gt;&gt; the first work set after &gt;&gt; the first work set after &gt;&gt; the first working set you do. Um, and &gt;&gt; the first working set you do. Um, and &gt;&gt; the first working set you do. Um, and then you know adding more volume, adding then you know adding more volume, adding then you know adding more volume, adding more frequency, it's not linear. more frequency, it's not linear. more frequency, it's not linear. &gt;&gt; So it sounds like if somebody's &gt;&gt; So it sounds like if somebody's &gt;&gt; So it sounds like if somebody's relatively new to resistance training, relatively new to resistance training, relatively new to resistance training, like they're in their first year of like they're in their first year of like they're in their first year of resistance training, the lower limit resistance training, the lower limit resistance training, the lower limit given that most people don't have a given that most people don't have a given that most people don't have a coach and are probably not willing to coach and are probably not willing to coach and are probably not willing to put in the kind of intensity for an a put in the kind of intensity for an a put in the kind of intensity for an a whole body workout to just train once whole body workout to just train once whole body workout to just train once per week. Seems like twice per week, per week. Seems like twice per week, per week. Seems like twice per week, hitting each body part twice per week. hitting each body part twice per week. hitting each body part twice per week. So whole body twice per week. Is that So whole body twice per week. Is that So whole body twice per week. Is that that's what I'm hearing. How many sets that's what I'm hearing. How many sets that's what I'm hearing. How many sets do you recommend uh per exercise after a do you recommend uh per exercise after a do you recommend uh per exercise after a sufficient warm-up? sufficient warm-up? sufficient warm-up? &gt;&gt; In my online programs, I always &gt;&gt; In my online programs, I always &gt;&gt; In my online programs, I always recommend three sets. When I train recommend three sets. When I train recommend three sets. When I train people in real life, it's typically two people in real life, it's typically two people in real life, it's typically two sets, &gt;&gt; but I it's and I would say most of the &gt;&gt; but I it's and I would say most of the &gt;&gt; but I it's and I would say most of the world does four sets, you know, like world does four sets, you know, like world does four sets, you know, like most people just generically do four most people just generically do four most people just generically do four sets per exercise. It's just kind of sets per exercise. It's just kind of sets per exercise. It's just kind of what And most people do bro splits. they what And most people do bro splits. they what And most people do bro splits. they do body part splits like what the do body part splits like what the do body part splits like what the most of the world does isn't always most of the world does isn't always most of the world does isn't always what's best. Um, and there's nothing what's best. Um, and there's nothing what's best. Um, and there's nothing wrong with doing four sets. It's just wrong with doing four sets. It's just wrong with doing four sets. It's just that people aren't focused. They just that people aren't focused. They just that people aren't focused. They just kind of go through the motions. You'll kind of go through the motions. You'll kind of go through the motions. You'll say, you know, hey, Andrew, what's your say, you know, hey, Andrew, what's your say, you know, hey, Andrew, what's your workout? And if you go, well, I do, you workout? And if you go, well, I do, you workout? And if you go, well, I do, you know, bench press. I do 135 for 15, and know, bench press. I do 135 for 15, and know, bench press. I do 135 for 15, and then I do 185 for 12, and then I do 205 then I do 185 for 12, and then I do 205 then I do 185 for 12, and then I do 205 for eight, and then 225 for five. Well, for eight, and then 225 for five. Well, for eight, and then 225 for five. Well, that's what you do every week. then why that's what you do every week. then why that's what you do every week. then why would you grow? Why would you adapt? Why would you grow? Why would you adapt? Why would you grow? Why would you adapt? Why would you see results from that? So a would you see results from that? So a would you see results from that? So a lot of people just go through the lot of people just go through the lot of people just go through the motions when you have a plan and you're motions when you have a plan and you're motions when you have a plan and you're utilizing progressive overload. So we utilizing progressive overload. So we utilizing progressive overload. So we can talk about volume frequency, all can talk about volume frequency, all can talk about volume frequency, all these things, but the main thing is are these things, but the main thing is are these things, but the main thing is are you progressively overloading the you progressively overloading the you progressively overloading the muscles? Are you putting more tension on muscles? Are you putting more tension on muscles? Are you putting more tension on the muscles over time? And that's how the muscles over time? And that's how the muscles over time? And that's how people grow. So, it's like you can you people grow. So, it's like you can you people grow. So, it's like you can you can geek out on the variables, which I can geek out on the variables, which I can geek out on the variables, which I love to do, but if your program is love to do, but if your program is love to do, but if your program is working, then you're getting stronger working, then you're getting stronger working, then you're getting stronger over time. You don't need four sets to over time. You don't need four sets to over time. You don't need four sets to do that. You need to take notes, have a do that. You need to take notes, have a do that. You need to take notes, have a log book or an app that keeps track of log book or an app that keeps track of log book or an app that keeps track of your progress, and you have a goal in your progress, and you have a goal in your progress, and you have a goal in mind, and I don't think most people do mind, and I don't think most people do mind, and I don't think most people do that. So, it's like if I have one of my that. So, it's like if I have one of my that. So, it's like if I have one of my female clients and we're doing a leg female clients and we're doing a leg female clients and we're doing a leg press or a hip thrust or something and press or a hip thrust or something and press or a hip thrust or something and say their main goal is to grow their and say their main goal is to grow their and say their main goal is to grow their glutes and my goal for the day is for glutes and my goal for the day is for glutes and my goal for the day is for you to set a PR meaning personal you to set a PR meaning personal you to set a PR meaning personal record on hip thrust and you know record on hip thrust and you know record on hip thrust and you know they've hit they've done 315 pounds for they've hit they've done 315 pounds for they've hit they've done 315 pounds for eight reps and I say okay I want you at eight reps and I say okay I want you at eight reps and I say okay I want you at least tying eight but nine or 10 would least tying eight but nine or 10 would least tying eight but nine or 10 would be good in the beginning they you can be good in the beginning they you can be good in the beginning they you can gain strength gain strength gain strength Newbie, we talk about newbie gains. You Newbie, we talk about newbie gains. You Newbie, we talk about newbie gains. You gain strength every time you come in for gain strength every time you come in for gain strength every time you come in for the first few months. It's the greatest the first few months. It's the greatest the first few months. It's the greatest time to be a lifter. It's so funny. In time to be a lifter. It's so funny. In time to be a lifter. It's so funny. In fact, you get spoiled and then it's fact, you get spoiled and then it's fact, you get spoiled and then it's depressing when the newbie gains end. depressing when the newbie gains end. depressing when the newbie gains end. But if they reach the goal, if they say But if they reach the goal, if they say But if they reach the goal, if they say I have them warm up and then they hit I have them warm up and then they hit I have them warm up and then they hit 3:15 for 9 or 10, that's the goal is 3:15 for 9 or 10, that's the goal is 3:15 for 9 or 10, that's the goal is done. That's what I wanted. Um and so do done. That's what I wanted. Um and so do done. That's what I wanted. Um and so do you need a second set? Yeah, you can do you need a second set? Yeah, you can do you need a second set? Yeah, you can do a second set. You can also, a lot of my a second set. You can also, a lot of my a second set. You can also, a lot of my colleagues would say you shouldn't go to colleagues would say you shouldn't go to colleagues would say you shouldn't go to failure your first set because then your failure your first set because then your failure your first set because then your second set you'll be fatigued and you second set you'll be fatigued and you second set you'll be fatigued and you should you could do four sets where your should you could do four sets where your should you could do four sets where your fourth set is to failure. There's a lot fourth set is to failure. There's a lot fourth set is to failure. There's a lot of ways to do things and every coach has of ways to do things and every coach has of ways to do things and every coach has their own system. My system that I've their own system. My system that I've their own system. My system that I've had success with is kind of like focused had success with is kind of like focused had success with is kind of like focused on gaining strength over time. on gaining strength over time. on gaining strength over time. &gt;&gt; So that you don't require so many sets. &gt;&gt; So that you don't require so many sets. &gt;&gt; So that you don't require so many sets. In fact, I would rather I like my In fact, I would rather I like my In fact, I would rather I like my clients training three times per week. clients training three times per week. clients training three times per week. Full body three times per week. Full body three times per week. Full body three times per week. &gt;&gt; Full body three times per week &gt;&gt; Full body three times per week &gt;&gt; Full body three times per week &gt;&gt; or lu lower, upper, lower, upper, lower &gt;&gt; or lu lower, upper, lower, upper, lower &gt;&gt; or lu lower, upper, lower, upper, lower &gt;&gt; with a rest day in between. &gt;&gt; with a rest day in between. &gt;&gt; with a rest day in between. &gt;&gt; No, Monday through Friday. Lower, upper, &gt;&gt; No, Monday through Friday. Lower, upper, &gt;&gt; No, Monday through Friday. Lower, upper, lower. Probably take Saturday and Sunday lower. Probably take Saturday and Sunday lower. Probably take Saturday and Sunday off. &gt;&gt; Wait, step it through because you're &gt;&gt; Wait, step it through because you're &gt;&gt; Wait, step it through because you're speaking fast. Lower, upper, speaking fast. Lower, upper, speaking fast. Lower, upper, &gt;&gt; lu. Lower, upper, lower, upper, lower. &gt;&gt; lu. Lower, upper, lower, upper, lower. &gt;&gt; lu. Lower, upper, lower, upper, lower. Keep in mind, 74% of my followers are Keep in mind, 74% of my followers are Keep in mind, 74% of my followers are women. I'm the glute guy. So people, so women. I'm the glute guy. So people, so women. I'm the glute guy. So people, so my most of my followers are women. So my most of my followers are women. So my most of my followers are women. So they women and men have different they women and men have different they women and men have different they can train the same way for their they can train the same way for their they can train the same way for their gains. There's a lot of kind of experts gains. There's a lot of kind of experts gains. There's a lot of kind of experts coming out now saying women and men need coming out now saying women and men need coming out now saying women and men need to train totally differently. They don't to train totally differently. They don't to train totally differently. They don't need to train differently as per like need to train differently as per like need to train differently as per like the variables and stuff. The the variables and stuff. The the variables and stuff. The the thing is they have different goals. A thing is they have different goals. A thing is they have different goals. A lot of women want their glutes. They lot of women want their glutes. They lot of women want their glutes. They prioritize lower body more than whereas prioritize lower body more than whereas prioritize lower body more than whereas men want more upper body. So then our men want more upper body. So then our men want more upper body. So then our exercise selection is going to differ exercise selection is going to differ exercise selection is going to differ and our splits are going to differ. If and our splits are going to differ. If and our splits are going to differ. If we do if we do split it up, they want we do if we do split it up, they want we do if we do split it up, they want typically three lower body days and two typically three lower body days and two typically three lower body days and two upper body days, whereas men would want upper body days, whereas men would want upper body days, whereas men would want probably the opposite. Three upper body probably the opposite. Three upper body probably the opposite. Three upper body days and two lower body days, for days and two lower body days, for days and two lower body days, for example. But anyway, this is there's so example. But anyway, this is there's so example. But anyway, this is there's so many ways to do things. is the man I many ways to do things. is the man I many ways to do things. is the man I could go on we could go on and on for an could go on we could go on and on for an could go on we could go on and on for an hour about the different ways to do hour about the different ways to do hour about the different ways to do things but you a lot of many roads things but you a lot of many roads things but you a lot of many roads can lead to Rome but you do need to make can lead to Rome but you do need to make can lead to Rome but you do need to make sure that you're gaining strength over sure that you're gaining strength over sure that you're gaining strength over time if you want a muscle to time if you want a muscle to time if you want a muscle to substantially change um but you can't substantially change um but you can't substantially change um but you can't have that increased that PR can't come have that increased that PR can't come have that increased that PR can't come at the expense of decreased range of at the expense of decreased range of at the expense of decreased range of motion or sloppy form that's probably motion or sloppy form that's probably motion or sloppy form that's probably the number one tenant of strength the number one tenant of strength the number one tenant of strength training is progressive overload and the training is progressive overload and the training is progressive overload and the listeners need to understand that listeners need to understand that listeners need to understand that because otherwise you're just going to because otherwise you're just going to because otherwise you're just going to be spinning your wheels. Now, now it's be spinning your wheels. Now, now it's be spinning your wheels. Now, now it's not to say you can't make gains not to say you can't make gains not to say you can't make gains not utilizing progressive overload. In fact, utilizing progressive overload. In fact, utilizing progressive overload. In fact, we talked about this on the when we were we talked about this on the when we were we talked about this on the when we were working out yesterday, how to use the working out yesterday, how to use the working out yesterday, how to use the mind muscle connection, but ultimately, mind muscle connection, but ultimately, mind muscle connection, but ultimately, how do you know you're placing how do you know you're placing how do you know you're placing increasing demands on the muscle over increasing demands on the muscle over increasing demands on the muscle over time? Your barometer should be like, you time? Your barometer should be like, you time? Your barometer should be like, you know, the loads and the sets and know, the loads and the sets and know, the loads and the sets and reps that you're doing. reps that you're doing. reps that you're doing. Perhaps one of the most underestimated Perhaps one of the most underestimated Perhaps one of the most underestimated but powerful tools to improve your but powerful tools to improve your but powerful tools to improve your mental health, your physical mental health, your physical mental health, your physical performance, and your cognitive performance, and your cognitive performance, and your cognitive performance is ensuring you get enough performance is ensuring you get enough performance is ensuring you get enough hydration every day. The unfortunate hydration every day. The unfortunate hydration every day. The unfortunate reality, however, is that tap water reality, however, is that tap water reality, however, is that tap water often contains contaminants that often contains contaminants that often contains contaminants that negatively impact our health. So, while negatively impact our health. So, while negatively impact our health. So, while we're trying to get great hydration, we're trying to get great hydration, we're trying to get great hydration, that can cause serious problems. In that can cause serious problems. In that can cause serious problems. In fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental fact, a 2020 study by the Environmental Working Group estimated that more than Working Group estimated that more than Working Group estimated that more than 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS 200 million Americans are exposed to PAS chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, also known as forever chemicals, through drinking tap water. chemicals, through drinking tap water. chemicals, through drinking tap water. These forever chemicals are linked to These forever chemicals are linked to These forever chemicals are linked to serious health issues such as hormone serious health issues such as hormone serious health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health problems, some of which are just now problems, some of which are just now problems, some of which are just now coming to light. For all these reasons, coming to light. For all these reasons, coming to light. For all these reasons, I was thrilled when I came across Aurora I was thrilled when I came across Aurora I was thrilled when I came across Aurora water filters, and now they're a sponsor water filters, and now they're a sponsor water filters, and now they're a sponsor of this podcast. Aurora makes what I of this podcast. Aurora makes what I of this podcast. Aurora makes what I believe are the best water filters on believe are the best water filters on believe are the best water filters on the market. I've been using the Aurora the market. I've been using the Aurora the market. I've been using the Aurora countertop system for almost a year now. countertop system for almost a year now. countertop system for almost a year now. Aurora's filtration technology removes Aurora's filtration technology removes Aurora's filtration technology removes harmful substances, including endocrine harmful substances, including endocrine harmful substances, including endocrine disruptors and disinfection byproducts disruptors and disinfection byproducts disruptors and disinfection byproducts while preserving beneficial minerals while preserving beneficial minerals while preserving beneficial minerals like magnesium and calcium. It requires like magnesium and calcium. It requires like magnesium and calcium. It requires no installation or plumbing, so it's no installation or plumbing, so it's no installation or plumbing, so it's extremely convenient. It's built from extremely convenient. It's built from extremely convenient. It's built from medical grade stainless steel, and it medical grade stainless steel, and it medical grade stainless steel, and it fits beautifully on your countertop. fits beautifully on your countertop. fits beautifully on your countertop. It's something that you would want to It's something that you would want to It's something that you would want to have in your kitchen. What's have in your kitchen. What's have in your kitchen. What's additionally impressive to me is Rora's additionally impressive to me is Rora's additionally impressive to me is Rora's transparency. You can find all of their transparency. You can find all of their transparency. You can find all of their independent thirdparty test results independent thirdparty test results independent thirdparty test results right on their website, and they report right on their website, and they report right on their website, and they report reduction data over the full life of the reduction data over the full life of the reduction data over the full life of the filter. If you'd like to try Rora, you filter. If you'd like to try Rora, you filter. If you'd like to try Rora, you can go to roora.com/huberman can go to roora.com/huberman can go to roora.com/huberman and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, and get an exclusive discount. Again, that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. that's r o r a.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Carbon. Carbon is a diet coaching app Carbon. Carbon is a diet coaching app Carbon. Carbon is a diet coaching app built by nutrition expert Dr. Lane built by nutrition expert Dr. Lane built by nutrition expert Dr. Lane Norton. Now, I've used Carbon for more Norton. Now, I've used Carbon for more Norton. Now, I've used Carbon for more than three years now, and I have to say than three years now, and I have to say than three years now, and I have to say it's among the most powerful tools for it's among the most powerful tools for it's among the most powerful tools for nutrition coaching and effective weight nutrition coaching and effective weight nutrition coaching and effective weight management that I've ever encountered. management that I've ever encountered. management that I've ever encountered. especially if your goal is like mine, especially if your goal is like mine, especially if your goal is like mine, which is to maintain or build muscle which is to maintain or build muscle which is to maintain or build muscle while also losing fat. Now, I'm turning while also losing fat. Now, I'm turning while also losing fat. Now, I'm turning 50 years old this September, and even 50 years old this September, and even 50 years old this September, and even though I consider myself in pretty good though I consider myself in pretty good though I consider myself in pretty good shape, and I've been training for a long shape, and I've been training for a long shape, and I've been training for a long time and trying to eat right, one of my time and trying to eat right, one of my time and trying to eat right, one of my goals is to hit 50 in the absolute best goals is to hit 50 in the absolute best goals is to hit 50 in the absolute best shape of my life. To do that, I'm shape of my life. To do that, I'm shape of my life. To do that, I'm dialing in my nutrition using Carbon dialing in my nutrition using Carbon dialing in my nutrition using Carbon with the goals of increasing my muscle with the goals of increasing my muscle with the goals of increasing my muscle mass, increasing my strength, while also mass, increasing my strength, while also mass, increasing my strength, while also decreasing my body fat. I've been raving decreasing my body fat. I've been raving decreasing my body fat. I've been raving about the Carbon app to friends and to about the Carbon app to friends and to about the Carbon app to friends and to family and to members of my Huberman Lab family and to members of my Huberman Lab family and to members of my Huberman Lab team over the last few years and team over the last few years and team over the last few years and everyone who's joined me in using it has everyone who's joined me in using it has everyone who's joined me in using it has found it to be tremendously useful. In found it to be tremendously useful. In found it to be tremendously useful. In fact, some of those people are going to fact, some of those people are going to fact, some of those people are going to join me in my approaching 50 fitness join me in my approaching 50 fitness join me in my approaching 50 fitness goals and body composition goals. My goals and body composition goals. My goals and body composition goals. My birthday is September 26th and so I'd birthday is September 26th and so I'd birthday is September 26th and so I'd like to invite you to join if you would like to invite you to join if you would like to invite you to join if you would like to improve your body composition like to improve your body composition like to improve your body composition and fitness to also use the Carbon app. and fitness to also use the Carbon app. and fitness to also use the Carbon app. Now, there are a lot of apps out there Now, there are a lot of apps out there Now, there are a lot of apps out there that are focused on fitness and that are focused on fitness and that are focused on fitness and nutrition. But what makes Carbon nutrition. But what makes Carbon nutrition. But what makes Carbon different is that it doesn't just hand different is that it doesn't just hand different is that it doesn't just hand you a one-sizefits-all plan. It actually you a one-sizefits-all plan. It actually you a one-sizefits-all plan. It actually learns your metabolism over time, and it learns your metabolism over time, and it learns your metabolism over time, and it adapts your program based on your adapts your program based on your adapts your program based on your results. It also allows you total results. It also allows you total results. It also allows you total flexibility in how you eat. So, if flexibility in how you eat. So, if flexibility in how you eat. So, if you're looking to take a smarter, more you're looking to take a smarter, more you're looking to take a smarter, more personalized approach to your nutrition, personalized approach to your nutrition, personalized approach to your nutrition, I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. I can't recommend the Carbon app enough. To try Carbon, you can go to To try Carbon, you can go to To try Carbon, you can go to joincarbon.com/huberman. While Carbon does not typically offer While Carbon does not typically offer While Carbon does not typically offer trials or promotions, they've agreed to trials or promotions, they've agreed to trials or promotions, they've agreed to give a free 7-day trial to all Huberman give a free 7-day trial to all Huberman give a free 7-day trial to all Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's joincarbon.com/huberman to get a 7-day free trial. Let's just, to get a 7-day free trial. Let's just, to get a 7-day free trial. Let's just, if you uh don't mind, um I'll just want if you uh don't mind, um I'll just want if you uh don't mind, um I'll just want to take a slight step back and highlight to take a slight step back and highlight to take a slight step back and highlight a couple of things that you said and a couple of things that you said and a couple of things that you said and maybe clarify a few of them for myself maybe clarify a few of them for myself maybe clarify a few of them for myself and for the listeners. and for the listeners. and for the listeners. The goal of going into the gym to train The goal of going into the gym to train The goal of going into the gym to train is foremost to create a stimulus that is foremost to create a stimulus that is foremost to create a stimulus that you need to adapt to so that the muscle you need to adapt to so that the muscle you need to adapt to so that the muscle grows and gets stronger. In theory, one grows and gets stronger. In theory, one grows and gets stronger. In theory, one could do that by training the entire could do that by training the entire could do that by training the entire body once per week, but that would be a body once per week, but that would be a body once per week, but that would be a very taxing workout. very taxing workout. very taxing workout. Probably requires a coach to do Probably requires a coach to do Probably requires a coach to do properly. And in general, most people properly. And in general, most people properly. And in general, most people are probably going to benefit from are probably going to benefit from are probably going to benefit from training two or three times per week training two or three times per week training two or three times per week minimum. Okay. It does seem to be the case lately Okay. It does seem to be the case lately Okay. It does seem to be the case lately that most of the papers as I understand that most of the papers as I understand that most of the papers as I understand point to every muscle should be trained point to every muscle should be trained point to every muscle should be trained twice per week. Um perhaps not as twice per week. Um perhaps not as twice per week. Um perhaps not as intensely in the two workouts but um at intensely in the two workouts but um at intensely in the two workouts but um at least twice per week. And you said three least twice per week. And you said three least twice per week. And you said three times per week is probably even more times per week is probably even more times per week is probably even more beneficial. I like this lower upper beneficial. I like this lower upper beneficial. I like this lower upper lower upper lower lol five days per lower upper lower lol five days per lower upper lower lol five days per week. Um format that you listed out. Um week. Um format that you listed out. Um week. Um format that you listed out. Um when I see that I think okay lower body when I see that I think okay lower body when I see that I think okay lower body three times per week. Wow. Right now I three times per week. Wow. Right now I three times per week. Wow. Right now I train my legs once per week intensely. train my legs once per week intensely. train my legs once per week intensely. So that's calves, tibs, hamstrings, So that's calves, tibs, hamstrings, So that's calves, tibs, hamstrings, quads. I now because of your uh tutorial quads. I now because of your uh tutorial quads. I now because of your uh tutorial train adductors, the inner thighs and train adductors, the inner thighs and train adductors, the inner thighs and glutes all in that one workout and then glutes all in that one workout and then glutes all in that one workout and then four or five days later I do a sprint four or five days later I do a sprint four or five days later I do a sprint workout which is my second leg workout. workout which is my second leg workout. workout which is my second leg workout. It's not an in gym workout, it's a It's not an in gym workout, it's a It's not an in gym workout, it's a sprinting workout. sprinting workout. sprinting workout. Training legs three times per week in Training legs three times per week in Training legs three times per week in the gym with weights and machines etc. the gym with weights and machines etc. the gym with weights and machines etc. Sounds like a lot. So my question is for Sounds like a lot. So my question is for Sounds like a lot. So my question is for the three or even the two lower body the three or even the two lower body the three or even the two lower body workouts that men or women are doing, workouts that men or women are doing, workouts that men or women are doing, are they doing the same exercises in are they doing the same exercises in are they doing the same exercises in every one of those lower body workouts every one of those lower body workouts every one of those lower body workouts for the same muscle groups or and in for the same muscle groups or and in for the same muscle groups or and in addition to that, are they hitting quads addition to that, are they hitting quads addition to that, are they hitting quads three times a week or twice a week three times a week or twice a week three times a week or twice a week directly? Um because many people can't directly? Um because many people can't directly? Um because many people can't recover or at least the soreness doesn't recover or at least the soreness doesn't recover or at least the soreness doesn't go away uh in between workouts. So, how go away uh in between workouts. So, how go away uh in between workouts. So, how are you splitting up lower body if are you splitting up lower body if are you splitting up lower body if somebody is training lower body uh two somebody is training lower body uh two somebody is training lower body uh two or three times per week? or three times per week? or three times per week? &gt;&gt; Great question. So, first of all, I want &gt;&gt; Great question. So, first of all, I want &gt;&gt; Great question. So, first of all, I want to mention before steroids became a to mention before steroids became a to mention before steroids became a thing, the bodybuilders back then, if thing, the bodybuilders back then, if thing, the bodybuilders back then, if you can look up like Steve Reeves, Regg you can look up like Steve Reeves, Regg you can look up like Steve Reeves, Regg Park, John Grime, they did three full I Park, John Grime, they did three full I Park, John Grime, they did three full I think they all did three full body think they all did three full body think they all did three full body workouts a week or they trained mostly workouts a week or they trained mostly workouts a week or they trained mostly full body, but they'd hit muscles full body, but they'd hit muscles full body, but they'd hit muscles frequently. The thing is they didn't do frequently. The thing is they didn't do frequently. The thing is they didn't do now we have so many machines. We have now we have so many machines. We have now we have so many machines. We have some they did they did mostly barbell some they did they did mostly barbell some they did they did mostly barbell training and you know what I mean they training and you know what I mean they training and you know what I mean they focused on the big basics and they would focused on the big basics and they would focused on the big basics and they would repeat movements. So repeat movements. So repeat movements. So &gt;&gt; so squatting three times per week, &gt;&gt; so squatting three times per week, &gt;&gt; so squatting three times per week, deadlifting three times a week. deadlifting three times a week. deadlifting three times a week. &gt;&gt; The goal is gaining strength. So with &gt;&gt; The goal is gaining strength. So with &gt;&gt; The goal is gaining strength. So with every person it's unique and there's so every person it's unique and there's so every person it's unique and there's so many ways to do this. If I have some many ways to do this. If I have some many ways to do this. If I have some people deadlift hard twice a week, they people deadlift hard twice a week, they people deadlift hard twice a week, they might get back pain even if they're might get back pain even if they're might get back pain even if they're using good form. What if they're really using good form. What if they're really using good form. What if they're really weak have really weak hamstrings in weak have really weak hamstrings in weak have really weak hamstrings in isolation? and I start giving them isolation? and I start giving them isolation? and I start giving them seated leg curls and it transfers to seated leg curls and it transfers to seated leg curls and it transfers to their deadlift. The seated leg curls their deadlift. The seated leg curls their deadlift. The seated leg curls doesn't put stress on their low back. doesn't put stress on their low back. doesn't put stress on their low back. You get stronger You get stronger You get stronger by identifying weak links. Um, and by identifying weak links. Um, and by identifying weak links. Um, and there's a lot of transfer between the there's a lot of transfer between the there's a lot of transfer between the different lifts. different lifts. different lifts. So, I don't believe you need to repeat So, I don't believe you need to repeat So, I don't believe you need to repeat the same movements all the time. And I the same movements all the time. And I the same movements all the time. And I also think you should switch it up every also think you should switch it up every also think you should switch it up every month. And that's one thing I've had a month. And that's one thing I've had a month. And that's one thing I've had a lot of success with. with my system. lot of success with. with my system. lot of success with. with my system. I've had a lot of success. We have like I've had a lot of success. We have like I've had a lot of success. We have like a squat and bench press month. Then the a squat and bench press month. Then the a squat and bench press month. Then the next month will be a deadlift and next month will be a deadlift and next month will be a deadlift and chin-up month. chin-up month. chin-up month. &gt;&gt; What does that mean? That means that &gt;&gt; What does that mean? That means that &gt;&gt; What does that mean? That means that during all lower body work workouts, during all lower body work workouts, during all lower body work workouts, you're doing squats and deadlifts. you're doing squats and deadlifts. you're doing squats and deadlifts. &gt;&gt; No, you do always do all the movement &gt;&gt; No, you do always do all the movement &gt;&gt; No, you do always do all the movement patterns. It's what you do first and patterns. It's what you do first and patterns. It's what you do first and what you focus on. That's what you're what you focus on. That's what you're what you focus on. That's what you're going for the PR on. But I'm not trying going for the PR on. But I'm not trying going for the PR on. But I'm not trying to have you get stronger at squats every to have you get stronger at squats every to have you get stronger at squats every single month. And if you don't like single month. And if you don't like single month. And if you don't like barbell squats, you can do, you know, barbell squats, you can do, you know, barbell squats, you can do, you know, &gt;&gt; hack squat, &gt;&gt; hack squat, &gt;&gt; hack squat, &gt;&gt; hack squat, leg press. It could be a &gt;&gt; hack squat, leg press. It could be a &gt;&gt; hack squat, leg press. It could be a single leg movement, but it's the single leg movement, but it's the single leg movement, but it's the movement pattern from the side view. movement pattern from the side view. movement pattern from the side view. Does it look like a squat? Does it look like a squat? Does it look like a squat? &gt;&gt; So that could be a squat, hack squat, &gt;&gt; So that could be a squat, hack squat, &gt;&gt; So that could be a squat, hack squat, lunge, belt squat, leg press, V squat, lunge, belt squat, leg press, V squat, lunge, belt squat, leg press, V squat, uh, step up, Bulgarian split squat, a uh, step up, Bulgarian split squat, a uh, step up, Bulgarian split squat, a lot of different lot of different lot of different &gt;&gt; It's a buffet. People can pick what &gt;&gt; It's a buffet. People can pick what &gt;&gt; It's a buffet. People can pick what &gt;&gt; from the side view. Does it look like a &gt;&gt; from the side view. Does it look like a &gt;&gt; from the side view. Does it look like a squat on one or two legs? It's They all squat on one or two legs? It's They all squat on one or two legs? It's They all work very similarly. So, I want you work very similarly. So, I want you work very similarly. So, I want you getting stronger at those. Um, but not getting stronger at those. Um, but not getting stronger at those. Um, but not every month because the next month I every month because the next month I every month because the next month I might switch to like deadlift and uh and might switch to like deadlift and uh and might switch to like deadlift and uh and but they all have different rules. So, but they all have different rules. So, but they all have different rules. So, here's what I kind of realized. Have you here's what I kind of realized. Have you here's what I kind of realized. Have you ever focused on you say you don't ever focused on you say you don't ever focused on you say you don't want your chest and back, you're want your chest and back, you're want your chest and back, you're not trying to grow maximally, but if you not trying to grow maximally, but if you not trying to grow maximally, but if you let's say you're just trying to get as let's say you're just trying to get as let's say you're just trying to get as big as humanly possible, have you ever big as humanly possible, have you ever big as humanly possible, have you ever said, "I want to see if I can work my said, "I want to see if I can work my said, "I want to see if I can work my way up to 20 chin-ups." Uh, I haven't. way up to 20 chin-ups." Uh, I haven't. way up to 20 chin-ups." Uh, I haven't. But, um, even in a single set, But, um, even in a single set, But, um, even in a single set, &gt;&gt; um, no, I've I have not done that. &gt;&gt; um, no, I've I have not done that. &gt;&gt; um, no, I've I have not done that. &gt;&gt; Well, if you did do that, your back &gt;&gt; Well, if you did do that, your back &gt;&gt; Well, if you did do that, your back muscles would probably get bigger, muscles would probably get bigger, muscles would probably get bigger, right? And but you you'd be like, "Okay, right? And but you you'd be like, "Okay, right? And but you you'd be like, "Okay, I have this chin-up goal. I want to get I have this chin-up goal. I want to get I have this chin-up goal. I want to get 20 chin-ups. How am I going to get there 20 chin-ups. How am I going to get there 20 chin-ups. How am I going to get there best? I'm going to start doing more best? I'm going to start doing more best? I'm going to start doing more chin-ups. Maybe you don't like chin-ups chin-ups. Maybe you don't like chin-ups chin-ups. Maybe you don't like chin-ups all the time, so you do heavy supenated all the time, so you do heavy supenated all the time, so you do heavy supenated pull downs. I've realized they transfer. pull downs. I've realized they transfer. pull downs. I've realized they transfer. There's like a one on one to one There's like a one on one to one There's like a one on one to one correlation. I never realized that till correlation. I never realized that till correlation. I never realized that till the last couple years. supenated, the last couple years. supenated, the last couple years. supenated, treating it like a chin-up. treating it like a chin-up. treating it like a chin-up. &gt;&gt; Okay, so for those that don't know, &gt;&gt; Okay, so for those that don't know, &gt;&gt; Okay, so for those that don't know, supernated means palms facing you. supernated means palms facing you. supernated means palms facing you. Basically, palms facing you, pull down Basically, palms facing you, pull down Basically, palms facing you, pull down or um on a pull down machine to, you or um on a pull down machine to, you or um on a pull down machine to, you know, chest level or something that to know, chest level or something that to know, chest level or something that to the front. Obviously, the front. Obviously, the front. Obviously, &gt;&gt; you can recover quickly from those. So, &gt;&gt; you can recover quickly from those. So, &gt;&gt; you can recover quickly from those. So, you could do chin-ups or pull downs you could do chin-ups or pull downs you could do chin-ups or pull downs three times a week. three times a week. three times a week. &gt;&gt; But what's going to what else will help &gt;&gt; But what's going to what else will help &gt;&gt; But what's going to what else will help your chin-ups? Training more biceps. your chin-ups? Training more biceps. your chin-ups? Training more biceps. When I had my female clients start doing When I had my female clients start doing When I had my female clients start doing barbell curls and easy bar curls, their barbell curls and easy bar curls, their barbell curls and easy bar curls, their chin-ups went up. So, it has its own chin-ups went up. So, it has its own chin-ups went up. So, it has its own rules. When you focus on like the rules. When you focus on like the rules. When you focus on like the chin-up month, you can hit these chin-up month, you can hit these chin-up month, you can hit these movements frequently. You can recover movements frequently. You can recover movements frequently. You can recover from them. But what about deadlifts? If from them. But what about deadlifts? If from them. But what about deadlifts? If I said you're going to focus on I said you're going to focus on I said you're going to focus on deadlifts this month, I don't know many deadlifts this month, I don't know many deadlifts this month, I don't know many lifters that can deadlift really hard lifters that can deadlift really hard lifters that can deadlift really hard twice a week. They beat you up, twice a week. They beat you up, twice a week. They beat you up, especially when you get strong. So, you especially when you get strong. So, you especially when you get strong. So, you might have you might if you're hitting might have you might if you're hitting might have you might if you're hitting three full body workouts a week, maybe three full body workouts a week, maybe three full body workouts a week, maybe only do heavy deadlifts once a week, but only do heavy deadlifts once a week, but only do heavy deadlifts once a week, but the other time you're doing a more like the other time you're doing a more like the other time you're doing a more like a hingy like a stiff leg deadlift or a hingy like a stiff leg deadlift or a hingy like a stiff leg deadlift or a good morning, real strict, not going good morning, real strict, not going good morning, real strict, not going crazy, you might leave some reps in crazy, you might leave some reps in crazy, you might leave some reps in reserve or you're just really strict so reserve or you're just really strict so reserve or you're just really strict so you don't get so you don't get as sore you don't get so you don't get as sore you don't get so you don't get as sore from that. And then the other day might from that. And then the other day might from that. And then the other day might be a ham, you start out with a hamstring be a ham, you start out with a hamstring be a ham, you start out with a hamstring movement or something. These lifts have movement or something. These lifts have movement or something. These lifts have different rules that you figure out over different rules that you figure out over different rules that you figure out over time. And it also depends on the time. And it also depends on the time. And it also depends on the individual. Some people can squat three individual. Some people can squat three individual. Some people can squat three times a week. Some people can can't get times a week. Some people can can't get times a week. Some people can can't get away with that. They'll develop hip away with that. They'll develop hip away with that. They'll develop hip pain, knee pain, low back pain. So, pain, knee pain, low back pain. So, pain, knee pain, low back pain. So, there's kind of this art of how to there's kind of this art of how to there's kind of this art of how to design programs that allow the masses to design programs that allow the masses to design programs that allow the masses to build strength. But whenever you to build strength. But whenever you to build strength. But whenever you work with someone individually, you have work with someone individually, you have work with someone individually, you have to you stray from it a little bit. But to you stray from it a little bit. But to you stray from it a little bit. But anyway, I do believe hitting a muscle anyway, I do believe hitting a muscle anyway, I do believe hitting a muscle three times a week is a little bit three times a week is a little bit three times a week is a little bit better, but it's more risky. It's better, but it's more risky. It's better, but it's more risky. It's you can over you can spin your wheels. I you can over you can spin your wheels. I you can over you can spin your wheels. I don't want to say overtrain because don't want to say overtrain because don't want to say overtrain because overtraining syndrome is something, but overtraining syndrome is something, but overtraining syndrome is something, but what we all know what it means. It means what we all know what it means. It means what we all know what it means. It means stagnating because you're not properly stagnating because you're not properly stagnating because you're not properly recovered. You're spinning your wheels. recovered. You're spinning your wheels. recovered. You're spinning your wheels. You're not And it's really hard to You're not And it's really hard to You're not And it's really hard to recover from three times a week. Um, so recover from three times a week. Um, so recover from three times a week. Um, so that's why the safest bet is hit a that's why the safest bet is hit a that's why the safest bet is hit a muscle twice a week. But I think if you muscle twice a week. But I think if you muscle twice a week. But I think if you know what you're doing, you can do three know what you're doing, you can do three know what you're doing, you can do three times a week. times a week. times a week. &gt;&gt; My understanding and my experience is &gt;&gt; My understanding and my experience is &gt;&gt; My understanding and my experience is that if you do a proper warm-up and then that if you do a proper warm-up and then that if you do a proper warm-up and then you train close to failure or to failure you train close to failure or to failure you train close to failure or to failure for one or two sets, maybe a third set for one or two sets, maybe a third set for one or two sets, maybe a third set that it takes at least three or four that it takes at least three or four that it takes at least three or four days for that muscle to recover. Now, I days for that muscle to recover. Now, I days for that muscle to recover. Now, I realize some people recover much more realize some people recover much more realize some people recover much more quickly, but I feel like most people quickly, but I feel like most people quickly, but I feel like most people don't. So, for me, it's always been hard don't. So, for me, it's always been hard don't. So, for me, it's always been hard to wrap my head around three times a to wrap my head around three times a to wrap my head around three times a week training unless people are not week training unless people are not week training unless people are not going to failure or they're switching up going to failure or they're switching up going to failure or they're switching up the movement so that the muscles are the movement so that the muscles are the movement so that the muscles are being targeted differently each time. being targeted differently each time. being targeted differently each time. &gt;&gt; First of all, there's what you're saying &gt;&gt; First of all, there's what you're saying &gt;&gt; First of all, there's what you're saying about most people, you're in you're um about most people, you're in you're um about most people, you're in you're um insinuating that people have different insinuating that people have different insinuating that people have different recovery genetics and there's research recovery genetics and there's research recovery genetics and there's research on that. There's some people experience on that. There's some people experience on that. There's some people experience way more muscle damage than others and way more muscle damage than others and way more muscle damage than others and some people have like a recovery gene some people have like a recovery gene some people have like a recovery gene like I'm sure like I'm sure like I'm sure &gt;&gt; they just recover quickly. Yeah, it's an &gt;&gt; they just recover quickly. Yeah, it's an &gt;&gt; they just recover quickly. Yeah, it's an old paper. old paper. old paper. &gt;&gt; I don't have that. &gt;&gt; I don't have that. &gt;&gt; I don't have that. &gt;&gt; I don't have it either. &gt;&gt; I don't have it either. &gt;&gt; I don't have it either. &gt;&gt; Clearly, &gt;&gt; Clearly, &gt;&gt; Clearly, &gt;&gt; and I'm very envious of people who do &gt;&gt; and I'm very envious of people who do &gt;&gt; and I'm very envious of people who do because &gt;&gt; the listeners, you'll &gt;&gt; the listeners, you'll &gt;&gt; the listeners, you'll probably have people split in half. probably have people split in half. probably have people split in half. People going, I can do these crazy People going, I can do these crazy People going, I can do these crazy marathon workouts and the next day I'm marathon workouts and the next day I'm marathon workouts and the next day I'm not even sore. And other people like you not even sore. And other people like you not even sore. And other people like you and I going, I get so sore. I wish I and I going, I get so sore. I wish I and I going, I get so sore. I wish I could. But it but here's the thing. You could. But it but here's the thing. You could. But it but here's the thing. You could train it three times a week. You could train it three times a week. You could train it three times a week. You have to adjust the variables. If you're have to adjust the variables. If you're have to adjust the variables. If you're always training when you're fatigued and always training when you're fatigued and always training when you're fatigued and beat up, you're never going to get beat up, you're never going to get beat up, you're never going to get stronger. So, you might have to adjust stronger. So, you might have to adjust stronger. So, you might have to adjust the variables. You and I might not be the variables. You and I might not be the variables. You and I might not be able to do as many sets as we could when able to do as many sets as we could when able to do as many sets as we could when we were 23. You know what I mean? Now we were 23. You know what I mean? Now we were 23. You know what I mean? Now that we're approaching 50, we have to do that we're approaching 50, we have to do that we're approaching 50, we have to do a little bit less volume. Maybe we can't a little bit less volume. Maybe we can't a little bit less volume. Maybe we can't train three times a week, but we could train three times a week, but we could train three times a week, but we could train twice a week. But everyone's train twice a week. But everyone's train twice a week. But everyone's unique. But in general, everyone can unique. But in general, everyone can unique. But in general, everyone can recover from two times a week. But you recover from two times a week. But you recover from two times a week. But you might not be able to recover if you do, might not be able to recover if you do, might not be able to recover if you do, you know, touch and go deadlifts, you know, touch and go deadlifts, you know, touch and go deadlifts, you know, to failure being like where you're know, to failure being like where you're know, to failure being like where you're maintaining really good form. But some maintaining really good form. But some maintaining really good form. But some people can just round their backs and people can just round their backs and people can just round their backs and keep going and then the next day you keep going and then the next day you keep going and then the next day you feel like you got hit by a bus. And it's feel like you got hit by a bus. And it's feel like you got hit by a bus. And it's a lot of times it's the muscle damage, a lot of times it's the muscle damage, a lot of times it's the muscle damage, but it might not just be muscle but it might not just be muscle but it might not just be muscle damage. It could be connective tissue. damage. It could be connective tissue. damage. It could be connective tissue. It could be fascia and other, you know, It could be fascia and other, you know, It could be fascia and other, you know, structures too that are just if they're structures too that are just if they're structures too that are just if they're damaged, it signals the central nervous damaged, it signals the central nervous damaged, it signals the central nervous system, hey, don't maximally recruit system, hey, don't maximally recruit system, hey, don't maximally recruit these muscles. So, if pain inhibits these muscles. So, if pain inhibits these muscles. So, if pain inhibits muscle activation, damage, it's probably muscle activation, damage, it's probably muscle activation, damage, it's probably a wise, you know, evolutionary strategy a wise, you know, evolutionary strategy a wise, you know, evolutionary strategy for the body to say, "Hey, chill. You're for the body to say, "Hey, chill. You're for the body to say, "Hey, chill. You're not recovered yet. Let's let's limit the not recovered yet. Let's let's limit the not recovered yet. Let's let's limit the gas pedal. How how much, you know, let's gas pedal. How how much, you know, let's gas pedal. How how much, you know, let's put the brakes on a little bit so this put the brakes on a little bit so this put the brakes on a little bit so this person can't keep hurting themselves." person can't keep hurting themselves." person can't keep hurting themselves." But you want to be recovered. So you But you want to be recovered. So you But you want to be recovered. So you sometimes have to adjust the variables sometimes have to adjust the variables sometimes have to adjust the variables which are exercise selection. That's which are exercise selection. That's which are exercise selection. That's probably the most important. Volume, probably the most important. Volume, probably the most important. Volume, effort, how hard you push yourself. effort, how hard you push yourself. effort, how hard you push yourself. These are the these are your tools. These are the these are your tools. These are the these are your tools. Program design is an awesome concept and Program design is an awesome concept and Program design is an awesome concept and it's a there's an art to this. We have a it's a there's an art to this. We have a it's a there's an art to this. We have a lot of science, but there's an art to lot of science, but there's an art to lot of science, but there's an art to combining them all. And that's why like combining them all. And that's why like combining them all. And that's why like strength training is an applied science. strength training is an applied science. strength training is an applied science. It's very it's that's why it's fun for It's very it's that's why it's fun for It's very it's that's why it's fun for me. There's an art to this. And you me. There's an art to this. And you me. There's an art to this. And you can't just read a research like a review can't just read a research like a review can't just read a research like a review paper and be like up here's how here's paper and be like up here's how here's paper and be like up here's how here's how everyone should train, but could you how everyone should train, but could you how everyone should train, but could you recover from hitting a muscle three recover from hitting a muscle three recover from hitting a muscle three times a week? You mentioned that you times a week? You mentioned that you times a week? You mentioned that you want your hamstrings to grow. You know, want your hamstrings to grow. You know, want your hamstrings to grow. You know, you could do two sets of lying leg curls you could do two sets of lying leg curls you could do two sets of lying leg curls three times a week, especially if you three times a week, especially if you three times a week, especially if you stopped your sets two reps shy of stopped your sets two reps shy of stopped your sets two reps shy of failure. You lying leg curls don't beat failure. You lying leg curls don't beat failure. You lying leg curls don't beat you up as much. It's when you throw in you up as much. It's when you throw in you up as much. It's when you throw in the stiff leg deadlifts, the good the stiff leg deadlifts, the good the stiff leg deadlifts, the good mornings, even seated leg curls the way mornings, even seated leg curls the way mornings, even seated leg curls the way we did it yesterday where I enhanced the we did it yesterday where I enhanced the we did it yesterday where I enhanced the eccentric and made it harder on the way eccentric and made it harder on the way eccentric and made it harder on the way down and really made you upright in that down and really made you upright in that down and really made you upright in that seated leg curl position so you got a seated leg curl position so you got a seated leg curl position so you got a stretch on the hamstrings that tends to stretch on the hamstrings that tends to stretch on the hamstrings that tends to create a little more damage. So some of create a little more damage. So some of create a little more damage. So some of these exercises that give you the most these exercises that give you the most these exercises that give you the most bang for your buck and they're the most bang for your buck and they're the most bang for your buck and they're the most efficient exercises, efficient exercises, efficient exercises, they sometimes aren't the best exercises they sometimes aren't the best exercises they sometimes aren't the best exercises if you're training them a muscle if you're training them a muscle if you're training them a muscle frequently. And I like to I like to say frequently. And I like to I like to say frequently. And I like to I like to say walking lunges are probably the best walking lunges are probably the best walking lunges are probably the best glute exercise there is. The problem is glute exercise there is. The problem is glute exercise there is. The problem is they're too good. If you really go to they're too good. If you really go to they're too good. If you really go to failure to where you can't get another failure to where you can't get another failure to where you can't get another step with a you know um they can step with a you know um they can step with a you know um they can beat you up a lot. If you do three or beat you up a lot. If you do three or beat you up a lot. If you do three or four sets to failure and then you're four sets to failure and then you're four sets to failure and then you're trying to train legs two days later, trying to train legs two days later, trying to train legs two days later, there's no way. Like you'll be so sore there's no way. Like you'll be so sore there's no way. Like you'll be so sore it'll be counterproductive. That's why I it'll be counterproductive. That's why I it'll be counterproductive. That's why I like stepups more than lunges. Not like stepups more than lunges. Not like stepups more than lunges. Not because I think they're more effective. because I think they're more effective. because I think they're more effective. They're just more conducive to training They're just more conducive to training They're just more conducive to training a muscle frequently. And this doesn't a muscle frequently. And this doesn't a muscle frequently. And this doesn't get talked about enough. There's an art get talked about enough. There's an art get talked about enough. There's an art to training frequently. So when men we to training frequently. So when men we to training frequently. So when men we grew up in the we're almost the same grew up in the we're almost the same grew up in the we're almost the same age. We're both 49 right now. We grew up age. We're both 49 right now. We grew up age. We're both 49 right now. We grew up where bodybuilders trained legs one day where bodybuilders trained legs one day where bodybuilders trained legs one day a week. You know, everyone trained you a week. You know, everyone trained you a week. You know, everyone trained you had your body part split routine where had your body part split routine where had your body part split routine where you train a muscle one day and then you train a muscle one day and then you train a muscle one day and then you damage the hell out of it and you need a damage the hell out of it and you need a damage the hell out of it and you need a whole week to recover. The ex the whole week to recover. The ex the whole week to recover. The ex the workouts back then were like four sets workouts back then were like four sets workouts back then were like four sets of squats, four sets of stiff leg of squats, four sets of stiff leg of squats, four sets of stiff leg deadlifts, four sets of leg press, four deadlifts, four sets of leg press, four deadlifts, four sets of leg press, four sets of leg extensions, and then maybe sets of leg extensions, and then maybe sets of leg extensions, and then maybe two types of leg curls or something. And two types of leg curls or something. And two types of leg curls or something. And then you'd be annihilated for the whole then you'd be annihilated for the whole then you'd be annihilated for the whole week. Can that work? Yes. The week. Can that work? Yes. The week. Can that work? Yes. The bodybuilders got big legs back then, but bodybuilders got big legs back then, but bodybuilders got big legs back then, but I think better results are seen when you I think better results are seen when you I think better results are seen when you don't go so crazy. So you're saying, don't go so crazy. So you're saying, don't go so crazy. So you're saying, "Okay, my girls train their my programs "Okay, my girls train their my programs "Okay, my girls train their my programs and my glute squad. I have one in San and my glute squad. I have one in San and my glute squad. I have one in San Diego, one in Florida. They train their Diego, one in Florida. They train their Diego, one in Florida. They train their legs, they train lower body three times legs, they train lower body three times legs, they train lower body three times a week. They do one squat pattern, a week. They do one squat pattern, a week. They do one squat pattern, a squat lunge pattern squat lunge pattern squat lunge pattern &gt;&gt; per workout. &gt;&gt; per workout. &gt;&gt; per workout. &gt;&gt; Yep. One and three sets, but when I &gt;&gt; Yep. One and three sets, but when I &gt;&gt; Yep. One and three sets, but when I train them in person, it's typically two train them in person, it's typically two train them in person, it's typically two sets because I push them harder and we sets because I push them harder and we sets because I push them harder and we have a goal in mind. And also, what I've have a goal in mind. And also, what I've have a goal in mind. And also, what I've realized is I typically only push them realized is I typically only push them realized is I typically only push them really hard during their first exercise really hard during their first exercise really hard during their first exercise because I realize if I sit there and because I realize if I sit there and because I realize if I sit there and hover over them for all four exercises, hover over them for all four exercises, hover over them for all four exercises, well, three of the exercises are hard. well, three of the exercises are hard. well, three of the exercises are hard. One's a squat lunge pattern, one's a One's a squat lunge pattern, one's a One's a squat lunge pattern, one's a hinge pull movement, meaning a type of hinge pull movement, meaning a type of hinge pull movement, meaning a type of deadlift, stiff leg deadlift, good deadlift, stiff leg deadlift, good deadlift, stiff leg deadlift, good morning, or a 45 degree hyper or reverse morning, or a 45 degree hyper or reverse morning, or a 45 degree hyper or reverse hyper. And then uh and then you have hyper. And then uh and then you have hyper. And then uh and then you have your thrust bridge pattern where it's your thrust bridge pattern where it's your thrust bridge pattern where it's either a hip thrust or a glute bridge. either a hip thrust or a glute bridge. either a hip thrust or a glute bridge. And we have lots of different hip thrust And we have lots of different hip thrust And we have lots of different hip thrust tools, but those don't create as much tools, but those don't create as much tools, but those don't create as much muscle damage because you're training muscle damage because you're training muscle damage because you're training the glutes in a shortened position. the glutes in a shortened position. the glutes in a shortened position. Anyway, they don't The squat lunge hits Anyway, they don't The squat lunge hits Anyway, they don't The squat lunge hits your quads, glutes, and adductors. The your quads, glutes, and adductors. The your quads, glutes, and adductors. The hinge hits your hamstrings and glutes. hinge hits your hamstrings and glutes. hinge hits your hamstrings and glutes. The thrust mainly just works the glutes The thrust mainly just works the glutes The thrust mainly just works the glutes and then you throw in an abduction and then you throw in an abduction and then you throw in an abduction movement at the end which is glute movement at the end which is glute movement at the end which is glute medius or upper glute max and they and medius or upper glute max and they and medius or upper glute max and they and that tends to be rec you can recover that tends to be rec you can recover that tends to be rec you can recover from that. Also I want to mention women from that. Also I want to mention women from that. Also I want to mention women can recover a little bit better than can recover a little bit better than can recover a little bit better than men. The research is mixed but having men. The research is mixed but having men. The research is mixed but having trained men and women my whole like for trained men and women my whole like for trained men and women my whole like for literally like 30 years now I will tell literally like 30 years now I will tell literally like 30 years now I will tell you women recover better. like I don't you women recover better. like I don't you women recover better. like I don't need studies to tell me that they can do need studies to tell me that they can do need studies to tell me that they can do a little more volume. Also, it might a little more volume. Also, it might a little more volume. Also, it might matter if you're on a specialization matter if you're on a specialization matter if you're on a specialization routine, meaning routine, meaning routine, meaning men, we're hitting our traps. We're men, we're hitting our traps. We're men, we're hitting our traps. We're hitting all three heads of our delts. hitting all three heads of our delts. hitting all three heads of our delts. We're hitting all the muscles in the We're hitting all the muscles in the We're hitting all the muscles in the body. So, the a lot of the women, body. So, the a lot of the women, body. So, the a lot of the women, they their upper body workouts, if they their upper body workouts, if they their upper body workouts, if they train full body, they might just do an train full body, they might just do an train full body, they might just do an up a compound or multi- joint upper body up a compound or multi- joint upper body up a compound or multi- joint upper body press and pull and that's it. press and pull and that's it. press and pull and that's it. &gt;&gt; No direct arm work, for instance. &gt;&gt; No direct arm work, for instance. &gt;&gt; No direct arm work, for instance. &gt;&gt; A lot of them. Yeah. because they don't &gt;&gt; A lot of them. Yeah. because they don't &gt;&gt; A lot of them. Yeah. because they don't want their arms to grow. want their arms to grow. want their arms to grow. &gt;&gt; They don't care as much as men do about &gt;&gt; They don't care as much as men do about &gt;&gt; They don't care as much as men do about arms. &gt;&gt; They and they're going to get decent arm &gt;&gt; They and they're going to get decent arm &gt;&gt; They and they're going to get decent arm development focusing on one upper body development focusing on one upper body development focusing on one upper body press and one upper body pull, but do press and one upper body pull, but do press and one upper body pull, but do that three times a week. We might do 36 that three times a week. We might do 36 that three times a week. We might do 36 sets a week for glutes. And you think, sets a week for glutes. And you think, sets a week for glutes. And you think, "Oh my god, that's so much." It's 12 12. "Oh my god, that's so much." It's 12 12. "Oh my god, that's so much." It's 12 12. I mentioned the four patterns. So, you I mentioned the four patterns. So, you I mentioned the four patterns. So, you got your squat lunge, hinge pull, uh got your squat lunge, hinge pull, uh got your squat lunge, hinge pull, uh thrust bridge, and then your abduction. thrust bridge, and then your abduction. thrust bridge, and then your abduction. And those can be in any order. Sometimes And those can be in any order. Sometimes And those can be in any order. Sometimes we prioritize the squat lunge, sometimes we prioritize the squat lunge, sometimes we prioritize the squat lunge, sometimes the hinge, some and it makes it fun the hinge, some and it makes it fun the hinge, some and it makes it fun because it's fun to PR on your favorite because it's fun to PR on your favorite because it's fun to PR on your favorite type of squat or hack squat or lunge or type of squat or hack squat or lunge or type of squat or hack squat or lunge or whatever. And then the next month we whatever. And then the next month we whatever. And then the next month we might prioritize a hinge, but you're might prioritize a hinge, but you're might prioritize a hinge, but you're always doing all three of them, but always doing all three of them, but always doing all three of them, but we're you're going for PRs on one of the we're you're going for PRs on one of the we're you're going for PRs on one of the movement patterns each time and then you movement patterns each time and then you movement patterns each time and then you mix it up throughout the that that's my mix it up throughout the that that's my mix it up throughout the that that's my system that tends to work well. There's system that tends to work well. There's system that tends to work well. There's a million ways to do to do it, but a million ways to do to do it, but a million ways to do to do it, but anyway, you can recover from that anyway, you can recover from that anyway, you can recover from that because it doesn't beat you up so much. because it doesn't beat you up so much. because it doesn't beat you up so much. But there's rules to it. You alternate But there's rules to it. You alternate But there's rules to it. You alternate with the squat lunge pattern. You with the squat lunge pattern. You with the squat lunge pattern. You alternate with a bilateral and alternate with a bilateral and alternate with a bilateral and unilateral because the unilateral tend unilateral because the unilateral tend unilateral because the unilateral tend to get you more sore. to get you more sore. to get you more sore. &gt;&gt; Could you clarify bilateral unilateral? &gt;&gt; Could you clarify bilateral unilateral? &gt;&gt; Could you clarify bilateral unilateral? &gt;&gt; Bilateral is double leg &gt;&gt; Bilateral is double leg &gt;&gt; Bilateral is double leg &gt;&gt; or um double like two limbs at a &gt;&gt; or um double like two limbs at a &gt;&gt; or um double like two limbs at a time and then unilateral single time and then unilateral single time and then unilateral single arm or single leg arm or single leg arm or single leg &gt;&gt; like rear foot elevated. &gt;&gt; like rear foot elevated. &gt;&gt; like rear foot elevated. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So the rear foot elev split squat &gt;&gt; Yeah. So the rear foot elev split squat &gt;&gt; Yeah. So the rear foot elev split squat or the Bulgarian split squat. They tend or the Bulgarian split squat. They tend or the Bulgarian split squat. They tend to get you more sore in the muscles. Um to get you more sore in the muscles. Um to get you more sore in the muscles. Um then and also vertical hinges then and also vertical hinges then and also vertical hinges meaning deadlifts and good mornings meaning deadlifts and good mornings meaning deadlifts and good mornings where it's a vertically loaded compared where it's a vertically loaded compared where it's a vertically loaded compared to like 45 degree hypers where you're to like 45 degree hypers where you're to like 45 degree hypers where you're kind of at an angle. The 45 degree works kind of at an angle. The 45 degree works kind of at an angle. The 45 degree works you a little bit more at shorter muscle you a little bit more at shorter muscle you a little bit more at shorter muscle lanes not as much in the stretch so you lanes not as much in the stretch so you lanes not as much in the stretch so you can recover from those a little bit can recover from those a little bit can recover from those a little bit easier. With my system we tend to easier. With my system we tend to easier. With my system we tend to alternate. You don't try and do RDL's alternate. You don't try and do RDL's alternate. You don't try and do RDL's and good mornings three times a week. and good mornings three times a week. and good mornings three times a week. That would be overkill. There's so many That would be overkill. There's so many That would be overkill. There's so many ways to do things, but that's how you ways to do things, but that's how you ways to do things, but that's how you make it recoverable. And then if you make it recoverable. And then if you make it recoverable. And then if you have a client that's like, I'm beat up have a client that's like, I'm beat up have a client that's like, I'm beat up all the time. I'm I feel like I'm not all the time. I'm I feel like I'm not all the time. I'm I feel like I'm not recovering. Let's reduce the sets. Okay, recovering. Let's reduce the sets. Okay, recovering. Let's reduce the sets. Okay, I don't want you training as close to I don't want you training as close to I don't want you training as close to failure. Let's switch the exercises. failure. Let's switch the exercises. failure. Let's switch the exercises. You're doing Smith machine reverse You're doing Smith machine reverse You're doing Smith machine reverse lunges and they're annihilating you. lunges and they're annihilating you. lunges and they're annihilating you. Let's see if you can do uh glute Let's see if you can do uh glute Let's see if you can do uh glute dominant step up where you're leaning dominant step up where you're leaning dominant step up where you're leaning forward. And it works for all the muscle forward. And it works for all the muscle forward. And it works for all the muscle groups, too. Um it's like delts. I groups, too. Um it's like delts. I groups, too. Um it's like delts. I prioritized delts the last year and I prioritized delts the last year and I prioritized delts the last year and I feel like they grew. I wanted to do more feel like they grew. I wanted to do more feel like they grew. I wanted to do more delt volume, but if you if I just do delt volume, but if you if I just do delt volume, but if you if I just do dumbbell later raises all the time and dumbbell later raises all the time and dumbbell later raises all the time and I'm always going for progressive I'm always going for progressive I'm always going for progressive overload on them, I start heaving. I overload on them, I start heaving. I overload on them, I start heaving. I start it starts kind of irritating my start it starts kind of irritating my start it starts kind of irritating my joints a little bit. But I found that joints a little bit. But I found that joints a little bit. But I found that cable lateral raises don't beat me cable lateral raises don't beat me cable lateral raises don't beat me up as much. But I will use dumbbells, up as much. But I will use dumbbells, up as much. But I will use dumbbells, machines, cable columns, even bands. You machines, cable columns, even bands. You machines, cable columns, even bands. You can do band exercise. Those work you can do band exercise. Those work you can do band exercise. Those work you most in the squeeze position. They don't most in the squeeze position. They don't most in the squeeze position. They don't create as much muscle damage. So you use create as much muscle damage. So you use create as much muscle damage. So you use this knowledge to maximize your this knowledge to maximize your this knowledge to maximize your recoverable volume. MRV is it's this recoverable volume. MRV is it's this recoverable volume. MRV is it's this concept of maximum recoverable volume. concept of maximum recoverable volume. concept of maximum recoverable volume. You want to do as much volume as You want to do as much volume as You want to do as much volume as possible but still recovering from it. possible but still recovering from it. possible but still recovering from it. &gt;&gt; Okay, this is an extremely important &gt;&gt; Okay, this is an extremely important &gt;&gt; Okay, this is an extremely important concept that most people I believe have concept that most people I believe have concept that most people I believe have not heard of. Certainly in exercise not heard of. Certainly in exercise not heard of. Certainly in exercise science circles I I'm sure everybody science circles I I'm sure everybody science circles I I'm sure everybody knows, but maximal recoverable volume. I knows, but maximal recoverable volume. I knows, but maximal recoverable volume. I think this is so critical because it think this is so critical because it think this is so critical because it frames basically everything we've been frames basically everything we've been frames basically everything we've been talking about up until now and I also talking about up until now and I also talking about up until now and I also think it can help clarify a lot of think it can help clarify a lot of think it can help clarify a lot of confusion for people in particular confusion for people in particular confusion for people in particular people that are starting to do people that are starting to do people that are starting to do resistance training and want to better resistance training and want to better resistance training and want to better understand what works and what doesn't understand what works and what doesn't understand what works and what doesn't work over time both men and women uh but work over time both men and women uh but work over time both men and women uh but also experienced lifters because u my uh also experienced lifters because u my uh also experienced lifters because u my uh sort of weaning and understanding uh sort of weaning and understanding uh sort of weaning and understanding uh around resist resistance training came around resist resistance training came around resist resistance training came from you know the high intens intensity from you know the high intens intensity from you know the high intens intensity folks. Okay, this years ago and this can folks. Okay, this years ago and this can folks. Okay, this years ago and this can be basically summarized as you warm up, be basically summarized as you warm up, be basically summarized as you warm up, you do a super intense focused set, you do a super intense focused set, you do a super intense focused set, maybe two, maybe three, and then you maybe two, maybe three, and then you maybe two, maybe three, and then you maybe do that for another muscle group, maybe do that for another muscle group, maybe do that for another muscle group, and then you take a couple days off and then you take a couple days off and then you take a couple days off and then come in and train other muscles. then come in and train other muscles. then come in and train other muscles. And really, you're hitting each muscle And really, you're hitting each muscle And really, you're hitting each muscle directly once per week, very intensely, directly once per week, very intensely, directly once per week, very intensely, both with mental focus and with both with mental focus and with both with mental focus and with physical, you know, intensity, physical, you know, intensity, physical, you know, intensity, obviously. And then you leave it alone obviously. And then you leave it alone obviously. And then you leave it alone and you try and get stronger every and you try and get stronger every and you try and get stronger every single workout. That was kind of the single workout. That was kind of the single workout. That was kind of the idea. Nowadays, I'm hearing a lot the idea. Nowadays, I'm hearing a lot the idea. Nowadays, I'm hearing a lot more about the kinds of things you're more about the kinds of things you're more about the kinds of things you're describing, like training each muscle describing, like training each muscle describing, like training each muscle group two or three times per week, group two or three times per week, group two or three times per week, dividing upper and lower body, so not dividing upper and lower body, so not dividing upper and lower body, so not dividing the body up as finely into like dividing the body up as finely into like dividing the body up as finely into like chest and back one day, shoulders and chest and back one day, shoulders and chest and back one day, shoulders and arms another day, legs another day, and arms another day, legs another day, and arms another day, legs another day, and so forth, and doing a lot more volume, so forth, and doing a lot more volume, so forth, and doing a lot more volume, but maybe not going to failure. And but maybe not going to failure. And but maybe not going to failure. And certainly changing exercises each certainly changing exercises each certainly changing exercises each workout. So, these two things, workout. So, these two things, workout. So, these two things, obviously, they both can work. I think obviously, they both can work. I think obviously, they both can work. I think we were talking about this yesterday. uh we were talking about this yesterday. uh we were talking about this yesterday. uh they both can work but there was this they both can work but there was this they both can work but there was this additional kind of element to it that I additional kind of element to it that I additional kind of element to it that I want to frame up here which was the I want to frame up here which was the I want to frame up here which was the idea from Mike Menser and Arthur idea from Mike Menser and Arthur idea from Mike Menser and Arthur Jones of you know and all the Nautilus Jones of you know and all the Nautilus Jones of you know and all the Nautilus folks that really believed in these folks that really believed in these folks that really believed in these really brief super highintensity really brief super highintensity really brief super highintensity infrequent workouts was one that I do infrequent workouts was one that I do infrequent workouts was one that I do think is true at least in my experience think is true at least in my experience think is true at least in my experience which is as you gain more experience which is as you gain more experience which is as you gain more experience with resistance training you are able to with resistance training you are able to with resistance training you are able to generate more directed intensity not generate more directed intensity not generate more directed intensity not like coming into the gym with more like coming into the gym with more like coming into the gym with more energy, but being able to really focus energy, but being able to really focus energy, but being able to really focus your mind and energy on, let's just say your mind and energy on, let's just say your mind and energy on, let's just say like a um a pull-up rather than just like a um a pull-up rather than just like a um a pull-up rather than just trying to get one's chin over the bar, trying to get one's chin over the bar, trying to get one's chin over the bar, which is what we do early on when we're which is what we do early on when we're which is what we do early on when we're trying to get pull-ups and then just trying to get pull-ups and then just trying to get pull-ups and then just count pull-ups. You drag yourself slowly count pull-ups. You drag yourself slowly count pull-ups. You drag yourself slowly out of the bottom position, paying out of the bottom position, paying out of the bottom position, paying attention to really using your lats and attention to really using your lats and attention to really using your lats and not using the biceps. So, like focusing not using the biceps. So, like focusing not using the biceps. So, like focusing on elbowing someone behind you, you get on elbowing someone behind you, you get on elbowing someone behind you, you get to the top, you try and bring the bar to the top, you try and bring the bar to the top, you try and bring the bar to your chest or even lower to like the, your chest or even lower to like the, your chest or even lower to like the, you know, for lack of a better way to you know, for lack of a better way to you know, for lack of a better way to put to the nipples. um and then really put to the nipples. um and then really put to the nipples. um and then really squeezing the lats and then lowering squeezing the lats and then lowering squeezing the lats and then lowering yourself slowly. This is very different yourself slowly. This is very different yourself slowly. This is very different than trying to rep out chin-ups. And the than trying to rep out chin-ups. And the than trying to rep out chin-ups. And the idea always was that doing things in a idea always was that doing things in a idea always was that doing things in a more focused way comes with experience more focused way comes with experience more focused way comes with experience that it the beginner can't generate that it the beginner can't generate that it the beginner can't generate that kind of intensity. they don't know that kind of intensity. they don't know that kind of intensity. they don't know how to do the movements. how to do the movements. how to do the movements. which led me at least to believe that at which led me at least to believe that at which led me at least to believe that at the beginning when somebody's in their the beginning when somebody's in their the beginning when somebody's in their say first four to six months of training say first four to six months of training say first four to six months of training that a bit more volume is necessary in that a bit more volume is necessary in that a bit more volume is necessary in order to really learn how to do the order to really learn how to do the order to really learn how to do the movements properly really develop the movements properly really develop the movements properly really develop the mind muscle connection really understand mind muscle connection really understand mind muscle connection really understand how to train without getting hurt and how to train without getting hurt and how to train without getting hurt and really learn what that MRV we didn't really learn what that MRV we didn't really learn what that MRV we didn't know that concept back then but really know that concept back then but really know that concept back then but really learn you know okay I can train my legs learn you know okay I can train my legs learn you know okay I can train my legs twice per week it's fine but if I go to twice per week it's fine but if I go to twice per week it's fine but if I go to three times I'm I start getting weaker three times I'm I start getting weaker three times I'm I start getting weaker in my workouts, not stronger. Or if in my workouts, not stronger. Or if in my workouts, not stronger. Or if you're like me, I can train my legs once you're like me, I can train my legs once you're like me, I can train my legs once per week really intensely, but you know per week really intensely, but you know per week really intensely, but you know what? Not every muscle in my legs is what? Not every muscle in my legs is what? Not every muscle in my legs is growing the same way. Maybe I need to do growing the same way. Maybe I need to do growing the same way. Maybe I need to do twice a week for hamstrings because one twice a week for hamstrings because one twice a week for hamstrings because one muscle group is lagging. So, the reason muscle group is lagging. So, the reason muscle group is lagging. So, the reason I'm sort of spooling out this essay I'm sort of spooling out this essay I'm sort of spooling out this essay here is that I think there's a lot of here is that I think there's a lot of here is that I think there's a lot of confusion for people about where to confusion for people about where to confusion for people about where to start and where to go. And MRV seems start and where to go. And MRV seems start and where to go. And MRV seems like it should be the kind of like it should be the kind of like it should be the kind of governing factor, the compass in all of governing factor, the compass in all of governing factor, the compass in all of this. So, for instance, if a client this. So, for instance, if a client this. So, for instance, if a client walks into your gym and let's just say walks into your gym and let's just say walks into your gym and let's just say she because you train a lot of female she because you train a lot of female she because you train a lot of female clients, but this could be also a man clients, but this could be also a man clients, but this could be also a man talking about chest training, but let's talking about chest training, but let's talking about chest training, but let's talk about a woman comes in and she just talk about a woman comes in and she just talk about a woman comes in and she just says, "Listen, I don't want to be big." says, "Listen, I don't want to be big." says, "Listen, I don't want to be big." Right? This is a common you hear, but I Right? This is a common you hear, but I Right? This is a common you hear, but I really want my glutes to be a bit bigger really want my glutes to be a bit bigger really want my glutes to be a bit bigger and I would like to see some abs and you and I would like to see some abs and you and I would like to see some abs and you know and I um and she's athletic, you know and I um and she's athletic, you know and I um and she's athletic, you know, she's done cardio, done um maybe a know, she's done cardio, done um maybe a know, she's done cardio, done um maybe a sport, maybe played some soccer, but she sport, maybe played some soccer, but she sport, maybe played some soccer, but she wants to really focus on her glutes and wants to really focus on her glutes and wants to really focus on her glutes and her quads. her quads. her quads. What do you do to assess MRV? Are you What do you do to assess MRV? Are you What do you do to assess MRV? Are you looking for her to get stronger every looking for her to get stronger every looking for her to get stronger every single workout? Or do you spend two or single workout? Or do you spend two or single workout? Or do you spend two or three weeks just like teaching her the three weeks just like teaching her the three weeks just like teaching her the movements? Do you spend two or three movements? Do you spend two or three movements? Do you spend two or three weeks teaching a guy, hey, you know weeks teaching a guy, hey, you know weeks teaching a guy, hey, you know what? You think you can do a biceps what? You think you can do a biceps what? You think you can do a biceps curl, but let's do a biceps curl where curl, but let's do a biceps curl where curl, but let's do a biceps curl where you really learn to activate the biceps you really learn to activate the biceps you really learn to activate the biceps at the beginning of the movement. You're at the beginning of the movement. You're at the beginning of the movement. You're not swinging your elbow forward. You're not swinging your elbow forward. You're not swinging your elbow forward. You're you're contracting the biceps. you're contracting the biceps. you're contracting the biceps. Let's really learn how to bring like Let's really learn how to bring like Let's really learn how to bring like your pinky higher than your thumb at the your pinky higher than your thumb at the your pinky higher than your thumb at the top and really learn how to cramp that top and really learn how to cramp that top and really learn how to cramp that thing down. That to me is a skill. It's thing down. That to me is a skill. It's thing down. That to me is a skill. It's something that requires time and it and something that requires time and it and something that requires time and it and it eats into recovery. So the bigger it eats into recovery. So the bigger it eats into recovery. So the bigger question in here is how do you determine question in here is how do you determine question in here is how do you determine MRV and is skill and ability in being MRV and is skill and ability in being MRV and is skill and ability in being able to target muscles a factor in MRV? able to target muscles a factor in MRV? able to target muscles a factor in MRV? Because to me it seems like the most Because to me it seems like the most Because to me it seems like the most important factor. Forgive the long important factor. Forgive the long important factor. Forgive the long question. &gt;&gt; So yeah, that's the hard thing about &gt;&gt; So yeah, that's the hard thing about &gt;&gt; So yeah, that's the hard thing about working with people online compared to working with people online compared to working with people online compared to in person. in person. in person. &gt;&gt; Online you kind of have to have a &gt;&gt; Online you kind of have to have a &gt;&gt; Online you kind of have to have a generic cookie cutter approach. In generic cookie cutter approach. In generic cookie cutter approach. In person, you can individualize it and person, you can individualize it and person, you can individualize it and assess where they are. If I if I have a assess where they are. If I if I have a assess where they are. If I if I have a beginner, yes, I agree with you. They beginner, yes, I agree with you. They beginner, yes, I agree with you. They benefit from more volume to have the benefit from more volume to have the benefit from more volume to have the motor learning and gain the motor learning and gain the motor learning and gain the coordination. Also, you should like I coordination. Also, you should like I coordination. Also, you should like I remember standing in the mirror as when remember standing in the mirror as when remember standing in the mirror as when I was like 15, 16 year old flexing and I was like 15, 16 year old flexing and I was like 15, 16 year old flexing and I'm like, I can't how do I flex my lats? I'm like, I can't how do I flex my lats? I'm like, I can't how do I flex my lats? How do I flex my if you can't flex your How do I flex my if you can't flex your How do I flex my if you can't flex your muscles, how can you flex your muscles muscles, how can you flex your muscles muscles, how can you flex your muscles against resistance? Like against resistance? Like against resistance? Like &gt;&gt; super important point. I'm just going to &gt;&gt; super important point. I'm just going to &gt;&gt; super important point. I'm just going to highlight I'm interrupting you to highlight I'm interrupting you to highlight I'm interrupting you to highlight that if folks if you can't highlight that if folks if you can't highlight that if folks if you can't contract a muscle without a weight in contract a muscle without a weight in contract a muscle without a weight in your hand or on your back or whatever it your hand or on your back or whatever it your hand or on your back or whatever it is, you're not going to be able to is, you're not going to be able to is, you're not going to be able to properly train that muscle. properly train that muscle. properly train that muscle. &gt;&gt; So you can use what Mel Cif back in the &gt;&gt; So you can use what Mel Cif back in the &gt;&gt; So you can use what Mel Cif back in the legendary sports scientist, he passed legendary sports scientist, he passed legendary sports scientist, he passed away too soon, but he wrote the book away too soon, but he wrote the book away too soon, but he wrote the book Super Training, but all of us strength Super Training, but all of us strength Super Training, but all of us strength coaches back in the day, that was our coaches back in the day, that was our coaches back in the day, that was our Bible. And uh and he called it loadless Bible. And uh and he called it loadless Bible. And uh and he called it loadless training. But yeah, you want to flex training. But yeah, you want to flex training. But yeah, you want to flex and squeeze, but then after a while, you and squeeze, but then after a while, you and squeeze, but then after a while, you don't need to do that. You can you can don't need to do that. You can you can don't need to do that. You can you can use that. You can feel that muscle doing use that. You can feel that muscle doing use that. You can feel that muscle doing any movement if you want. any movement if you want. any movement if you want. &gt;&gt; Do you think people could do a self &gt;&gt; Do you think people could do a self &gt;&gt; Do you think people could do a self test, for instance, where just on their test, for instance, where just on their test, for instance, where just on their own in their bathroom, uh, with no one own in their bathroom, uh, with no one own in their bathroom, uh, with no one around, they could just kind of walk around, they could just kind of walk around, they could just kind of walk from, you know, uh, calves up, you know, from, you know, uh, calves up, you know, from, you know, uh, calves up, you know, just not walk physically, but just move just not walk physically, but just move just not walk physically, but just move from calves up. Like, can you flex your from calves up. Like, can you flex your from calves up. Like, can you flex your calf on both sides? Can you generate a calf on both sides? Can you generate a calf on both sides? Can you generate a hard contraction? Can you do that for hard contraction? Can you do that for hard contraction? Can you do that for your quad? Can you do that for your quad? Can you do that for your quad? Can you do that for your hamstring? That to me seems like the hamstring? That to me seems like the hamstring? That to me seems like the most important thing to do before most important thing to do before most important thing to do before touching a weight or a machine because touching a weight or a machine because touching a weight or a machine because then one can get a real sense of, you then one can get a real sense of, you then one can get a real sense of, you know, what kind of neuromuscular control know, what kind of neuromuscular control know, what kind of neuromuscular control do they have because it's going to vary do they have because it's going to vary do they have because it's going to vary by sports, by injury history, by sports, by injury history, by sports, by injury history, by genetics, by all sorts of things, right? genetics, by all sorts of things, right? genetics, by all sorts of things, right? &gt;&gt; Men probably have an advantage with when &gt;&gt; Men probably have an advantage with when &gt;&gt; Men probably have an advantage with when they start out because, you know, when they start out because, you know, when they start out because, you know, when we were going through puberty and you're we were going through puberty and you're we were going through puberty and you're like, "Oh, wow. My body's changing." And like, "Oh, wow. My body's changing." And like, "Oh, wow. My body's changing." And you no one was looking and you're in the you no one was looking and you're in the you no one was looking and you're in the mirror. I remember mirror. I remember mirror. I remember &gt;&gt; every dude flexes his &gt;&gt; every dude flexes his &gt;&gt; every dude flexes his biceps. biceps and you're like biceps. biceps and you're like biceps. biceps and you're like &gt;&gt; you practice flexing. Well, that's &gt;&gt; you practice flexing. Well, that's &gt;&gt; you practice flexing. Well, that's training. That's resistance that's training. That's resistance that's training. That's resistance training. Um you're flexing your training. Um you're flexing your training. Um you're flexing your muscles, you're providing the muscles, you're providing the muscles, you're providing the resistance, you know. Um and there's resistance, you know. Um and there's resistance, you know. Um and there's some evidence that you can gain muscle some evidence that you can gain muscle some evidence that you can gain muscle that way. There's a classic study by that way. There's a classic study by that way. There's a classic study by Britney Counts um you know where with Britney Counts um you know where with Britney Counts um you know where with the biceps where one side used a the biceps where one side used a the biceps where one side used a dumbbell, the other arm just body weight dumbbell, the other arm just body weight dumbbell, the other arm just body weight just like concentrating using no load. just like concentrating using no load. just like concentrating using no load. Four sets of 20, flexing your arm Four sets of 20, flexing your arm Four sets of 20, flexing your arm throughout the range of motion, trying throughout the range of motion, trying throughout the range of motion, trying to squeeze your biceps. And to squeeze your biceps. And to squeeze your biceps. And interestingly, this arm grew the triceps interestingly, this arm grew the triceps interestingly, this arm grew the triceps because you're using your triceps to because you're using your triceps to because you're using your triceps to provide some of the no weight arm. Yeah. provide some of the no weight arm. Yeah. provide some of the no weight arm. Yeah. The no weight arm. And so The no weight arm. And so The no weight arm. And so &gt;&gt; that's pretty wild. &gt;&gt; that's pretty wild. &gt;&gt; that's pretty wild. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so you can, but then how but &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so you can, but then how but &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so you can, but then how but that &gt;&gt; I'm not suggesting that's the training &gt;&gt; I'm not suggesting that's the training &gt;&gt; I'm not suggesting that's the training people stick with. I mean, this sort of people stick with. I mean, this sort of people stick with. I mean, this sort of like an assessment like an assessment like an assessment assessment. Yeah. if you can't feel your assessment. Yeah. if you can't feel your assessment. Yeah. if you can't feel your muscles, you know, if you can't flex muscles, you know, if you can't flex muscles, you know, if you can't flex your It's kind of hard to like, how do I your It's kind of hard to like, how do I your It's kind of hard to like, how do I flex my delts just standing here, but flex my delts just standing here, but flex my delts just standing here, but like yeah, you start tweaking the like yeah, you start tweaking the like yeah, you start tweaking the body and contorting and you're like, oh, body and contorting and you're like, oh, body and contorting and you're like, oh, I can feel my delts when I do this, I can feel my delts when I do this, I can feel my delts when I do this, flaring your lats. That took me some flaring your lats. That took me some flaring your lats. That took me some time back, you know, 30 years ago when I time back, you know, 30 years ago when I time back, you know, 30 years ago when I started. And then you start to realize, started. And then you start to realize, started. And then you start to realize, oh, and then another thing, sometimes oh, and then another thing, sometimes oh, and then another thing, sometimes you go to a gym that doesn't have a lot you go to a gym that doesn't have a lot you go to a gym that doesn't have a lot of equipment or you're limited in of equipment or you're limited in of equipment or you're limited in loading and you're like, you know, I'm loading and you're like, you know, I'm loading and you're like, you know, I'm going to do lat pull downs and you going to do lat pull downs and you going to do lat pull downs and you figure out, wow, I feel my lats more figure out, wow, I feel my lats more figure out, wow, I feel my lats more doing it this way. Um, lifting is a doing it this way. Um, lifting is a doing it this way. Um, lifting is a lifelong journey. You can always be lifelong journey. You can always be lifelong journey. You can always be improving your form. You can always be improving your form. You can always be improving your form. You can always be learning new skills. Um, but in the learning new skills. Um, but in the learning new skills. Um, but in the beginning, yes, you want to learn how to beginning, yes, you want to learn how to beginning, yes, you want to learn how to flex your muscles. You want to learn how flex your muscles. You want to learn how flex your muscles. You want to learn how to perform the exercises with good form, to perform the exercises with good form, to perform the exercises with good form, gain the coordination factor, the neuro gain the coordination factor, the neuro gain the coordination factor, the neuro gains. Then over time, most of your gains. Then over time, most of your gains. Then over time, most of your gains in strength will come from the gains in strength will come from the gains in strength will come from the muscle growing, from hypertrophy. muscle growing, from hypertrophy. muscle growing, from hypertrophy. &gt;&gt; I think these are incredibly informative &gt;&gt; I think these are incredibly informative &gt;&gt; I think these are incredibly informative things to do because then when you things to do because then when you things to do because then when you arrive in the gym, perhaps you put more arrive in the gym, perhaps you put more arrive in the gym, perhaps you put more um priority on the muscles that you have um priority on the muscles that you have um priority on the muscles that you have a harder time contracting. a harder time contracting. a harder time contracting. &gt;&gt; Well, this was like proposed by this &gt;&gt; Well, this was like proposed by this &gt;&gt; Well, this was like proposed by this researcher, Vladimir Yand, whatever. Um researcher, Vladimir Yand, whatever. Um researcher, Vladimir Yand, whatever. Um and kind of got trickled down. I and kind of got trickled down. I and kind of got trickled down. I know Stu McIll, you've had him on the know Stu McIll, you've had him on the know Stu McIll, you've had him on the show. He started talking about show. He started talking about show. He started talking about glutamnesia and then it gets a lot of glutamnesia and then it gets a lot of glutamnesia and then it gets a lot of backlash because people are like, "Oh, backlash because people are like, "Oh, backlash because people are like, "Oh, really? You have glutamisia? Your glutes really? You have glutamisia? Your glutes really? You have glutamisia? Your glutes don't activate at all." But what we're don't activate at all." But what we're don't activate at all." But what we're talking about is some muscles talking about is some muscles talking about is some muscles and I learned this from doing EMG and I learned this from doing EMG and I learned this from doing EMG electromyiography testing back in the electromyiography testing back in the electromyiography testing back in the day. I'm like, man, when people walk up day. I'm like, man, when people walk up day. I'm like, man, when people walk up stairs, their quad activation is through stairs, their quad activation is through stairs, their quad activation is through the roof. When you just stand up from the roof. When you just stand up from the roof. When you just stand up from the couch, quad activation through the couch, quad activation through the couch, quad activation through the roof. Glute activation doesn't get very roof. Glute activation doesn't get very roof. Glute activation doesn't get very high during everyday normal movements. high during everyday normal movements. high during everyday normal movements. Um, so they're probably more prone to Um, so they're probably more prone to Um, so they're probably more prone to atrophy and you know disuse. You're just atrophy and you know disuse. You're just atrophy and you know disuse. You're just going to the muscle will shrink. You're going to the muscle will shrink. You're going to the muscle will shrink. You're also not activating as much. Why would also not activating as much. Why would also not activating as much. Why would the neural gains be as efficient? And the neural gains be as efficient? And the neural gains be as efficient? And then probably there's a genetic element then probably there's a genetic element then probably there's a genetic element too with your anatomy and with your too with your anatomy and with your too with your anatomy and with your sport history and stuff. Um, so there's sport history and stuff. Um, so there's sport history and stuff. Um, so there's kind of like neural pro think of it as kind of like neural pro think of it as kind of like neural pro think of it as neural programming. I know glute neural programming. I know glute neural programming. I know glute activation gets a lot of flack from activation gets a lot of flack from activation gets a lot of flack from people because it got so popular back. people because it got so popular back. people because it got so popular back. Low load glute activation. It's funny Low load glute activation. It's funny Low load glute activation. It's funny because I'm a personal trainer, but my because I'm a personal trainer, but my because I'm a personal trainer, but my roots come up as a strength coach. Um, I roots come up as a strength coach. Um, I roots come up as a strength coach. Um, I wanted to I wanted to work with athletes wanted to I wanted to work with athletes wanted to I wanted to work with athletes earlier in my career and I think that's earlier in my career and I think that's earlier in my career and I think that's what differentiated me from all these co what differentiated me from all these co what differentiated me from all these co these bodybuilding coaches have a these bodybuilding coaches have a these bodybuilding coaches have a different mindset. I have a more of a different mindset. I have a more of a different mindset. I have a more of a functional outlook on things, but also functional outlook on things, but also functional outlook on things, but also we were doing glute lowload glute we were doing glute lowload glute we were doing glute lowload glute activation back in the day and there activation back in the day and there activation back in the day and there were all these coaches, the popular were all these coaches, the popular were all these coaches, the popular strength coaches were doing it in the strength coaches were doing it in the strength coaches were doing it in the early 2000s up until the late 2000s. early 2000s up until the late 2000s. early 2000s up until the late 2000s. &gt;&gt; What's low load glute activation? &gt;&gt; What's low load glute activation? &gt;&gt; What's low load glute activation? &gt;&gt; You're using lower loads, body weight or &gt;&gt; You're using lower loads, body weight or &gt;&gt; You're using lower loads, body weight or bands and you're just doing like, you bands and you're just doing like, you bands and you're just doing like, you know, movements trying to you're not know, movements trying to you're not know, movements trying to you're not going to failure. It's not a working going to failure. It's not a working going to failure. It's not a working set. You do it in the in the general set. You do it in the in the general set. You do it in the in the general warm-up, you know, the your dynamic warm-up, you know, the your dynamic warm-up, you know, the your dynamic warm-up. You might be able to do a 100 warm-up. You might be able to do a 100 warm-up. You might be able to do a 100 glute bridges, but you're doing two sets glute bridges, but you're doing two sets glute bridges, but you're doing two sets of 10, trying to really squeeze the of 10, trying to really squeeze the of 10, trying to really squeeze the glutes and feel them moving you. Lateral glutes and feel them moving you. Lateral glutes and feel them moving you. Lateral band walks, things like that. So, we band walks, things like that. So, we band walks, things like that. So, we were doing that in the early 2000s to were doing that in the early 2000s to were doing that in the early 2000s to wake up the glutes. And there is wake up the glutes. And there is wake up the glutes. And there is evidence of this though. It's there's a evidence of this though. It's there's a evidence of this though. It's there's a there's probably 15 studies on it like there's probably 15 studies on it like there's probably 15 studies on it like key studies. A lot of them show no key studies. A lot of them show no key studies. A lot of them show no benefit, but a couple of them um show benefit, but a couple of them um show benefit, but a couple of them um show definitely definite neural gains. Like definitely definite neural gains. Like definitely definite neural gains. Like one study just in one week they had one study just in one week they had one study just in one week they had people doing like an hour a day of people doing like an hour a day of people doing like an hour a day of isometric like a on all fours you put a isometric like a on all fours you put a isometric like a on all fours you put a band around the knees and you did like band around the knees and you did like band around the knees and you did like kind of this weird movement where it's kind of this weird movement where it's kind of this weird movement where it's like hip extension abduction external like hip extension abduction external like hip extension abduction external rotation at the same time kind of rotation at the same time kind of rotation at the same time kind of lifting your leg out to the side like a lifting your leg out to the side like a lifting your leg out to the side like a dog peeing. dog peeing. dog peeing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost like a fire hydrant but &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost like a fire hydrant but &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost like a fire hydrant but also extending. also extending. also extending. &gt;&gt; It's called a fire hydrant. &gt;&gt; It's called a fire hydrant. &gt;&gt; It's called a fire hydrant. &gt;&gt; The fire hydrant moving like a dog. &gt;&gt; The fire hydrant moving like a dog. &gt;&gt; The fire hydrant moving like a dog. &gt;&gt; You're on your for and you lift a leg &gt;&gt; You're on your for and you lift a leg &gt;&gt; You're on your for and you lift a leg up. Yeah. up. Yeah. up. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But they wanted to be isometric &gt;&gt; But they wanted to be isometric &gt;&gt; But they wanted to be isometric because they thought isymmetric you're because they thought isymmetric you're because they thought isymmetric you're focusing you're using the brain. focusing you're using the brain. focusing you're using the brain. Isometric uh folks is where you're Isometric uh folks is where you're Isometric uh folks is where you're pausing the movement typically in you're pausing the movement typically in you're pausing the movement typically in the fully contracted position, but you the fully contracted position, but you the fully contracted position, but you know where you're holding the movement know where you're holding the movement know where you're holding the movement and really trying to contract the and really trying to contract the and really trying to contract the muscle. So that there's obviously you muscle. So that there's obviously you muscle. So that there's obviously you got to get the knee up to pee on the got to get the knee up to pee on the got to get the knee up to pee on the fire hydrant, but then you're holding it fire hydrant, but then you're holding it fire hydrant, but then you're holding it there and really trying to contract. there and really trying to contract. there and really trying to contract. &gt;&gt; So you did they tried to do like 20 &gt;&gt; So you did they tried to do like 20 &gt;&gt; So you did they tried to do like 20 minutes three times a day for a whole minutes three times a day for a whole minutes three times a day for a whole week. Like that's crazy. week. Like that's crazy. week. Like that's crazy. &gt;&gt; 20 minutes of isometric holding. &gt;&gt; 20 minutes of isometric holding. &gt;&gt; 20 minutes of isometric holding. &gt;&gt; So it's like as much as you can &gt;&gt; So it's like as much as you can &gt;&gt; So it's like as much as you can tolerate, but three times a day for a tolerate, but three times a day for a tolerate, but three times a day for a whole week because they did the study in whole week because they did the study in whole week because they did the study in one week. But in one week they showed one week. But in one week they showed one week. But in one week they showed significant I don't know all the terms significant I don't know all the terms significant I don't know all the terms cuz this is the you would know these cuz this is the you would know these cuz this is the you would know these terms you would know the neural sign we terms you would know the neural sign we terms you would know the neural sign we could it's could it's could it's &gt;&gt; the motor cortex you &gt;&gt; the motor cortex you &gt;&gt; the motor cortex you &gt;&gt; one way or another there's a &gt;&gt; one way or another there's a &gt;&gt; one way or another there's a strengthening of the neural connection. strengthening of the neural connection. strengthening of the neural connection. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The brain the air in the &gt;&gt; Yeah. The brain the air in the &gt;&gt; Yeah. The brain the air in the brain the motor cortex responsible for brain the motor cortex responsible for brain the motor cortex responsible for activating the glutes saw increases in activating the glutes saw increases in activating the glutes saw increases in just one week but it's obvious like it's just one week but it's obvious like it's just one week but it's obvious like it's obvious you can improve that side of obvious you can improve that side of obvious you can improve that side of things. So but then here's the thing things. So but then here's the thing things. So but then here's the thing about what we're talking about. People about what we're talking about. People about what we're talking about. People get car carried away. You can get car carried away. You can get car carried away. You can get sidetracked. MRV can distract you. sidetracked. MRV can distract you. sidetracked. MRV can distract you. People get obsessive with the number of People get obsessive with the number of People get obsessive with the number of sets. The main thing is are you gaining sets. The main thing is are you gaining sets. The main thing is are you gaining strength? And I don't mean alltime PRs strength? And I don't mean alltime PRs strength? And I don't mean alltime PRs every single like especially if you've every single like especially if you've every single like especially if you've been lifting for a lot of years like you been lifting for a lot of years like you been lifting for a lot of years like you and me. Can we keep going up in and me. Can we keep going up in and me. Can we keep going up in strength? But you set a baseline strength? But you set a baseline strength? But you set a baseline on week one and can you gain strength on week one and can you gain strength on week one and can you gain strength for three weeks in a row after that? And for three weeks in a row after that? And for three weeks in a row after that? And then you switch. Then you start at then you switch. Then you start at then you switch. Then you start at baseline. Can you gain strength? Are you baseline. Can you gain strength? Are you baseline. Can you gain strength? Are you kind of moving up over time? Um, you kind of moving up over time? Um, you kind of moving up over time? Um, you know, you said it yesterday that it's know, you said it yesterday that it's know, you said it yesterday that it's going to be a jigsaw. What did you going to be a jigsaw. What did you going to be a jigsaw. What did you call it? Saw call it? Saw call it? Saw &gt;&gt; uh up into the right saw to pattern. &gt;&gt; uh up into the right saw to pattern. &gt;&gt; uh up into the right saw to pattern. &gt;&gt; Sawtooth pattern, but up and to the &gt;&gt; Sawtooth pattern, but up and to the &gt;&gt; Sawtooth pattern, but up and to the right. Over time, are you making gains? right. Over time, are you making gains? right. Over time, are you making gains? &gt;&gt; And that's where I've I been heavily &gt;&gt; And that's where I've I been heavily &gt;&gt; And that's where I've I been heavily influenced by a strength co a influenced by a strength co a influenced by a strength co a powerlifting coach who passed away, powerlifting coach who passed away, powerlifting coach who passed away, Louisie Simmons. I really like the idea Louisie Simmons. I really like the idea Louisie Simmons. I really like the idea that his um his powerlifterss were like, that his um his powerlifterss were like, that his um his powerlifterss were like, you know, platform ready year round. you know, platform ready year round. you know, platform ready year round. They would max out year round. And I'm They would max out year round. And I'm They would max out year round. And I'm going, how do you max out on squats, going, how do you max out on squats, going, how do you max out on squats, deadlifts, good mornings year round? deadlifts, good mornings year round? deadlifts, good mornings year round? They'd have one max effort day a week They'd have one max effort day a week They'd have one max effort day a week and then they'd have a dynamic effort and then they'd have a dynamic effort and then they'd have a dynamic effort day, you know, where they focused on day, you know, where they focused on day, you know, where they focused on speed or like reps, but it wasn't going speed or like reps, but it wasn't going speed or like reps, but it wasn't going crazy. But their max effort day, they crazy. But their max effort day, they crazy. But their max effort day, they they'd switch it around a lot. that's they'd switch it around a lot. that's they'd switch it around a lot. that's how they could compete year round like how they could compete year round like how they could compete year round like that. And you know, a lot of what I do that. And you know, a lot of what I do that. And you know, a lot of what I do is influenced by him. All of us strength is influenced by him. All of us strength is influenced by him. All of us strength coaches back in the late 90s, the coaches back in the late 90s, the coaches back in the late 90s, the early 2000s were he was our primary early 2000s were he was our primary early 2000s were he was our primary influence. We and you could talk to all influence. We and you could talk to all influence. We and you could talk to all the popular strength coaches back when I the popular strength coaches back when I the popular strength coaches back when I came up, they would all say they were came up, they would all say they were came up, they would all say they were influenced by Louis Simmons. But he did influenced by Louis Simmons. But he did influenced by Louis Simmons. But he did things a certain way where now I'm things a certain way where now I'm things a certain way where now I'm going, okay, it makes sense to me now going, okay, it makes sense to me now going, okay, it makes sense to me now after studying biomechanics. He used a after studying biomechanics. He used a after studying biomechanics. He used a lot of bands and chains. that's a little lot of bands and chains. that's a little lot of bands and chains. that's a little bit easier in the stretch position, a bit easier in the stretch position, a bit easier in the stretch position, a little bit harder in the endrange little bit harder in the endrange little bit harder in the endrange position. He did um one max ever, but is position. He did um one max ever, but is position. He did um one max ever, but is rotating the lifts every, you know, rotating the lifts every, you know, rotating the lifts every, you know, several weeks. And so that's what I do. several weeks. And so that's what I do. several weeks. And so that's what I do. But I don't I'm not just preparing But I don't I'm not just preparing But I don't I'm not just preparing my clients for powerlifting. I love the my clients for powerlifting. I love the my clients for powerlifting. I love the squat, the bench, and the deadlift. I squat, the bench, and the deadlift. I squat, the bench, and the deadlift. I also love the military press, the also love the military press, the also love the military press, the chin-up, and the hip thrust. Those are chin-up, and the hip thrust. Those are chin-up, and the hip thrust. Those are my big six lifts. But we also use leg my big six lifts. But we also use leg my big six lifts. But we also use leg press. We use whatever machines, tools, press. We use whatever machines, tools, press. We use whatever machines, tools, whatever suits the clients well. And I whatever suits the clients well. And I whatever suits the clients well. And I help my clients figure out what their help my clients figure out what their help my clients figure out what their favorite exercise are and they favorite exercise are and they favorite exercise are and they evolve over time. But here are the tools evolve over time. But here are the tools evolve over time. But here are the tools and we try to set PRs over time, but you and we try to set PRs over time, but you and we try to set PRs over time, but you switch it around because what you talked switch it around because what you talked switch it around because what you talked about in a previous question, this old about in a previous question, this old about in a previous question, this old nautilus and hit philosophy was, you nautilus and hit philosophy was, you nautilus and hit philosophy was, you know, hit a muscle infrequently, hit it know, hit a muscle infrequently, hit it know, hit a muscle infrequently, hit it hard, recover, blast it, and try to get hard, recover, blast it, and try to get hard, recover, blast it, and try to get one more rep or go up five or 10 pounds. one more rep or go up five or 10 pounds. one more rep or go up five or 10 pounds. It sounds great in theory. It just It sounds great in theory. It just It sounds great in theory. It just doesn't work out in real life. doesn't work out in real life. doesn't work out in real life. &gt;&gt; You can't get stronger continually over &gt;&gt; You can't get stronger continually over &gt;&gt; You can't get stronger continually over time anyway. Eventually, you get hurt. time anyway. Eventually, you get hurt. time anyway. Eventually, you get hurt. &gt;&gt; That's the thing. If you just repeat the &gt;&gt; That's the thing. If you just repeat the &gt;&gt; That's the thing. If you just repeat the same exercises, say you and I just same exercises, say you and I just same exercises, say you and I just said, "Look, let's let's, you know, say said, "Look, let's let's, you know, say said, "Look, let's let's, you know, say we worked out tomorrow together. Let's we worked out tomorrow together. Let's we worked out tomorrow together. Let's set our baseline with deep squats and set our baseline with deep squats and set our baseline with deep squats and stiff leg deadlifts and whatever we hit, stiff leg deadlifts and whatever we hit, stiff leg deadlifts and whatever we hit, we hit. And then we're going to go up we hit. And then we're going to go up we hit. And then we're going to go up either one more rep or, you know, up either one more rep or, you know, up either one more rep or, you know, up five or 10 pounds, you know, you even if five or 10 pounds, you know, you even if five or 10 pounds, you know, you even if we maxed out and said, "Okay, we're we maxed out and said, "Okay, we're we maxed out and said, "Okay, we're going to try and get one more rep each going to try and get one more rep each going to try and get one more rep each week." You won't get, you know, 52 more week." You won't get, you know, 52 more week." You won't get, you know, 52 more reps each year, reps each year, reps each year, &gt;&gt; right? You won't get five more pounds &gt;&gt; right? You won't get five more pounds &gt;&gt; right? You won't get five more pounds each month. That's 60 pounds in a year. each month. That's 60 pounds in a year. each month. That's 60 pounds in a year. You won't keep going up 60 pounds. Maybe You won't keep going up 60 pounds. Maybe You won't keep going up 60 pounds. Maybe you can the first year, maybe the second you can the first year, maybe the second you can the first year, maybe the second year, depending on the lift, but after a year, depending on the lift, but after a year, depending on the lift, but after a while, then if that were true, in 10 while, then if that were true, in 10 while, then if that were true, in 10 years of lifting, everyone would be years of lifting, everyone would be years of lifting, everyone would be doing 600 plus pounds on every exercise. doing 600 plus pounds on every exercise. doing 600 plus pounds on every exercise. It doesn't happen. And that's what It doesn't happen. And that's what It doesn't happen. And that's what people don't talk about with progressive people don't talk about with progressive people don't talk about with progressive overload. You got to talk about this because You got to talk about this because You got to talk about this because you can't just keep going up. It doesn't you can't just keep going up. It doesn't you can't just keep going up. It doesn't happen. And then it's frustrating when happen. And then it's frustrating when happen. And then it's frustrating when you think you have to progressive you think you have to progressive you think you have to progressive overload and then you don't get one more overload and then you don't get one more overload and then you don't get one more rep or you don't get five more pounds or rep or you don't get five more pounds or rep or you don't get five more pounds or you don't set a PR and then you start you don't set a PR and then you start you don't set a PR and then you start getting contorting your form and you getting contorting your form and you getting contorting your form and you start getting joint pain and nagging start getting joint pain and nagging start getting joint pain and nagging injuries and then you start going injuries and then you start going injuries and then you start going backwards. That's one thing you backwards. That's one thing you backwards. That's one thing you definitely want to avoid. We talked definitely want to avoid. We talked definitely want to avoid. We talked about this yesterday is avoiding this about this yesterday is avoiding this about this yesterday is avoiding this pain cycle, avoiding this nagging injury pain cycle, avoiding this nagging injury pain cycle, avoiding this nagging injury cycle. How do you keep making gains cycle. How do you keep making gains cycle. How do you keep making gains without being hurt, without being and without being hurt, without being and without being hurt, without being and that's where you got to use more that's where you got to use more that's where you got to use more variety. We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there We've known for a long time that there are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our are things that we can do to improve our sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we sleep. And that includes things that we can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium can take. Things like magnesium thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, thrienate, theanine, chamomile extract, and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known and glycine along with lesserk known things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. things like saffron and valyan root. These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported These are all clinically supported ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall ingredients that can help you fall asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling asleep, stay asleep, and wake up feeling more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share more refreshed. I'm excited to share that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just that our longtime sponsor AG1 just created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a created a new product called AGZ, a nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get nightly drink designed to help you get better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up better sleep and have you wake up feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past feeling super refreshed. Over the past few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at few years, I've worked with the team at AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. AG1 to help create this new AGZ formula. It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting It has the best sleep supporting compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in compounds in exactly the right ratios in one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all one easy to drink mix. This removes all the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the complexity of trying to forge the vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on vast landscape of supplements focused on sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages sleep and figuring out the right dosages and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, and which ones to take for you. AGZ is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive to my knowledge, the most comprehensive sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take sleep supplement on the market. I take it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's it 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. It's delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it delicious, by the way, and it dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality dramatically increases both the quality and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that and the depth of my sleep. I know that both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my both from my subjective experience of my sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm sleep and because I track my sleep. I'm excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ excited for everyone to try this new AGZ formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of formulation and to enjoy the benefits of better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in better sleep. AGZ is available in chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed chocolate, chocolate mint, and mixed berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned berry flavors. And as I mentioned before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. before, they're all extremely delicious. My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I My favorite of the three has to be, I think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like think, chocolate mint, but I really like them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go them all. If you'd like to try AGZ, go to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to drinkagz.com/huberman to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's to get a special offer. Again, that's drinkagz.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, in the sodium, magnesium, and potassium, in the sodium, magnesium, and potassium, in the correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper correct amounts, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure in water makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of Element in about 16 to 32 one packet of Element in about 16 to 32 one packet of Element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in ounces of water when I first wake up in the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also first thing in the morning. I'll also drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the great tasting flavors. I love the raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. raspberry. I love the citrus flavor. Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition Right now, Element has a limited edition lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely lemonade flavor that is absolutely delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one delicious. I hate to say that I love one more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this more than all the others, but this lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with lemonade flavor is right up there with my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is my favorite other one, which is raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't raspberry or watermelon. Again, I can't pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. pick just one flavor. I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklelmnt.com/huberman spelled drinklelmnt.com/huberman spelled drinklelmnt.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. a purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. real quick question and then um more real quick question and then um more real quick question and then um more about what we're just discussing. You about what we're just discussing. You about what we're just discussing. You mentioned six lifts and you rattled them mentioned six lifts and you rattled them mentioned six lifts and you rattled them off very fast. I caught them. People off very fast. I caught them. People off very fast. I caught them. People can slow it down, but yeah, I heard can slow it down, but yeah, I heard can slow it down, but yeah, I heard squat or hip hinge in there. Could you squat or hip hinge in there. Could you squat or hip hinge in there. Could you list off the six things that you list off the six things that you list off the six things that you consider and I realize there are many consider and I realize there are many consider and I realize there are many more exercises, but what are the many more exercises, but what are the many more exercises, but what are the six that you listed off? six that you listed off? six that you listed off? &gt;&gt; My top six are squats, bench press, &gt;&gt; My top six are squats, bench press, &gt;&gt; My top six are squats, bench press, deadlifts, &gt;&gt; military press, chin-ups, and hip &gt;&gt; military press, chin-ups, and hip &gt;&gt; military press, chin-ups, and hip thrusts. Great. thrusts. Great. thrusts. Great. &gt;&gt; And if you do those six lifts, so it's &gt;&gt; And if you do those six lifts, so it's &gt;&gt; And if you do those six lifts, so it's like I loved powerlifting, but if you like I loved powerlifting, but if you like I loved powerlifting, but if you just did the three lifts, your shoulders just did the three lifts, your shoulders just did the three lifts, your shoulders might not be maximally developed. Your might not be maximally developed. Your might not be maximally developed. Your lats might not max. So you might be lats might not max. So you might be lats might not max. So you might be leaving some glute some room for glute leaving some glute some room for glute leaving some glute some room for glute growth on the table. Um, and so this, in growth on the table. Um, and so this, in growth on the table. Um, and so this, in my opinion, you're going to develop all my opinion, you're going to develop all my opinion, you're going to develop all your muscles with these six lifts. your muscles with these six lifts. your muscles with these six lifts. &gt;&gt; Squat, bench press, deadlift, military &gt;&gt; Squat, bench press, deadlift, military &gt;&gt; Squat, bench press, deadlift, military press, which is overhead press, which is overhead press, which is overhead press, &gt;&gt; overhead press, &gt;&gt; overhead press, &gt;&gt; overhead press, &gt;&gt; could be standing, could be seated, &gt;&gt; could be standing, could be seated, &gt;&gt; could be standing, could be seated, front of, you know, etc. then chin and front of, you know, etc. then chin and front of, you know, etc. then chin and hip thrust and there could be and hip thrust and there could be and hip thrust and there could be and variations of those variations of those variations of those &gt;&gt; all the variations of those but &gt;&gt; all the variations of those but &gt;&gt; all the variations of those but &gt;&gt; let me tell you a lesson I learned in &gt;&gt; let me tell you a lesson I learned in &gt;&gt; let me tell you a lesson I learned in 2020 we have the quarantine right we're 2020 we have the quarantine right we're 2020 we have the quarantine right we're all so bored all so bored all so bored &gt;&gt; and stressed we're bored and stressed &gt;&gt; and stressed we're bored and stressed &gt;&gt; and stressed we're bored and stressed &gt;&gt; I have a gym in San Diego and it's like &gt;&gt; I have a gym in San Diego and it's like &gt;&gt; I have a gym in San Diego and it's like I remember like week one of the I remember like week one of the I remember like week one of the quarantine I'm like okay I can do this I quarantine I'm like okay I can do this I quarantine I'm like okay I can do this I I'm lucky I have a gym I can go to the I'm lucky I have a gym I can go to the I'm lucky I have a gym I can go to the gym I don't have to do these silly gym I don't have to do these silly gym I don't have to do these silly bodyweight workouts that we're telling bodyweight workouts that we're telling bodyweight workouts that we're telling everyone to do. I can actually still use everyone to do. I can actually still use everyone to do. I can actually still use all the machines and the free weights. all the machines and the free weights. all the machines and the free weights. And I had my client Algra call me, And I had my client Algra call me, And I had my client Algra call me, "Coach, you know me. I'm going to go "Coach, you know me. I'm going to go "Coach, you know me. I'm going to go crazy. You know, my mental health. I crazy. You know, my mental health. I crazy. You know, my mental health. I have to be lifting weights." I'm like, have to be lifting weights." I'm like, have to be lifting weights." I'm like, "Well, come to the gym with me. Who's "Well, come to the gym with me. Who's "Well, come to the gym with me. Who's going to know?" And then, you know, going to know?" And then, you know, going to know?" And then, you know, California was pretty hardcore. But I'm California was pretty hardcore. But I'm California was pretty hardcore. But I'm like, I don't want my, you know, I know like, I don't want my, you know, I know like, I don't want my, you know, I know it was like a this is a sensitive topic it was like a this is a sensitive topic it was like a this is a sensitive topic because people were dying back then. How because people were dying back then. How because people were dying back then. How tragic. But I'm a very social person. tragic. But I'm a very social person. tragic. But I'm a very social person. And I'm like, "All right, I'm going to And I'm like, "All right, I'm going to And I'm like, "All right, I'm going to let my clients come and train with me." let my clients come and train with me." let my clients come and train with me." Well, long story short, 2020 was, sad Well, long story short, 2020 was, sad Well, long story short, 2020 was, sad enough, probably the best year of all of enough, probably the best year of all of enough, probably the best year of all of our lives. We'll say it was the best our lives. We'll say it was the best our lives. We'll say it was the best year. We lifted weights all day long year. We lifted weights all day long year. We lifted weights all day long because you didn't have to, you weren't because you didn't have to, you weren't because you didn't have to, you weren't so focused on your career back then and so focused on your career back then and so focused on your career back then and posting to social media. You were just posting to social media. You were just posting to social media. You were just trying to survive each day and you trying to survive each day and you trying to survive each day and you weren't even allowed to post on social weren't even allowed to post on social weren't even allowed to post on social media about like your workouts and stuff media about like your workouts and stuff media about like your workouts and stuff because you weren't supposed to be in a because you weren't supposed to be in a because you weren't supposed to be in a gym. So my clients would come to me for gym. So my clients would come to me for gym. So my clients would come to me for 2, three hours a day, six days a 2, three hours a day, six days a 2, three hours a day, six days a week. I was in the gym all day long. And week. I was in the gym all day long. And week. I was in the gym all day long. And all of a sudden, I'm like, Jesus, my all of a sudden, I'm like, Jesus, my all of a sudden, I'm like, Jesus, my clients are getting so freaking strong. clients are getting so freaking strong. clients are getting so freaking strong. They're insane right now. They're so They're insane right now. They're so They're insane right now. They're so strong. So that's when I thought up the strong. So that's when I thought up the strong. So that's when I thought up the idea of strong lifting. It's like idea of strong lifting. It's like idea of strong lifting. It's like powerlifting is the three lifts. Strong powerlifting is the three lifts. Strong powerlifting is the three lifts. Strong lifting is the six lifts. Those six lifting is the six lifts. Those six lifting is the six lifts. Those six lifts I just mentioned. We're going to lifts I just mentioned. We're going to lifts I just mentioned. We're going to start competing. And I did this like start competing. And I did this like start competing. And I did this like psychological trick where I'd have my psychological trick where I'd have my psychological trick where I'd have my computer up and I'd have the spreadsheet computer up and I'd have the spreadsheet computer up and I'd have the spreadsheet and I'd have all my clients names and I'd have all my clients names and I'd have all my clients names and all their strength and they'd start and all their strength and they'd start and all their strength and they'd start looking because I gave awards out like looking because I gave awards out like looking because I gave awards out like the so if you got the absolute best or the so if you got the absolute best or the so if you got the absolute best or the relative best strength divided by the relative best strength divided by the relative best strength divided by body weight at any lift and then we had body weight at any lift and then we had body weight at any lift and then we had the total lift and then we had strongest the total lift and then we had strongest the total lift and then we had strongest upper body, strongest lower body, upper body, strongest lower body, upper body, strongest lower body, strongest presser which were squats, strongest presser which were squats, strongest presser which were squats, military and bench, strongest puller military and bench, strongest puller military and bench, strongest puller which was chin-ups and um you know which was chin-ups and um you know which was chin-ups and um you know deadlifts. So I strongest lower body, deadlifts. So I strongest lower body, deadlifts. So I strongest lower body, strongest upper body. We could mix it strongest upper body. We could mix it strongest upper body. We could mix it around. I had like 55 awards I'd give around. I had like 55 awards I'd give around. I had like 55 awards I'd give out. But the point was the women out. But the point was the women out. But the point was the women would go like my clients like Amanda would go like my clients like Amanda would go like my clients like Amanda would be like Cararly just hit a PR would be like Cararly just hit a PR would be like Cararly just hit a PR I got to be her. Like they got I got to be her. Like they got I got to be her. Like they got competitive with it. And so competitive with it. And so competitive with it. And so &gt;&gt; were they training these every single &gt;&gt; were they training these every single &gt;&gt; were they training these every single day of those six days per week? day of those six days per week? day of those six days per week? &gt;&gt; No, I would say we did kind of like the &gt;&gt; No, I would say we did kind of like the &gt;&gt; No, I would say we did kind of like the lower upper lower upper lower because lower upper lower upper lower because lower upper lower upper lower because they wanted to come in every day. Hey, they wanted to come in every day. Hey, they wanted to come in every day. Hey, they were bored to death. So, we'd have they were bored to death. So, we'd have they were bored to death. So, we'd have three lower body days and we would do three lower body days and we would do three lower body days and we would do probably a variation of each, but you probably a variation of each, but you probably a variation of each, but you some days it would be like we're trying some days it would be like we're trying some days it would be like we're trying to hit squat really hard. Some days to hit squat really hard. Some days to hit squat really hard. Some days we're trying to deadlift hard. You can't we're trying to deadlift hard. You can't we're trying to deadlift hard. You can't squat deadlift and you could hip thrust squat deadlift and you could hip thrust squat deadlift and you could hip thrust hard three times a week. That works you hard three times a week. That works you hard three times a week. That works you in the short the squeeze position. It in the short the squeeze position. It in the short the squeeze position. It doesn't beat you up as much. But as we doesn't beat you up as much. But as we doesn't beat you up as much. But as we started getting stronger at deadlifts, started getting stronger at deadlifts, started getting stronger at deadlifts, we realized some things. We were doing we realized some things. We were doing we realized some things. We were doing touch and go, meaning you bounce the touch and go, meaning you bounce the touch and go, meaning you bounce the weight up. You don't reset. You don't weight up. You don't reset. You don't weight up. You don't reset. You don't set the weight down, reset it, then lift set the weight down, reset it, then lift set the weight down, reset it, then lift it up. You're stronger when you do touch it up. You're stronger when you do touch it up. You're stronger when you do touch and go compared to reset reps. But I and go compared to reset reps. But I and go compared to reset reps. But I remember my client Ashley Hodgej hits remember my client Ashley Hodgej hits remember my client Ashley Hodgej hits 315 for 18 reps. And like Dominique gets 315 for 18 reps. And like Dominique gets 315 for 18 reps. And like Dominique gets it 315 for 11 reps. And and it's the it 315 for 11 reps. And and it's the it 315 for 11 reps. And and it's the environment is crazy. We have their PR environment is crazy. We have their PR environment is crazy. We have their PR song going on. You know, what song do song going on. You know, what song do song going on. You know, what song do you want to hear? It's it's it's, you want to hear? It's it's it's, you want to hear? It's it's it's, you know, blaring it at max volume. and you know, blaring it at max volume. and you know, blaring it at max volume. and you have 10, 20 of your lifting partners, have 10, 20 of your lifting partners, have 10, 20 of your lifting partners, your colleagues around going, "Come on, your colleagues around going, "Come on, your colleagues around going, "Come on, you got it. Come on." The the videos you got it. Come on." The the videos you got it. Come on." The the videos back then were crazy. And they're back then were crazy. And they're back then were crazy. And they're hitting these crazy PRs. And then they hitting these crazy PRs. And then they hitting these crazy PRs. And then they say to me, "Coach, I don't know. Cool. I say to me, "Coach, I don't know. Cool. I say to me, "Coach, I don't know. Cool. I set a deadlift PR, a touchandgo PR, and set a deadlift PR, a touchandgo PR, and set a deadlift PR, a touchandgo PR, and then I'm sore for my next week and a then I'm sore for my next week and a then I'm sore for my next week and a half is shot." It can take when you're half is shot." It can take when you're half is shot." It can take when you're really training that kind of really training that kind of really training that kind of psychological arousal when you're psychological arousal when you're psychological arousal when you're training that hard and doing like some training that hard and doing like some training that hard and doing like some lifts like that hack squat you have lifts like that hack squat you have lifts like that hack squat you have at your place. It's it's more at your place. It's it's more at your place. It's it's more horizontal. You can keep going with it. horizontal. You can keep going with it. horizontal. You can keep going with it. If I'm there going, "Come on, Andrew. If I'm there going, "Come on, Andrew. If I'm there going, "Come on, Andrew. You got this. Keep going." You get you You got this. Keep going." You get you You got this. Keep going." You get you get in some zone. There's some lifts get in some zone. There's some lifts get in some zone. There's some lifts where you can just keep going and then where you can just keep going and then where you can just keep going and then it annihilates you so bad your knees are it annihilates you so bad your knees are it annihilates you so bad your knees are sore for a week. So, we kind of realized sore for a week. So, we kind of realized sore for a week. So, we kind of realized then we're not going to train with that. then we're not going to train with that. then we're not going to train with that. We're not going to yell in each other. We're not going to yell in each other. We're not going to yell in each other. We're not going to train with music. It We're not going to train with music. It We're not going to train with music. It beats you up too much. We're not going beats you up too much. We're not going beats you up too much. We're not going to do touchand go. We're going to do to do touchand go. We're going to do to do touchand go. We're going to do reset reps. And we're going to do lower reset reps. And we're going to do lower reset reps. And we're going to do lower reps with stricter form because they reps with stricter form because they reps with stricter form because they beat you up too much. So, we learned beat you up too much. So, we learned beat you up too much. So, we learned during the when we were training for it, during the when we were training for it, during the when we were training for it, we learned some stuff can beat you up we learned some stuff can beat you up we learned some stuff can beat you up too much. And you don't know that until too much. And you don't know that until too much. And you don't know that until you've hit it. You till you've worked you've hit it. You till you've worked you've hit it. You till you've worked that hard and you got really strong. that hard and you got really strong. that hard and you got really strong. Most of the listeners, you know, Ashley Most of the listeners, you know, Ashley Most of the listeners, you know, Ashley Hodgej weighed 130 pounds and hit 315 Hodgej weighed 130 pounds and hit 315 Hodgej weighed 130 pounds and hit 315 for 18. Now she's even stronger. But you for 18. Now she's even stronger. But you for 18. Now she's even stronger. But you don't, most people never train that don't, most people never train that don't, most people never train that hard. Most people need to train harder. hard. Most people need to train harder. hard. Most people need to train harder. Then there's the category that people Then there's the category that people Then there's the category that people who train too hard. What we now know is who train too hard. What we now know is who train too hard. What we now know is that um that Arthur Jones back in the that um that Arthur Jones back in the that um that Arthur Jones back in the day, the Mike Mener approach hit day, the Mike Mener approach hit day, the Mike Mener approach hit once all out set to failure. That once all out set to failure. That once all out set to failure. That probably is the most efficient way to probably is the most efficient way to probably is the most efficient way to train, the most economical way to train. train, the most economical way to train. train, the most economical way to train. You're in the gym, you can be in the gym You're in the gym, you can be in the gym You're in the gym, you can be in the gym 45 minutes twice a week and make good 45 minutes twice a week and make good 45 minutes twice a week and make good gains. The problem is it leads to gains. The problem is it leads to gains. The problem is it leads to injuries over time if you don't swap injuries over time if you don't swap injuries over time if you don't swap rotate the exercise and you don't have rotate the exercise and you don't have rotate the exercise and you don't have to perform every set to failure. In to perform every set to failure. In to perform every set to failure. In fact, there's some evidence now emerging fact, there's some evidence now emerging fact, there's some evidence now emerging that you can get just as much that you can get just as much that you can get just as much hypertrophy, similar strength gains, but like you similar strength gains, but like you similar strength gains, but like you might want to leave a rep or two in the might want to leave a rep or two in the might want to leave a rep or two in the tank and do a little more volume. So, tank and do a little more volume. So, tank and do a little more volume. So, everything's very nuanced. But when I everything's very nuanced. But when I everything's very nuanced. But when I moved away from San Diego, I moved to moved away from San Diego, I moved to moved away from San Diego, I moved to Vegas. Um, my now my squad is left to Vegas. Um, my now my squad is left to Vegas. Um, my now my squad is left to train on their own. Well, I was always train on their own. Well, I was always train on their own. Well, I was always there to watch them, you know, and so if there to watch them, you know, and so if there to watch them, you know, and so if I'm training you, Andrew, and if I'm training you, Andrew, and if I'm training you, Andrew, and you're like, "Uh, coach, my low back you're like, "Uh, coach, my low back you're like, "Uh, coach, my low back feels a little off." And then I'm go, feels a little off." And then I'm go, feels a little off." And then I'm go, "Okay, we're not deadlifting today." Or "Okay, we're not deadlifting today." Or "Okay, we're not deadlifting today." Or if you're like, "My my knee feels weird if you're like, "My my knee feels weird if you're like, "My my knee feels weird today." Okay, we're not going to squat today." Okay, we're not going to squat today." Okay, we're not going to squat today. We're going to do this instead. today. We're going to do this instead. today. We're going to do this instead. I'm there to swap it out. But if I'm there to swap it out. But if I'm there to swap it out. But if I'm not there and you push yourself through not there and you push yourself through not there and you push yourself through it and you do that for a few weeks, now it and you do that for a few weeks, now it and you do that for a few weeks, now it becomes a chronic problem and it becomes a chronic problem and it becomes a chronic problem and it takes a long time to go away. So now my takes a long time to go away. So now my takes a long time to go away. So now my clients are getting with me not being clients are getting with me not being clients are getting with me not being there, they're getting injured more there, they're getting injured more there, they're getting injured more often. They start developing nagging low often. They start developing nagging low often. They start developing nagging low back pain and things like that. So now back pain and things like that. So now back pain and things like that. So now I've learned to I still love strong I've learned to I still love strong I've learned to I still love strong lifting, but we you need to you can't lifting, but we you need to you can't lifting, but we you need to you can't just keep getting stronger at the main just keep getting stronger at the main just keep getting stronger at the main barbell lifts week in week out. You've barbell lifts week in week out. You've barbell lifts week in week out. You've got to introduce more variety. You have got to introduce more variety. You have got to introduce more variety. You have to So we now cycle things around and we to So we now cycle things around and we to So we now cycle things around and we stray, but we still it's still about stray, but we still it's still about stray, but we still it's still about progressive overload, but we incorporate progressive overload, but we incorporate progressive overload, but we incorporate more machines, more like you said, more machines, more like you said, more machines, more like you said, overhead press. It could be dumbbells. overhead press. It could be dumbbells. overhead press. It could be dumbbells. It could be Smith machine. It could be It could be Smith machine. It could be It could be Smith machine. It could be barbell. It could be seated standing. barbell. It could be seated standing. barbell. It could be seated standing. But you can pick a lift like what Louis But you can pick a lift like what Louis But you can pick a lift like what Louis Simmons would do back in the day. You Simmons would do back in the day. You Simmons would do back in the day. You can pick a lift and get stronger at it can pick a lift and get stronger at it can pick a lift and get stronger at it for a few weeks, you know, for a month for a few weeks, you know, for a month for a few weeks, you know, for a month and then recycle it. So, we're always and then recycle it. So, we're always and then recycle it. So, we're always using progressive overload, but you using progressive overload, but you using progressive overload, but you can't always just go set alltime PRs can't always just go set alltime PRs can't always just go set alltime PRs every week in the gym. It doesn't work every week in the gym. It doesn't work every week in the gym. It doesn't work that way. And that's the hardest thing that way. And that's the hardest thing that way. And that's the hardest thing to instill into people is this topic of to instill into people is this topic of to instill into people is this topic of progressive overload. What does that progressive overload. What does that progressive overload. What does that look like over the long haul? What does look like over the long haul? What does look like over the long haul? What does it look like over a 30-year lifting it look like over a 30-year lifting it look like over a 30-year lifting career? &gt;&gt; One of the things that I've done as the &gt;&gt; One of the things that I've done as the &gt;&gt; One of the things that I've done as the years have gone by in order to generate years have gone by in order to generate years have gone by in order to generate hypertrophy and strength increases, but hypertrophy and strength increases, but hypertrophy and strength increases, but not necessarily by always trying to add not necessarily by always trying to add not necessarily by always trying to add more weight is to change my mindset more weight is to change my mindset more weight is to change my mindset around lifting where after a couple of around lifting where after a couple of around lifting where after a couple of warm-ups, do the work sets. Um, warm-ups, do the work sets. Um, warm-ups, do the work sets. Um, typically for me that's two to four work typically for me that's two to four work typically for me that's two to four work sets per exercise. sets per exercise. sets per exercise. Generally, it's two, occasionally three, Generally, it's two, occasionally three, Generally, it's two, occasionally three, rarely four. But the idea is to make the rarely four. But the idea is to make the rarely four. But the idea is to make the final reps of each set, each work set final reps of each set, each work set final reps of each set, each work set that is as difficult as possible. It's that is as difficult as possible. It's that is as difficult as possible. It's completely transformed my progress in completely transformed my progress in completely transformed my progress in the last I would say two or three years, the last I would say two or three years, the last I would say two or three years, right? I'm making more progress in the right? I'm making more progress in the right? I'm making more progress in the last two or three years than I did in last two or three years than I did in last two or three years than I did in the previous eight despite having been the previous eight despite having been the previous eight despite having been at the resistance training thing for a at the resistance training thing for a at the resistance training thing for a long time and not really changed much long time and not really changed much long time and not really changed much else. So the idea is always trying to do So the idea is always trying to do So the idea is always trying to do repetitions in really good form. Always repetitions in really good form. Always repetitions in really good form. Always trying to isolate the muscles that I'm trying to isolate the muscles that I'm trying to isolate the muscles that I'm trying to target for compound movements. trying to target for compound movements. trying to target for compound movements. I'm not trying to isolate one muscle I'm not trying to isolate one muscle I'm not trying to isolate one muscle obviously, but to execute the movements obviously, but to execute the movements obviously, but to execute the movements properly in the case of compound properly in the case of compound properly in the case of compound movements. And then as the set gets movements. And then as the set gets movements. And then as the set gets harder and I can okay, you know, failure harder and I can okay, you know, failure harder and I can okay, you know, failure is approaching somewhere to stop is approaching somewhere to stop is approaching somewhere to stop counting repetitions and just focus counting repetitions and just focus counting repetitions and just focus extremely hard on the form and execution extremely hard on the form and execution extremely hard on the form and execution and the targeting of the muscles. So and the targeting of the muscles. So and the targeting of the muscles. So that a lot of times I don't even really that a lot of times I don't even really that a lot of times I don't even really know how many repetitions I did. Of know how many repetitions I did. Of know how many repetitions I did. Of course I know how much weight I'm moving course I know how much weight I'm moving course I know how much weight I'm moving but I just keep telling myself make it but I just keep telling myself make it but I just keep telling myself make it harder not easier. Make it harder not harder not easier. Make it harder not harder not easier. Make it harder not easier in the final two to three easier in the final two to three easier in the final two to three repetitions of the set. Sometimes I'll repetitions of the set. Sometimes I'll repetitions of the set. Sometimes I'll go to failure where I can't move the go to failure where I can't move the go to failure where I can't move the weight anymore. Sometimes I get close to weight anymore. Sometimes I get close to weight anymore. Sometimes I get close to it and just stop. And I've noticed that it and just stop. And I've noticed that it and just stop. And I've noticed that for me this has translated to better for me this has translated to better for me this has translated to better strength and hypertrophy increases, but strength and hypertrophy increases, but strength and hypertrophy increases, but also just better ability to execute the also just better ability to execute the also just better ability to execute the movements and far fewer little nagging movements and far fewer little nagging movements and far fewer little nagging aches and pains and things like that. aches and pains and things like that. aches and pains and things like that. So, it's been an inversion of the So, it's been an inversion of the So, it's been an inversion of the mindset of like comp, you know, complete mindset of like comp, you know, complete mindset of like comp, you know, complete x number of repetitions at a given x number of repetitions at a given x number of repetitions at a given weight, then increase it every couple weight, then increase it every couple weight, then increase it every couple weeks or every workout ideally. You weeks or every workout ideally. You weeks or every workout ideally. You know, my mindset is nope. I'm going into know, my mindset is nope. I'm going into know, my mindset is nope. I'm going into the gym to use the weights as a tool to the gym to use the weights as a tool to the gym to use the weights as a tool to generate adaptation, strength and generate adaptation, strength and generate adaptation, strength and hypertrophy increases, and I'm going to hypertrophy increases, and I'm going to hypertrophy increases, and I'm going to make each work set as hard as possible make each work set as hard as possible make each work set as hard as possible by making the final two or three reps by making the final two or three reps by making the final two or three reps harder and resist the temptation to move harder and resist the temptation to move harder and resist the temptation to move the weight just to complete more the weight just to complete more the weight just to complete more repetitions. I just like your repetitions. I just like your repetitions. I just like your reflections on that because I'm actually reflections on that because I'm actually reflections on that because I'm actually interested in getting better at what I'm interested in getting better at what I'm interested in getting better at what I'm doing and I imagine that is useful, but doing and I imagine that is useful, but doing and I imagine that is useful, but you're probably going to tell me that you're probably going to tell me that you're probably going to tell me that there are times when I should just there are times when I should just there are times when I should just actually try and max out the number of actually try and max out the number of actually try and max out the number of repetitions I can do. repetitions I can do. repetitions I can do. &gt;&gt; Well, I watched you lift yesterday and I &gt;&gt; Well, I watched you lift yesterday and I &gt;&gt; Well, I watched you lift yesterday and I and you do a good job of that. So, there and you do a good job of that. So, there and you do a good job of that. So, there are people who use sloppy technique and are people who use sloppy technique and are people who use sloppy technique and you come in and as a coach, you know, oh you come in and as a coach, you know, oh you come in and as a coach, you know, oh god, I got to really clean up the way god, I got to really clean up the way god, I got to really clean up the way they lift, their form, their tempo. Then they lift, their form, their tempo. Then they lift, their form, their tempo. Then there are people who are really there are people who are really there are people who are really strict and you're like, "Okay, you could strict and you're like, "Okay, you could strict and you're like, "Okay, you could benefit from benefit from benefit from um you typically with women, you'll see um you typically with women, you'll see um you typically with women, you'll see this with like people who are real big this with like people who are real big this with like people who are real big on yoga and Pilates and then they come on yoga and Pilates and then they come on yoga and Pilates and then they come to lift weights and they think to lift weights and they think to lift weights and they think everything needs to be so slow and everything needs to be so slow and everything needs to be so slow and controlled and um this is going to controlled and um this is going to controlled and um this is going to be a shock to the listeners. Tempo be a shock to the listeners. Tempo be a shock to the listeners. Tempo doesn't affect hypertrophy that much. doesn't affect hypertrophy that much. doesn't affect hypertrophy that much. Um, you can have like a one second Um, you can have like a one second Um, you can have like a one second repetition and an eight- second repetition and an eight- second repetition and an eight- second repetition and it builds muscle repetition and it builds muscle repetition and it builds muscle similarly &gt;&gt; really &gt;&gt; really &gt;&gt; really &gt;&gt; and it blows people's mind because they &gt;&gt; and it blows people's mind because they &gt;&gt; and it blows people's mind because they go what you don't have to control the go what you don't have to control the go what you don't have to control the negative. You can't just like let the negative. You can't just like let the negative. You can't just like let the weights crash down. But as long as weights crash down. But as long as weights crash down. But as long as you're you are controlling the weights you're you are controlling the weights you're you are controlling the weights on the way down also the lift matters. on the way down also the lift matters. on the way down also the lift matters. Some lifts are less range of motion. Some lifts are less range of motion. Some lifts are less range of motion. Like are you like I used to laugh at Like are you like I used to laugh at Like are you like I used to laugh at when I'd see people this is how you know when I'd see people this is how you know when I'd see people this is how you know who's really a coach and who's not. When who's really a coach and who's not. When who's really a coach and who's not. When you see them prescribe an exercise and you see them prescribe an exercise and you see them prescribe an exercise and you're like, "Do this with a two second you're like, "Do this with a two second you're like, "Do this with a two second concentric and 4 second eccentric, concentric and 4 second eccentric, concentric and 4 second eccentric, 6 seconds per rep, and it's like a 6 seconds per rep, and it's like a 6 seconds per rep, and it's like a shrug." Imagine what that would look shrug." Imagine what that would look shrug." Imagine what that would look like. Shrugs are like explosive, you like. Shrugs are like explosive, you like. Shrugs are like explosive, you know, 1 second per rep, if that, you know, 1 second per rep, if that, you know, 1 second per rep, if that, you know, some lifts are just quicker. And then if some lifts are just quicker. And then if some lifts are just quicker. And then if you see that they prescribed a set of if you see that they prescribed a set of if you see that they prescribed a set of 12 and it and it's a you know six second 12 and it and it's a you know six second 12 and it and it's a you know six second okay six times 12 is 72. You're that's a okay six times 12 is 72. You're that's a okay six times 12 is 72. You're that's a 72 second set and then you're telling 72 second set and then you're telling 72 second set and then you're telling them and it's a say it's a step up. So them and it's a say it's a step up. So them and it's a say it's a step up. So you got one leg then you go right in the you got one leg then you go right in the you got one leg then you go right in the next leg and then you're saying rest one next leg and then you're saying rest one next leg and then you're saying rest one minute. You'd be breathing so fast you minute. You'd be breathing so fast you minute. You'd be breathing so fast you would not have a productive second set. would not have a productive second set. would not have a productive second set. But I digress. I think tempo matters But I digress. I think tempo matters But I digress. I think tempo matters mostly for longevity. um if you're just mostly for longevity. um if you're just mostly for longevity. um if you're just like being very erratic and so explosive like being very erratic and so explosive like being very erratic and so explosive and not controlling the weight, you have and not controlling the weight, you have and not controlling the weight, you have a big better chance of getting injured a big better chance of getting injured a big better chance of getting injured over time. And so I think tempo is more over time. And so I think tempo is more over time. And so I think tempo is more important for hypertrophy in the long important for hypertrophy in the long important for hypertrophy in the long run by preventing injury. My clients, run by preventing injury. My clients, run by preventing injury. My clients, they will do hip thrust explosively and they will do hip thrust explosively and they will do hip thrust explosively and people will say you got to control the people will say you got to control the people will say you got to control the weight on the way down. Well, there weight on the way down. Well, there weight on the way down. Well, there aren't a lot of there aren't tons of aren't a lot of there aren't tons of aren't a lot of there aren't tons of studies on this topic, but it appears studies on this topic, but it appears studies on this topic, but it appears that they're wrong. You can explode up. that they're wrong. You can explode up. that they're wrong. You can explode up. You can lower it slowly. I mean, lower You can lower it slowly. I mean, lower You can lower it slowly. I mean, lower it quickly or you can go a lot lighter it quickly or you can go a lot lighter it quickly or you can go a lot lighter and really control it. I it makes more and really control it. I it makes more and really control it. I it makes more sense to me to try to explode uh at the sense to me to try to explode uh at the sense to me to try to explode uh at the bottom and like really I but you want to bottom and like really I but you want to bottom and like really I but you want to control it but you want to use that control it but you want to use that control it but you want to use that explosion because you're trying to explosion because you're trying to explosion because you're trying to create maximum force in the stretch create maximum force in the stretch create maximum force in the stretch position, the bottom position, but then position, the bottom position, but then position, the bottom position, but then you still want to use full range and you still want to use full range and you still want to use full range and control it the whole way and maybe have control it the whole way and maybe have control it the whole way and maybe have a brief little pause at the top. But uh a brief little pause at the top. But uh a brief little pause at the top. But uh that but yeah, people get too strict on that but yeah, people get too strict on that but yeah, people get too strict on tempo and those are the same types that tempo and those are the same types that tempo and those are the same types that when there you're so focused on that when there you're so focused on that when there you're so focused on tempo and form and feeling that you tempo and form and feeling that you tempo and form and feeling that you don't use progressive overload like what don't use progressive overload like what don't use progressive overload like what you just said, you don't even count it. you just said, you don't even count it. you just said, you don't even count it. You don't even know how many reps you You don't even know how many reps you You don't even know how many reps you did, but you saw results this way. So a did, but you saw results this way. So a did, but you saw results this way. So a lot of times people see results just lot of times people see results just lot of times people see results just from doing something different. Um, you from doing something different. Um, you from doing something different. Um, you and I talked about how when you were in and I talked about how when you were in and I talked about how when you were in your teens learning how to lift weights, your teens learning how to lift weights, your teens learning how to lift weights, you were influenced right away by Mike you were influenced right away by Mike you were influenced right away by Mike Mener. So, you right away learned how to Mener. So, you right away learned how to Mener. So, you right away learned how to get your all out of one hard set or get your all out of one hard set or get your all out of one hard set or like, you know, low volume, low volume like, you know, low volume, low volume like, you know, low volume, low volume training. I was the opposite. I learned training. I was the opposite. I learned training. I was the opposite. I learned from Arnold and Arnold and Mener were from Arnold and Arnold and Mener were from Arnold and Arnold and Mener were like opposing. They actually didn't get like opposing. They actually didn't get like opposing. They actually didn't get along in real life. So, I read Arnold's along in real life. So, I read Arnold's along in real life. So, I read Arnold's encyclopedia and I'm like, I got to do encyclopedia and I'm like, I got to do encyclopedia and I'm like, I got to do all this volume. So I did high volume all this volume. So I did high volume all this volume. So I did high volume training for eight years. When I was training for eight years. When I was training for eight years. When I was like 24 years old, I started doing low like 24 years old, I started doing low like 24 years old, I started doing low volume training one set to fill. It took volume training one set to fill. It took volume training one set to fill. It took me a while to get good at it. I sucked me a while to get good at it. I sucked me a while to get good at it. I sucked at it initially and then I you get at it initially and then I you get at it initially and then I you get really good at pushing one. It's a really good at pushing one. It's a really good at pushing one. It's a skill. You get so much better when skill. You get so much better when skill. You get so much better when you're only doing one set. You get you're only doing one set. You get you're only doing one set. You get really good at getting your all out of really good at getting your all out of really good at getting your all out of that one set. You mentioned that then that one set. You mentioned that then that one set. You mentioned that then you saw good results realizing I can you saw good results realizing I can you saw good results realizing I can benefit from more volume doing more benefit from more volume doing more benefit from more volume doing more sets. Same with when you said, "I'm sets. Same with when you said, "I'm sets. Same with when you said, "I'm going to focus on making the last reps going to focus on making the last reps going to focus on making the last reps harder, not using momentum or body harder, not using momentum or body harder, not using momentum or body English to squeeze out a couple more to English to squeeze out a couple more to English to squeeze out a couple more to make it easier." And you definitely see make it easier." And you definitely see make it easier." And you definitely see gains that way, but it's these it's this gains that way, but it's these it's this gains that way, but it's these it's this concept where something that can get you concept where something that can get you concept where something that can get you gains, then it can it can limit you gains, then it can it can limit you gains, then it can it can limit you eventually because your focus is now on. eventually because your focus is now on. eventually because your focus is now on. So, you're relying on your mind. You're So, you're relying on your mind. You're So, you're relying on your mind. You're relying now on your mind to use relying now on your mind to use relying now on your mind to use progressive overload, meaning you're not progressive overload, meaning you're not progressive overload, meaning you're not going to progress with weights. you're going to progress with weights. you're going to progress with weights. you're going to try to produce increasing going to try to produce increasing going to try to produce increasing amounts of muscle force through a mind amounts of muscle force through a mind amounts of muscle force through a mind muscle connection, through an internal muscle connection, through an internal muscle connection, through an internal um attentional focus. And you and your um attentional focus. And you and your um attentional focus. And you and your you lie to yourself. It's the same as if you lie to yourself. It's the same as if you lie to yourself. It's the same as if I don't have my log book in front I don't have my log book in front I don't have my log book in front of me and I go, um yeah, I can I hit of me and I go, um yeah, I can I hit of me and I go, um yeah, I can I hit 3:15 for six last time and then I get it 3:15 for six last time and then I get it 3:15 for six last time and then I get it for se I get it for seven. I'm like, for se I get it for seven. I'm like, for se I get it for seven. I'm like, yeah. And then I and I and then I get my yeah. And then I and I and then I get my yeah. And then I and I and then I get my book and I'm like, "Oh my god, I hit my book and I'm like, "Oh my god, I hit my book and I'm like, "Oh my god, I hit it for eight. I forgot. I could have it for eight. I forgot. I could have it for eight. I forgot. I could have probably gotten more." That's what I probably gotten more." That's what I probably gotten more." That's what I like about taking notes and writing it like about taking notes and writing it like about taking notes and writing it down. You lie to yourself and you limit down. You lie to yourself and you limit down. You lie to yourself and you limit yourself and you're like, "God, if I yourself and you're like, "God, if I yourself and you're like, "God, if I knew somehow if I knew that I had hitten knew somehow if I knew that I had hitten knew somehow if I knew that I had hitten I had to hit eight before, I probably I had to hit eight before, I probably I had to hit eight before, I probably could have hit nine." But the set still could have hit nine." But the set still could have hit nine." But the set still felt hard. But we're capable a lot more. felt hard. But we're capable a lot more. felt hard. But we're capable a lot more. But you got to be reminded. That's why But you got to be reminded. That's why But you got to be reminded. That's why for my clients, I give them autonomy. for my clients, I give them autonomy. for my clients, I give them autonomy. So, say I'm we're doing hip thrust first So, say I'm we're doing hip thrust first So, say I'm we're doing hip thrust first and they say, "Coach, what should I and they say, "Coach, what should I and they say, "Coach, what should I do?" I want them involved in on it. It do?" I want them involved in on it. It do?" I want them involved in on it. It just I think things work better when you just I think things work better when you just I think things work better when you get them involved. So, go, "Okay, which get them involved. So, go, "Okay, which get them involved. So, go, "Okay, which hip thrust do you want to do?" At my hip thrust do you want to do?" At my hip thrust do you want to do?" At my gym, we do rotisserie hip thrust, ramp gym, we do rotisserie hip thrust, ramp gym, we do rotisserie hip thrust, ramp hip thrust, and thruster pro. You won't hip thrust, and thruster pro. You won't hip thrust, and thruster pro. You won't know what those mean, but which hip know what those mean, but which hip know what those mean, but which hip thrust do you want to do? Or say it's thrust do you want to do? Or say it's thrust do you want to do? Or say it's say they're doing a squat. Do you want say they're doing a squat. Do you want say they're doing a squat. Do you want to use the glute builder squat machine to use the glute builder squat machine to use the glute builder squat machine because it's really good? or do you want because it's really good? or do you want because it's really good? or do you want to do um a Smith machine squat? Do you to do um a Smith machine squat? Do you to do um a Smith machine squat? Do you want to do a barbell squat, box squat? want to do a barbell squat, box squat? want to do a barbell squat, box squat? Do you want to use the T-bell and do the Do you want to use the T-bell and do the Do you want to use the T-bell and do the squat that way? Which squat do you the squat that way? Which squat do you the squat that way? Which squat do you want to do? And I let them choose. And want to do? And I let them choose. And want to do? And I let them choose. And they go, um uh let's do let's do a they go, um uh let's do let's do a they go, um uh let's do let's do a rotisser hip th or let's do a T-bell rotisser hip th or let's do a T-bell rotisser hip th or let's do a T-bell squat. All right, what's your what are squat. All right, what's your what are squat. All right, what's your what are your records? And then they say, well, your records? And then they say, well, your records? And then they say, well, I've done, you know, my record with the I've done, you know, my record with the I've done, you know, my record with the T-bell squat is I've done 100 for 16. T-bell squat is I've done 100 for 16. T-bell squat is I've done 100 for 16. And I've done 125 cuz we load up 25 And I've done 125 cuz we load up 25 And I've done 125 cuz we load up 25 pound plates on that. I they are very pound plates on that. I they are very pound plates on that. I they are very involved in the process and I go, "Okay, involved in the process and I go, "Okay, involved in the process and I go, "Okay, which do you want to beat today?" And I which do you want to beat today?" And I which do you want to beat today?" And I give them some autonomy. So yes, a lot give them some autonomy. So yes, a lot give them some autonomy. So yes, a lot of my the coaches listening to this of my the coaches listening to this of my the coaches listening to this would say, "So you only have them go would say, "So you only have them go would say, "So you only have them go hard on one set. You should have them go hard on one set. You should have them go hard on one set. You should have them go do three or four sets and then the last do three or four sets and then the last do three or four sets and then the last set go hard on." But that can work well. set go hard on." But that can work well. set go hard on." But that can work well. And there's also some evidence that you And there's also some evidence that you And there's also some evidence that you can trade off volume and effort. can trade off volume and effort. can trade off volume and effort. Meaning, if you left three reps in the Meaning, if you left three reps in the Meaning, if you left three reps in the tank but did an extra two sets, that tank but did an extra two sets, that tank but did an extra two sets, that might be equal to doing a couple less might be equal to doing a couple less might be equal to doing a couple less sets but go training to failure. There's sets but go training to failure. There's sets but go training to failure. There's some evidence that, but I'm just saying some evidence that, but I'm just saying some evidence that, but I'm just saying my system, I want them focused on my system, I want them focused on my system, I want them focused on progressive overload. And when they have progressive overload. And when they have progressive overload. And when they have autonomy and they say, "Okay, coach, I autonomy and they say, "Okay, coach, I autonomy and they say, "Okay, coach, I think I want to go for the 125 for a think I want to go for the 125 for a think I want to go for the 125 for a seven. I want to get eight." All right, seven. I want to get eight." All right, seven. I want to get eight." All right, let's do it. And then you're focused on let's do it. And then you're focused on let's do it. And then you're focused on it and then you go all out. You hit it and then you go all out. You hit it and then you go all out. You hit eight. Great. They set a PR. Now I'm not eight. Great. They set a PR. Now I'm not eight. Great. They set a PR. Now I'm not going to follow them through the rest of going to follow them through the rest of going to follow them through the rest of the workout. Now get your volume in, but the workout. Now get your volume in, but the workout. Now get your volume in, but you achieved the goal. Everything else you achieved the goal. Everything else you achieved the goal. Everything else is icing on the cake. You achieved that is icing on the cake. You achieved that is icing on the cake. You achieved that goal. People don't understand how hard goal. People don't understand how hard goal. People don't understand how hard it is to continue use, you know, to keep it is to continue use, you know, to keep it is to continue use, you know, to keep using progressive. And most people stop using progressive. And most people stop using progressive. And most people stop after a year or two. They just quit after a year or two. They just quit after a year or two. They just quit paying attention. I think you've done paying attention. I think you've done paying attention. I think you've done that because we get older and you're that because we get older and you're that because we get older and you're like, uh, I can still get awesome like, uh, I can still get awesome like, uh, I can still get awesome workouts. I can still improve my workouts. I can still improve my workouts. I can still improve my physique. But what you're talking about physique. But what you're talking about physique. But what you're talking about is using my muscle connection to produce is using my muscle connection to produce is using my muscle connection to produce increasing muscle force m putting more increasing muscle force m putting more increasing muscle force m putting more mechanical tension on the muscles mechanical tension on the muscles mechanical tension on the muscles through your mind. But your mind plays through your mind. But your mind plays through your mind. But your mind plays tricks on you. It's not objective. What tricks on you. It's not objective. What tricks on you. It's not objective. What is objective is the load on the bar. But is objective is the load on the bar. But is objective is the load on the bar. But that can play tricks on you too where that can play tricks on you too where that can play tricks on you too where you're setting PRs but using sloppier you're setting PRs but using sloppier you're setting PRs but using sloppier form, not controlling it, using a form, not controlling it, using a form, not controlling it, using a different tempo or a different range of different tempo or a different range of different tempo or a different range of motion. So that happens too. That's why motion. So that happens too. That's why motion. So that happens too. That's why you got to have this yin and yang, the you got to have this yin and yang, the you got to have this yin and yang, the external and the internal, like the external and the internal, like the external and the internal, like the progressive overload with the mind the progressive overload with the mind the progressive overload with the mind muscle connection. Those two are the yin muscle connection. Those two are the yin muscle connection. Those two are the yin and yang that keep each other in check. and yang that keep each other in check. and yang that keep each other in check. And those two pathways are necessary to And those two pathways are necessary to And those two pathways are necessary to optimize hypertrophy over the long run. optimize hypertrophy over the long run. optimize hypertrophy over the long run. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I definitely pursue progressive &gt;&gt; Yeah, I definitely pursue progressive &gt;&gt; Yeah, I definitely pursue progressive overload still. I should have been uh overload still. I should have been uh overload still. I should have been uh clear about this. clear about this. clear about this. &gt;&gt; What you're describing is using &gt;&gt; What you're describing is using &gt;&gt; What you're describing is using progressive overload. You're just progressive overload. You're just progressive overload. You're just keeping the same weight. Mhm. keeping the same weight. Mhm. keeping the same weight. Mhm. &gt;&gt; But I like to I used to make I remember &gt;&gt; But I like to I used to make I remember &gt;&gt; But I like to I used to make I remember writing an article like 10 different writing an article like 10 different writing an article like 10 different ways you can progressive overload and ways you can progressive overload and ways you can progressive overload and that's just confusing people. No, that's just confusing people. No, that's just confusing people. No, there's two main ways to progressive there's two main ways to progressive there's two main ways to progressive overload. You use the same weight for overload. You use the same weight for overload. You use the same weight for more reps or more weight for the same more reps or more weight for the same more reps or more weight for the same reps. But in a way you are using reps. But in a way you are using reps. But in a way you are using progressive overload because you're progressive overload because you're progressive overload because you're using the same weight not necessarily using the same weight not necessarily using the same weight not necessarily getting more reps but having more getting more reps but having more getting more reps but having more control over it which does produce more control over it which does produce more control over it which does produce more tension on the muscles and can lead to tension on the muscles and can lead to tension on the muscles and can lead to muscle growth over time. It's just it's muscle growth over time. It's just it's muscle growth over time. It's just it's not as objective. It requires you to not as objective. It requires you to not as objective. It requires you to come in fresh and work your hardest and come in fresh and work your hardest and come in fresh and work your hardest and you can there's no studies on this topic you can there's no studies on this topic you can there's no studies on this topic by the way. It would be cool to see one by the way. It would be cool to see one by the way. It would be cool to see one group focus on just on the numbers group focus on just on the numbers group focus on just on the numbers quantity and the other group focus just quantity and the other group focus just quantity and the other group focus just on the quality for a whole year and on the quality for a whole year and on the quality for a whole year and maybe in your first year you might tie maybe in your first year you might tie maybe in your first year you might tie but over the years like I don't know but over the years like I don't know but over the years like I don't know it's &gt;&gt; I'll tell you who I think will look &gt;&gt; I'll tell you who I think will look &gt;&gt; I'll tell you who I think will look better men and women. I think the people better men and women. I think the people better men and women. I think the people that focus on quality and that raises a that focus on quality and that raises a that focus on quality and that raises a new question which a new question which a new question which &gt;&gt; see I would disagree. I'd say the &gt;&gt; see I would disagree. I'd say the &gt;&gt; see I would disagree. I'd say the quantity group, but quantity group, but quantity group, but &gt;&gt; you mean just heavier for more reps? &gt;&gt; you mean just heavier for more reps? &gt;&gt; you mean just heavier for more reps? &gt;&gt; Either beating the reps or the load, &gt;&gt; Either beating the reps or the load, &gt;&gt; Either beating the reps or the load, &gt;&gt; but because I think people can get too &gt;&gt; but because I think people can get too &gt;&gt; but because I think people can get too caught up on caught up on caught up on &gt;&gt; quality to where they never go heavier &gt;&gt; quality to where they never go heavier &gt;&gt; quality to where they never go heavier and they're cool. You're and they're cool. You're and they're cool. You're &gt;&gt; Well, this is your this is your area of &gt;&gt; Well, this is your this is your area of &gt;&gt; Well, this is your this is your area of study. So, you would I trust your study. So, you would I trust your study. So, you would I trust your answer? &gt;&gt; People will agree with you on like it'll &gt;&gt; People will agree with you on like it'll &gt;&gt; People will agree with you on like it'll be divided. Um if you put up a be divided. Um if you put up a be divided. Um if you put up a poll, what do you guys think about this? poll, what do you guys think about this? poll, what do you guys think about this? you'd have 50% say quality and then 50% you'd have 50% say quality and then 50% you'd have 50% say quality and then 50% say quantity because the and over say quantity because the and over say quantity because the and over the long run quantity leads to injuries. the long run quantity leads to injuries. the long run quantity leads to injuries. And we don't talk about this enough And we don't talk about this enough And we don't talk about this enough because it's like the typical because it's like the typical because it's like the typical bros in their 20s that are like just bros in their 20s that are like just bros in their 20s that are like just squat, deadlift, and you know, okay, how squat, deadlift, and you know, okay, how squat, deadlift, and you know, okay, how does that pan out 30 years, 20 years does that pan out 30 years, 20 years does that pan out 30 years, 20 years from now when you've been, you know, from now when you've been, you know, from now when you've been, you know, lifting? You don't they don't even lifting? You don't they don't even lifting? You don't they don't even understand. They haven't gotten there. understand. They haven't gotten there. understand. They haven't gotten there. you have to have the nagging pains. You you have to have the nagging pains. You you have to have the nagging pains. You were like, "Ugh, can should I deadlift were like, "Ugh, can should I deadlift were like, "Ugh, can should I deadlift today or should I do, you know, single today or should I do, you know, single today or should I do, you know, single leg RDL's or like a seated leg curl?" I leg RDL's or like a seated leg curl?" I leg RDL's or like a seated leg curl?" I have a um uh a thought around the role have a um uh a thought around the role have a um uh a thought around the role of the gym and training and recovery as of the gym and training and recovery as of the gym and training and recovery as it relates to how one feels outside of it relates to how one feels outside of it relates to how one feels outside of the gym. Okay, I don't think I'm alone the gym. Okay, I don't think I'm alone the gym. Okay, I don't think I'm alone in this. Although I've never heard in this. Although I've never heard in this. Although I've never heard anyone bring this up as a kind of like anyone bring this up as a kind of like anyone bring this up as a kind of like formally introducing the topic, which is formally introducing the topic, which is formally introducing the topic, which is for many people, including myself, the for many people, including myself, the for many people, including myself, the reason I train three times a week, reason I train three times a week, reason I train three times a week, different body parts each time I train different body parts each time I train different body parts each time I train is because I also like to run. The other is because I also like to run. The other is because I also like to run. The other reason is I love to train, but after reason is I love to train, but after reason is I love to train, but after three or four days a week of resistance three or four days a week of resistance three or four days a week of resistance training, I'm not as excited to training, I'm not as excited to training, I'm not as excited to resistance train. I want to arrive in resistance train. I want to arrive in resistance train. I want to arrive in the gym excited to resistance train. the gym excited to resistance train. the gym excited to resistance train. I also have other things in my life and I also have other things in my life and I also have other things in my life and it's not just a matter of time. If I'm it's not just a matter of time. If I'm it's not just a matter of time. If I'm training with the kind of intensity and training with the kind of intensity and training with the kind of intensity and frequency to maximize hypertrophy, a lot frequency to maximize hypertrophy, a lot frequency to maximize hypertrophy, a lot of times I'm tired, you know, I need of times I'm tired, you know, I need of times I'm tired, you know, I need more a bit more sleep and I'm not going more a bit more sleep and I'm not going more a bit more sleep and I'm not going to get that sleep. I have a very to get that sleep. I have a very to get that sleep. I have a very full life. You know, I often say my full life. You know, I often say my full life. You know, I often say my dance card is very full and I think I'm dance card is very full and I think I'm dance card is very full and I think I'm not alone in this. So, I feel like for a not alone in this. So, I feel like for a not alone in this. So, I feel like for a lot of people, the ideal training lot of people, the ideal training lot of people, the ideal training frequency for them has something to do frequency for them has something to do frequency for them has something to do with yes, they want bigger glutes and with yes, they want bigger glutes and with yes, they want bigger glutes and yes, they want to be leaner and um yes, they want to be leaner and um yes, they want to be leaner and um yes, they're willing to work hard in the gym, they're willing to work hard in the gym, they're willing to work hard in the gym, but that they also have to acknowledge but that they also have to acknowledge but that they also have to acknowledge like the real life constraints. like the real life constraints. like the real life constraints. Like, how often are they um really able Like, how often are they um really able Like, how often are they um really able to train five days a week? Maybe in to train five days a week? Maybe in to train five days a week? Maybe in certain phases of the year they are, but certain phases of the year they are, but certain phases of the year they are, but I found to be very beneficial to kind of I found to be very beneficial to kind of I found to be very beneficial to kind of set a minimum of three workouts per set a minimum of three workouts per set a minimum of three workouts per week in the gym, resistance training, week in the gym, resistance training, week in the gym, resistance training, two or three cardio workouts per week, two or three cardio workouts per week, two or three cardio workouts per week, and then stay with that and adjust the and then stay with that and adjust the and then stay with that and adjust the intensity and do these various things intensity and do these various things intensity and do these various things that we're talking about so that I wake that we're talking about so that I wake that we're talking about so that I wake up in the morning feeling pretty fresh, up in the morning feeling pretty fresh, up in the morning feeling pretty fresh, so that I can focus when I work, so that so that I can focus when I work, so that so that I can focus when I work, so that I'm not, you know, dragging, and that I I'm not, you know, dragging, and that I I'm not, you know, dragging, and that I can, you know, like carry my luggage can, you know, like carry my luggage can, you know, like carry my luggage through the airport like I had to do the through the airport like I had to do the through the airport like I had to do the other without feeling like my body's other without feeling like my body's other without feeling like my body's going to explode in pain or something going to explode in pain or something going to explode in pain or something like that because at some point the gym like that because at some point the gym like that because at some point the gym for many people is the end point. But I for many people is the end point. But I for many people is the end point. But I think for far more people the gym is a think for far more people the gym is a think for far more people the gym is a tool to create a body that can do things tool to create a body that can do things tool to create a body that can do things in the outside world including feel in the outside world including feel in the outside world including feel refreshed. And so that's why when we refreshed. And so that's why when we refreshed. And so that's why when we started off today and you said, "Well, started off today and you said, "Well, started off today and you said, "Well, in principle, one could get away with in principle, one could get away with in principle, one could get away with training once per week, whole body, but training once per week, whole body, but training once per week, whole body, but you'd have to put so much intensity you'd have to put so much intensity you'd have to put so much intensity you'd probably feel like garbage for the you'd probably feel like garbage for the you'd probably feel like garbage for the next two or three days and then pretty next two or three days and then pretty next two or three days and then pretty good for the remainder of the week. good for the remainder of the week. good for the remainder of the week. Maybe divide that into like two or three Maybe divide that into like two or three Maybe divide that into like two or three workouts, right? Or this lower, upper, workouts, right? Or this lower, upper, workouts, right? Or this lower, upper, lower, upper, lower sounds great, but lower, upper, lower sounds great, but lower, upper, lower sounds great, but five days a week of training, even if five days a week of training, even if five days a week of training, even if it's, you know, varying the lifts, etc. it's, you know, varying the lifts, etc. it's, you know, varying the lifts, etc. Just even like commuting the same way to Just even like commuting the same way to Just even like commuting the same way to the gym. I don't want to sound overly the gym. I don't want to sound overly the gym. I don't want to sound overly lazy here, but again, people have stuff lazy here, but again, people have stuff lazy here, but again, people have stuff to do. It would be awesome if people to do. It would be awesome if people to do. It would be awesome if people would look at their schedule, I think, would look at their schedule, I think, would look at their schedule, I think, and say, you know, how many days a week and say, you know, how many days a week and say, you know, how many days a week can I go to the gym and really put real can I go to the gym and really put real can I go to the gym and really put real work into it, progressive overload, work into it, progressive overload, work into it, progressive overload, focus training, all these things. How focus training, all these things. How focus training, all these things. How much time can I really dedicate to that? much time can I really dedicate to that? much time can I really dedicate to that? And then backineer the ideal split and And then backineer the ideal split and And then backineer the ideal split and way to work out from there. Is that way to work out from there. Is that way to work out from there. Is that something that is seems I just want to something that is seems I just want to something that is seems I just want to check myself on this. I'm not proposing check myself on this. I'm not proposing check myself on this. I'm not proposing this as much as I just want your this as much as I just want your this as much as I just want your thoughts on this as a trainer who's thoughts on this as a trainer who's thoughts on this as a trainer who's trained so many people and including trained so many people and including trained so many people and including people who are not physique athletes and people who are not physique athletes and people who are not physique athletes and just like people who want to like and just like people who want to like and just like people who want to like have a great shaped body, be lean, um be have a great shaped body, be lean, um be have a great shaped body, be lean, um be strong, live a long time, feel awesome. strong, live a long time, feel awesome. strong, live a long time, feel awesome. &gt;&gt; Well, I think what you're talking about &gt;&gt; Well, I think what you're talking about &gt;&gt; Well, I think what you're talking about is so important. Like yesterday we were is so important. Like yesterday we were is so important. Like yesterday we were in your gym working out and you know you in your gym working out and you know you in your gym working out and you know you took a shower and came out in a you took a shower and came out in a you took a shower and came out in a towel peeled down. You have ripped abs. towel peeled down. You have ripped abs. towel peeled down. You have ripped abs. Some people don't know this about you. Some people don't know this about you. Some people don't know this about you. You look amazing. You're 49 years old. You look amazing. You're 49 years old. You look amazing. You're 49 years old. You've been lifting weights since you You've been lifting weights since you You've been lifting weights since you were 16. Same here. We've both been were 16. Same here. We've both been were 16. Same here. We've both been lifting weights for 33 years. We started lifting weights for 33 years. We started lifting weights for 33 years. We started when we were 16. We're both 49. You can when we were 16. We're both 49. You can when we were 16. We're both 49. You can learn a thing for a thing or two from learn a thing for a thing or two from learn a thing for a thing or two from us. You know why? Because we didn't us. You know why? Because we didn't us. You know why? Because we didn't fizzle out. You know, we didn't fizzle out. You know, we didn't fizzle out. You know, we didn't fizzle out over time. And that's what you out over time. And that's what you out over time. And that's what you get a lot of gung-ho people that are get a lot of gung-ho people that are get a lot of gung-ho people that are like train five, six days a week, spend like train five, six days a week, spend like train five, six days a week, spend two, three hours a day in the gym. They two, three hours a day in the gym. They two, three hours a day in the gym. They don't last. So, there's this what's best don't last. So, there's this what's best don't last. So, there's this what's best for short-term hypertrophy, what's for short-term hypertrophy, what's for short-term hypertrophy, what's optimal. You can we can geek out over optimal. You can we can geek out over optimal. You can we can geek out over what's optimal, but the main thing is what's optimal, but the main thing is what's optimal, but the main thing is what's going to keep you motivated. what's going to keep you motivated. what's going to keep you motivated. Also, you're not you're not going to if Also, you're not you're not going to if Also, you're not you're not going to if you train even training five days a if you train even training five days a if you train even training five days a week is tough. My my clients will week is tough. My my clients will week is tough. My my clients will typically have like typically on Friday typically have like typically on Friday typically have like typically on Friday if they hit it too hard on Monday and if they hit it too hard on Monday and if they hit it too hard on Monday and Wednesday and then they're trying to hit Wednesday and then they're trying to hit Wednesday and then they're trying to hit lower body on Friday and they're this lower body on Friday and they're this lower body on Friday and they're this happens to a lot of them. Coach, I'm happens to a lot of them. Coach, I'm happens to a lot of them. Coach, I'm beat down today. I'm just going to do beat down today. I'm just going to do beat down today. I'm just going to do kickbacks and abduction and keep it kickbacks and abduction and keep it kickbacks and abduction and keep it light. And I go, "That's fine." Guess light. And I go, "That's fine." Guess light. And I go, "That's fine." Guess what? They come back on Monday crushing what? They come back on Monday crushing what? They come back on Monday crushing it. &gt;&gt; They had to do a wimpy workout. Uh, and &gt;&gt; They had to do a wimpy workout. Uh, and &gt;&gt; They had to do a wimpy workout. Uh, and then they take Saturday and Sunday off. then they take Saturday and Sunday off. then they take Saturday and Sunday off. They come back again on Monday ready to They come back again on Monday ready to They come back again on Monday ready to rock and roll. You have to make rock and roll. You have to make rock and roll. You have to make adjustments when you're training adjustments when you're training adjustments when you're training frequently. When you're training one or frequently. When you're training one or frequently. When you're training one or two days a week, you don't have to make two days a week, you don't have to make two days a week, you don't have to make that many adjustments because you're that many adjustments because you're that many adjustments because you're recovered. The more frequently you recovered. The more frequently you recovered. The more frequently you train, the more adjustments you have to train, the more adjustments you have to train, the more adjustments you have to make. You have to autoregulate based on make. You have to autoregulate based on make. You have to autoregulate based on BOF feedback. meaning like you just got BOF feedback. meaning like you just got BOF feedback. meaning like you just got to listen to your body and stray to listen to your body and stray to listen to your body and stray from the plan. But what you're saying is from the plan. But what you're saying is from the plan. But what you're saying is you start feeling overwhelmed. You're you start feeling overwhelmed. You're you start feeling overwhelmed. You're not as psyched when you start trying to not as psyched when you start trying to not as psyched when you start trying to lift four or five times a week because lift four or five times a week because lift four or five times a week because you also like to be functional. You you also like to be functional. You you also like to be functional. You sprint, you run. You have a life and sprint, you run. You have a life and sprint, you run. You have a life and you've learned that three days a week is you've learned that three days a week is you've learned that three days a week is what the optimal frequency for you, you what the optimal frequency for you, you what the optimal frequency for you, you and your lifestyle. And you look and your lifestyle. And you look and your lifestyle. And you look amazing. And so you've figured that out. amazing. And so you've figured that out. amazing. And so you've figured that out. Most people don't ever figure that out. Most people don't ever figure that out. Most people don't ever figure that out. They don't think out. They just are They don't think out. They just are They don't think out. They just are these ro, you know, robots going through these ro, you know, robots going through these ro, you know, robots going through life taking and they don't think for life taking and they don't think for life taking and they don't think for themselves. And so that's what I themselves. And so that's what I themselves. And so that's what I encourage people. You're going to see encourage people. You're going to see encourage people. You're going to see way better results training two days a way better results training two days a way better results training two days a week, but you're psyched up, you're week, but you're psyched up, you're week, but you're psyched up, you're recovered, you're feeling, you want to, recovered, you're feeling, you want to, recovered, you're feeling, you want to, you're itching to go to the gym compared you're itching to go to the gym compared you're itching to go to the gym compared to if you train six times a week and to if you train six times a week and to if you train six times a week and you're always sore, you're beat up, you're always sore, you're beat up, you're always sore, you're beat up, you're dreading it, you don't use you're dreading it, you don't use you're dreading it, you don't use progressive oil, you just go through the progressive oil, you just go through the progressive oil, you just go through the motions and it's just to check off a box motions and it's just to check off a box motions and it's just to check off a box and you're not going to see many and you're not going to see many and you're not going to see many gains that way. So you're absolutely gains that way. So you're absolutely gains that way. So you're absolutely right that your psych I always say we right that your psych I always say we right that your psych I always say we talk about anatomy and physiology and we talk about anatomy and physiology and we talk about anatomy and physiology and we ignore the psych the psychology ignore the psych the psychology ignore the psych the psychology component. The psychological component component. The psychological component component. The psychological component is huge and that gets ignored and I try is huge and that gets ignored and I try is huge and that gets ignored and I try to help people tune into that as a as a to help people tune into that as a as a to help people tune into that as a as a coach and I try to stray from like I coach and I try to stray from like I coach and I try to stray from like I have my system but I've had great have my system but I've had great have my system but I've had great gains um you know like with people gains um you know like with people gains um you know like with people straying far from the norms. I remember straying far from the norms. I remember straying far from the norms. I remember this client Sammy I had in 20 2013 and this client Sammy I had in 20 2013 and this client Sammy I had in 20 2013 and I'm like she's the strongest one of the I'm like she's the strongest one of the I'm like she's the strongest one of the group. She I started training six bikini group. She I started training six bikini group. She I started training six bikini competitors all at once out of my I competitors all at once out of my I competitors all at once out of my I didn't even have a gym at that time. I didn't even have a gym at that time. I didn't even have a gym at that time. I trained them out of my sixth floor condo trained them out of my sixth floor condo trained them out of my sixth floor condo in Phoenix, Arizona. I smuggled in Phoenix, Arizona. I smuggled in Phoenix, Arizona. I smuggled equipment up to my sixth floor when equipment up to my sixth floor when equipment up to my sixth floor when the security guards were distracted and the security guards were distracted and the security guards were distracted and um and I had like you know six um and I had like you know six um and I had like you know six pieces of equipment and they got so pieces of equipment and they got so pieces of equipment and they got so strong. I think Sammy probably doubled strong. I think Sammy probably doubled strong. I think Sammy probably doubled her glute size in six months. But I'm her glute size in six months. But I'm her glute size in six months. But I'm like, every Mon I only train her twice a like, every Mon I only train her twice a like, every Mon I only train her twice a week, Monday, Thursday back then. And week, Monday, Thursday back then. And week, Monday, Thursday back then. And I'm like, every Thursday her workouts I'm like, every Thursday her workouts I'm like, every Thursday her workouts suck. And I'm like, oh my god, she's suck. And I'm like, oh my god, she's suck. And I'm like, oh my god, she's gaining so much strength, but every gaining so much strength, but every gaining so much strength, but every Thursday workout sucks. I'm going to Thursday workout sucks. I'm going to Thursday workout sucks. I'm going to just give her one set to failure. And just give her one set to failure. And just give her one set to failure. And one set to failure on of like So she do one set to failure on of like So she do one set to failure on of like So she do she'd do like five or six sets on she'd do like five or six sets on she'd do like five or six sets on Monday, five or six sets on Thursday, Monday, five or six sets on Thursday, Monday, five or six sets on Thursday, and the other girls would go, "Coach, and the other girls would go, "Coach, and the other girls would go, "Coach, why does she only have to do one why does she only have to do one why does she only have to do one set?" And I'd go, "You can do one set if set?" And I'd go, "You can do one set if set?" And I'd go, "You can do one set if you want. I think you want to do more. I you want. I think you want to do more. I you want. I think you want to do more. I don't think you want to do one set. Most don't think you want to do one set. Most don't think you want to do one set. Most &gt;&gt; people want to do more volume, but I'd &gt;&gt; people want to do more volume, but I'd &gt;&gt; people want to do more volume, but I'd say it's because she's so strong. She say it's because she's so strong. She say it's because she's so strong. She gets I remember I had this 106 pound gets I remember I had this 106 pound gets I remember I had this 106 pound kettle bell they were deadlifting and kettle bell they were deadlifting and kettle bell they were deadlifting and she &gt;&gt; 160 pound. &gt;&gt; 160 pound. &gt;&gt; 160 pound. &gt;&gt; No, no. 106, &gt;&gt; No, no. 106, &gt;&gt; No, no. 106, &gt;&gt; but she could she quickly got to where &gt;&gt; but she could she quickly got to where &gt;&gt; but she could she quickly got to where she could do it 50 reps. So, I had to she could do it 50 reps. So, I had to she could do it 50 reps. So, I had to buy a 203 pound kettle bell. It looked buy a 203 pound kettle bell. It looked buy a 203 pound kettle bell. It looked like a cannonball cuz I didn't want to like a cannonball cuz I didn't want to like a cannonball cuz I didn't want to have like a barbell in place. have like a barbell in place. have like a barbell in place. &gt;&gt; This is on the sixth floor of an &gt;&gt; This is on the sixth floor of an &gt;&gt; This is on the sixth floor of an apartment. No wonder they didn't want apartment. No wonder they didn't want apartment. No wonder they didn't want you have weights in there like drop you have weights in there like drop you have weights in there like drop through the through the through the &gt;&gt; No, I And I and I looked back because &gt;&gt; No, I And I and I looked back because &gt;&gt; No, I And I and I looked back because you still see the video on the YouTube. you still see the video on the YouTube. you still see the video on the YouTube. It's hilarious because I would the It's hilarious because I would the It's hilarious because I would the bench was um against uh my TV stand the bench was um against uh my TV stand the bench was um against uh my TV stand and I had travertine tile and I'd put and I had travertine tile and I'd put and I had travertine tile and I'd put this I'd pick up this easy bar and set this I'd pick up this easy bar and set this I'd pick up this easy bar and set it in their laps and they do hip thrust. it in their laps and they do hip thrust. it in their laps and they do hip thrust. You see in some of the videos like this You see in some of the videos like this You see in some of the videos like this red envelope like the Netflix back when red envelope like the Netflix back when red envelope like the Netflix back when we used to order Netflix DVDs. That's we used to order Netflix DVDs. That's we used to order Netflix DVDs. That's how long ago this was. But if they were how long ago this was. But if they were how long ago this was. But if they were to dropped the weight or their feet slid to dropped the weight or their feet slid to dropped the weight or their feet slid out, I would have cracked my tile. But out, I would have cracked my tile. But out, I would have cracked my tile. But anyway, I saw great results just having anyway, I saw great results just having anyway, I saw great results just having minimal equipment, but she could gain a minimal equipment, but she could gain a minimal equipment, but she could gain a lot of strength, but she did best with lot of strength, but she did best with lot of strength, but she did best with single sets. And I don't and there's single sets. And I don't and there's single sets. And I don't and there's some there's one study I remember on the some there's one study I remember on the some there's one study I remember on the like the ACE gene, the angio con like the ACE gene, the angio con like the ACE gene, the angio con angotensin converting enzyme gene. I angotensin converting enzyme gene. I angotensin converting enzyme gene. I don't know what the hell that has to do don't know what the hell that has to do don't know what the hell that has to do with strength and volume, but with strength and volume, but with strength and volume, but &gt;&gt; there were like different alals. This is &gt;&gt; there were like different alals. This is &gt;&gt; there were like different alals. This is not my field, but like different not my field, but like different not my field, but like different &gt;&gt; different uh phenotypes or what? Not &gt;&gt; different uh phenotypes or what? Not &gt;&gt; different uh phenotypes or what? Not phenotype, I don't know, whatever. This phenotype, I don't know, whatever. This phenotype, I don't know, whatever. This was years ago when I read the study, but was years ago when I read the study, but was years ago when I read the study, but it seemed that some people do better on it seemed that some people do better on it seemed that some people do better on with lower body doing single sets versus with lower body doing single sets versus with lower body doing single sets versus multiple sets. multiple sets. multiple sets. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; And that was that study was like 12 that &gt;&gt; And that was that study was like 12 that &gt;&gt; And that was that study was like 12 that study was I think a lot of years ago, study was I think a lot of years ago, study was I think a lot of years ago, maybe like 10 15 years old study. But maybe like 10 15 years old study. But maybe like 10 15 years old study. But there's probably a genetic element to there's probably a genetic element to there's probably a genetic element to how many sets is optimal for us. But she how many sets is optimal for us. But she how many sets is optimal for us. But she saw that if I train if I had to do three saw that if I train if I had to do three saw that if I train if I had to do three lower body workouts a week, she spun her lower body workouts a week, she spun her lower body workouts a week, she spun her wheels. Could I have said, "We're going wheels. Could I have said, "We're going wheels. Could I have said, "We're going to do three, but we're going to do more to do three, but we're going to do more to do three, but we're going to do more sets, way less effort." But who likes sets, way less effort." But who likes sets, way less effort." But who likes stopping five reps shy of failure? stopping five reps shy of failure? stopping five reps shy of failure? &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's &gt;&gt; hard to do. It's hard to be like It's &gt;&gt; hard to do. It's hard to be like It's &gt;&gt; hard to do. It's hard to be like It's hard to do hard to do hard to do &gt;&gt; when it's easy and you stop. &gt;&gt; when it's easy and you stop. &gt;&gt; when it's easy and you stop. &gt;&gt; People like training, serious lifters &gt;&gt; People like training, serious lifters &gt;&gt; People like training, serious lifters like training close to failure. And then like training close to failure. And then like training close to failure. And then if someone just generally doesn't like I if someone just generally doesn't like I if someone just generally doesn't like I know there's genetics to that exercise I know there's genetics to that exercise I know there's genetics to that exercise enjoyment, you know, that there's enjoyment, you know, that there's enjoyment, you know, that there's genetics of everything. genetics of everything. genetics of everything. &gt;&gt; I mean, I love training and part of &gt;&gt; I mean, I love training and part of &gt;&gt; I mean, I love training and part of the reason I set that frequency at three the reason I set that frequency at three the reason I set that frequency at three times per week. Okay, I've trained four times per week. Okay, I've trained four times per week. Okay, I've trained four times per week from, you know, from time times per week from, you know, from time times per week from, you know, from time to time, but is that I love training and to time, but is that I love training and to time, but is that I love training and I love making progress and I don't like I love making progress and I don't like I love making progress and I don't like being in pain. I can handle soreness. being in pain. I can handle soreness. being in pain. I can handle soreness. I can handle pain during the set, during I can handle pain during the set, during I can handle pain during the set, during the workout. I'm talking about I'm the workout. I'm talking about I'm the workout. I'm talking about I'm talking about like headed towards injury talking about like headed towards injury talking about like headed towards injury type pain that just, you know, feeling type pain that just, you know, feeling type pain that just, you know, feeling like you can't get up out of bed in the like you can't get up out of bed in the like you can't get up out of bed in the morning because you got a strain or morning because you got a strain or morning because you got a strain or something. Um, but I've always loved something. Um, but I've always loved something. Um, but I've always loved exercise. I never understood this exercise. I never understood this exercise. I never understood this concept of, you know, I hate working concept of, you know, I hate working concept of, you know, I hate working out, but I always feel better out, but I always feel better out, but I always feel better afterwards. People say that and I'm afterwards. People say that and I'm afterwards. People say that and I'm always like I wish I could train six always like I wish I could train six always like I wish I could train six days per week. Um I don't have the time days per week. Um I don't have the time days per week. Um I don't have the time and I just can't generate the and I just can't generate the and I just can't generate the intensity. So you're telling me that intensity. So you're telling me that intensity. So you're telling me that there are genetic differences in there are genetic differences in there are genetic differences in exercise enjoyment? exercise enjoyment? exercise enjoyment? &gt;&gt; I remember one day I was bored. I was &gt;&gt; I remember one day I was bored. I was &gt;&gt; I remember one day I was bored. I was blogging back, you know, like 2015. I blogging back, you know, like 2015. I blogging back, you know, like 2015. I started I was like looking at started I was like looking at started I was like looking at everything. There's a there's a you know everything. There's a there's a you know everything. There's a there's a you know genetics of pain tolerance, genetics of genetics of pain tolerance, genetics of genetics of pain tolerance, genetics of exercise enjoyment, genetics of muscle exercise enjoyment, genetics of muscle exercise enjoyment, genetics of muscle damage, recovery. There's there's damage, recovery. There's there's damage, recovery. There's there's obviously look at um I remember I wrote obviously look at um I remember I wrote obviously look at um I remember I wrote this article for teenation back in the this article for teenation back in the this article for teenation back in the day and there were some fascinating day and there were some fascinating day and there were some fascinating studies back then. They took the top studies back then. They took the top studies back then. They took the top responders versus the non-responders responders versus the non-responders responders versus the non-responders and they compared their physiology. And and they compared their physiology. And and they compared their physiology. And this is again this is like 15y old this is again this is like 15y old this is again this is like 15y old research, maybe 20-y old research, but research, maybe 20-y old research, but research, maybe 20-y old research, but it was like it was like it was like the top responders um had better the top responders um had better the top responders um had better satellite cell efficiency, meaning um satellite cell efficiency, meaning um satellite cell efficiency, meaning um the satellite cells are like stem cells the satellite cells are like stem cells the satellite cells are like stem cells that lay they lay quesuscent unless that lay they lay quesuscent unless that lay they lay quesuscent unless they're called upon through stimulating they're called upon through stimulating they're called upon through stimulating gains. You know, you mechanical gains. You know, you mechanical gains. You know, you mechanical tension or whatever. um some evidence tension or whatever. um some evidence tension or whatever. um some evidence that metabolic stress and muscle damage that metabolic stress and muscle damage that metabolic stress and muscle damage can signal them, but like they can signal them, but like they can signal them, but like they they're called upon when you hit a hard they're called upon when you hit a hard they're called upon when you hit a hard workout and then what they end up doing workout and then what they end up doing workout and then what they end up doing is the satellite cells uh they have is the satellite cells uh they have is the satellite cells uh they have nuclei in them and they fuse they fuse nuclei in them and they fuse they fuse nuclei in them and they fuse they fuse and there's steps to it. I can't and there's steps to it. I can't and there's steps to it. I can't remember the exact step, but they fuse remember the exact step, but they fuse remember the exact step, but they fuse to the muscle cell and they lend their to the muscle cell and they lend their to the muscle cell and they lend their nuclei. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Because muscles are multi-ucleated. They &gt;&gt; Because muscles are multi-ucleated. They &gt;&gt; Because muscles are multi-ucleated. They don't just have one nuclei, they have don't just have one nuclei, they have don't just have one nuclei, they have multiple nuclei. And there's this multiple nuclei. And there's this multiple nuclei. And there's this myionuclear domain theory that your myionuclear domain theory that your myionuclear domain theory that your muscle size is limited by the number of muscle size is limited by the number of muscle size is limited by the number of nuclei in it. So the top responders nuclei in it. So the top responders nuclei in it. So the top responders say you start out with 50 say you start out with 50 say you start out with 50 a muscle cell has we'll just say 20 a muscle cell has we'll just say 20 a muscle cell has we'll just say 20 nuclei and 20 satellite cells. I'm going nuclei and 20 satellite cells. I'm going nuclei and 20 satellite cells. I'm going to butcher the hell out of this, but to butcher the hell out of this, but to butcher the hell out of this, but anyway, after training for 12 weeks, I anyway, after training for 12 weeks, I anyway, after training for 12 weeks, I think the study looked at training arms think the study looked at training arms think the study looked at training arms two or three times a week, and some two or three times a week, and some two or three times a week, and some people like newbies trained arms like people like newbies trained arms like people like newbies trained arms like two, three times a week and didn't even two, three times a week and didn't even two, three times a week and didn't even gain arm size. Like, these are people gain arm size. Like, these are people gain arm size. Like, these are people that you look at them, you're like, they that you look at them, you're like, they that you look at them, you're like, they don't even lift or they don't know what don't even lift or they don't know what don't even lift or they don't know what they're doing. They just might have they're doing. They just might have they're doing. They just might have really poor genetics for growth. And really poor genetics for growth. And really poor genetics for growth. And then but the best responders like you then but the best responders like you then but the best responders like you know I remember one of them like doubled know I remember one of them like doubled know I remember one of them like doubled their strength and like dramatically their strength and like dramatically their strength and like dramatically increased their size by like maybe like increased their size by like maybe like increased their size by like maybe like 20 30 or maybe more I can't remember but 20 30 or maybe more I can't remember but 20 30 or maybe more I can't remember but percent increase in muscle size. So the percent increase in muscle size. So the percent increase in muscle size. So the non-responders start out with 20 um non-responders start out with 20 um non-responders start out with 20 um nuclei in the muscles and 20 satellite nuclei in the muscles and 20 satellite nuclei in the muscles and 20 satellite cells and they end with 2020. Mhm. cells and they end with 2020. Mhm. cells and they end with 2020. Mhm. &gt;&gt; The top responders would end with 3030 &gt;&gt; The top responders would end with 3030 &gt;&gt; The top responders would end with 3030 meaning now they have 10 more nuclei but meaning now they have 10 more nuclei but meaning now they have 10 more nuclei but they also somehow have 10 like the they also somehow have 10 like the they also somehow have 10 like the satellite cells replenishing they have satellite cells replenishing they have satellite cells replenishing they have 10 more satellite cells and that seems 10 more satellite cells and that seems 10 more satellite cells and that seems to be a big difference there also like to be a big difference there also like to be a big difference there also like mechano growth factors a splice variant mechano growth factors a splice variant mechano growth factors a splice variant of IGF-1 I think um and there's like of IGF-1 I think um and there's like of IGF-1 I think um and there's like myiogenic growth factors that have myiogenic growth factors that have myiogenic growth factors that have different names like myod they have different names like myod they have different names like myod they have different it's not people think different it's not people think different it's not people think testosterone is so important and growth testosterone is so important and growth testosterone is so important and growth hormone and all this stuff. But it's hormone and all this stuff. But it's hormone and all this stuff. But it's there's so many things that are there's so many things that are there's so many things that are important. There's so many pathways, so important. There's so many pathways, so important. There's so many pathways, so many if you study muscle physiology, I many if you study muscle physiology, I many if you study muscle physiology, I don't I just send them send these don't I just send them send these don't I just send them send these studies to my friend Brad Schill and I studies to my friend Brad Schill and I studies to my friend Brad Schill and I hope he reads them because I don't hope he reads them because I don't hope he reads them because I don't understand all the all the pathways. understand all the all the pathways. understand all the all the pathways. There's so many of them. They they tend There's so many of them. They they tend There's so many of them. They they tend to have acronyms, you know, the JNK to have acronyms, you know, the JNK to have acronyms, you know, the JNK pathway, the red pathway, the Fox F, you pathway, the red pathway, the Fox F, you pathway, the red pathway, the Fox F, you know, these pathways that only the know, these pathways that only the know, these pathways that only the muscle scientists, but we don't know. We muscle scientists, but we don't know. We muscle scientists, but we don't know. We don't have a grip on this. But there don't have a grip on this. But there don't have a grip on this. But there there's genetics to every aspect of it. there's genetics to every aspect of it. there's genetics to every aspect of it. There's genetics to your anatomy, your There's genetics to your anatomy, your There's genetics to your anatomy, your muscle bellies, how you're going to muscle bellies, how you're going to muscle bellies, how you're going to look. There's genetics to how you're look. There's genetics to how you're look. There's genetics to how you're going to respond. There's genetics of going to respond. There's genetics of going to respond. There's genetics of everything. And so what you've tapped everything. And so what you've tapped everything. And so what you've tapped into is how you can keep the goal of the into is how you can keep the goal of the into is how you can keep the goal of the goal. keep lifting weights to where you goal. keep lifting weights to where you goal. keep lifting weights to where you enjoy it and don't make it something enjoy it and don't make it something enjoy it and don't make it something that feels like a chore or um something that feels like a chore or um something that feels like a chore or um something you dread. And that doesn't get talked you dread. And that doesn't get talked you dread. And that doesn't get talked about enough in this whole concept of um about enough in this whole concept of um about enough in this whole concept of um long-term hypertrophy, long-term gains long-term hypertrophy, long-term gains long-term hypertrophy, long-term gains has a lot to do with remaining injury, has a lot to do with remaining injury, has a lot to do with remaining injury, not having these crushing injuries, not having these crushing injuries, not having these crushing injuries, not being in pain all the time. And that we being in pain all the time. And that we being in pain all the time. And that we talked about this yesterday. I've never talked about this yesterday. I've never talked about this yesterday. I've never heard anyone discuss this, but I think heard anyone discuss this, but I think heard anyone discuss this, but I think it affects your knee, your non- exercise it affects your knee, your non- exercise it affects your knee, your non- exercise activity, thermogenesis, where you don't activity, thermogenesis, where you don't activity, thermogenesis, where you don't move around as much move around as much move around as much &gt;&gt; if you're injured. &gt;&gt; if you're injured. &gt;&gt; if you're injured. &gt;&gt; If you have nagging pain, my knees hurt &gt;&gt; If you have nagging pain, my knees hurt &gt;&gt; If you have nagging pain, my knees hurt right now. I can't do squats right now. right now. I can't do squats right now. right now. I can't do squats right now. I love I love training quads hard, but I love I love training quads hard, but I love I love training quads hard, but I &gt;&gt; just run up the stairs. &gt;&gt; just run up the stairs. &gt;&gt; just run up the stairs. &gt;&gt; Yeah, run up. Yeah, but like right now, &gt;&gt; Yeah, run up. Yeah, but like right now, &gt;&gt; Yeah, run up. Yeah, but like right now, I have some knee pain right now as I'm I have some knee pain right now as I'm I have some knee pain right now as I'm sitting here. sitting here. sitting here. &gt;&gt; So, if I think of standing up, I'm like, &gt;&gt; So, if I think of standing up, I'm like, &gt;&gt; So, if I think of standing up, I'm like, eh, maybe I'll just chill here. I'm not eh, maybe I'll just chill here. I'm not eh, maybe I'll just chill here. I'm not going to get up. going to get up. going to get up. &gt;&gt; If you have low back pain, you don't &gt;&gt; If you have low back pain, you don't &gt;&gt; If you have low back pain, you don't want to pick something up off the want to pick something up off the want to pick something up off the ground. Well, this matches the data that ground. Well, this matches the data that ground. Well, this matches the data that was published in science, I think about was published in science, I think about was published in science, I think about a year or so ago, which was shocking to a year or so ago, which was shocking to a year or so ago, which was shocking to the world that our metabolism doesn't the world that our metabolism doesn't the world that our metabolism doesn't really change much over our really change much over our really change much over our lifespan. What happens is people move lifespan. What happens is people move lifespan. What happens is people move around a lot less, less neat, non-ex around a lot less, less neat, non-ex around a lot less, less neat, non-ex exercise induced thermogenesis. And I exercise induced thermogenesis. And I exercise induced thermogenesis. And I totally agree and I'd not heard this totally agree and I'd not heard this totally agree and I'd not heard this idea before until yesterday when you idea before until yesterday when you idea before until yesterday when you said that when we have a nagging pain or said that when we have a nagging pain or said that when we have a nagging pain or injury, we just move a lot less. And injury, we just move a lot less. And injury, we just move a lot less. And when we move a lot less, we burn less when we move a lot less, we burn less when we move a lot less, we burn less calories. And then there's a feedback calories. And then there's a feedback calories. And then there's a feedback where we tend to feel more lethargic where we tend to feel more lethargic where we tend to feel more lethargic when we move less as opposed to more. when we move less as opposed to more. when we move less as opposed to more. One of the perhaps most valuable things One of the perhaps most valuable things One of the perhaps most valuable things that I've ever learned in my uh work that I've ever learned in my uh work that I've ever learned in my uh work life, my workout life, and just life, my workout life, and just life, my workout life, and just life. I try and apply this everywhere. life. I try and apply this everywhere. life. I try and apply this everywhere. And I haven't always been successful in And I haven't always been successful in And I haven't always been successful in doing this. When I was a graduate doing this. When I was a graduate doing this. When I was a graduate student um at Berkeley, there was a student um at Berkeley, there was a student um at Berkeley, there was a professor there. His name is Bob Knight. professor there. His name is Bob Knight. professor there. His name is Bob Knight. He's a neurologist. Um so he's a He's a neurologist. Um so he's a He's a neurologist. Um so he's a clinician and a and a very good one. Uh clinician and a and a very good one. Uh clinician and a and a very good one. Uh and also a researcher. And I remember and also a researcher. And I remember and also a researcher. And I remember asking him at the beginning of graduate asking him at the beginning of graduate asking him at the beginning of graduate school. I don't know why I had the nerve school. I don't know why I had the nerve school. I don't know why I had the nerve to do this, but I caught him outside of to do this, but I caught him outside of to do this, but I caught him outside of the building and I said, you know, like the building and I said, you know, like the building and I said, you know, like what's a piece of advice, what's it to what's a piece of advice, what's it to what's a piece of advice, what's it to being really good at this whole research being really good at this whole research being really good at this whole research science thing in addition to reading science thing in addition to reading science thing in addition to reading papers and learning the field and papers and learning the field and papers and learning the field and collecting data and you know, and you collecting data and you know, and you collecting data and you know, and you know, was driven uh obviously, but I know, was driven uh obviously, but I know, was driven uh obviously, but I wanted to know how he was able to do as wanted to know how he was able to do as wanted to know how he was able to do as many things as he did, be a clinician, many things as he did, be a clinician, many things as he did, be a clinician, run a lab, and he seemed like a run a lab, and he seemed like a run a lab, and he seemed like a pretty chill guy, which it turns out he pretty chill guy, which it turns out he pretty chill guy, which it turns out he was. And I'll never forget what he said. was. And I'll never forget what he said. was. And I'll never forget what he said. He said, "Figure out what you can do He said, "Figure out what you can do He said, "Figure out what you can do consistently each week and don't do any consistently each week and don't do any consistently each week and don't do any more except under conditions of more except under conditions of more except under conditions of emergency like a deadline or, you know, emergency like a deadline or, you know, emergency like a deadline or, you know, just figure it out." He said for him it just figure it out." He said for him it just figure it out." He said for him it was something like 8 to nine hours a day was something like 8 to nine hours a day was something like 8 to nine hours a day of real work. This was before of real work. This was before of real work. This was before smartphones when you would actually go smartphones when you would actually go smartphones when you would actually go in and do your work. You didn't have to in and do your work. You didn't have to in and do your work. You didn't have to compete with phone for attention. And he compete with phone for attention. And he compete with phone for attention. And he said for him it was also on the weekends said for him it was also on the weekends said for him it was also on the weekends he said that he liked I'll never forget he said that he liked I'll never forget he said that he liked I'll never forget he said he liked mindless recreation he said he liked mindless recreation he said he liked mindless recreation that was not destructive. So like not that was not destructive. So like not that was not destructive. So like not drinking a lot, not partying a lot, not drinking a lot, not partying a lot, not drinking a lot, not partying a lot, not staying out too late. But for him it was staying out too late. But for him it was staying out too late. But for him it was fishing, hanging out with his family, fishing, hanging out with his family, fishing, hanging out with his family, and I think he was into exercising as and I think he was into exercising as and I think he was into exercising as well. So I was like, that's pretty well. So I was like, that's pretty well. So I was like, that's pretty clever. So, I figured out uh you know clever. So, I figured out uh you know clever. So, I figured out uh you know how much I could work per day across how much I could work per day across how much I could work per day across each week and still continue to do that each week and still continue to do that each week and still continue to do that output. But he said something else that output. But he said something else that output. But he said something else that was really key that maybe we can kind of was really key that maybe we can kind of was really key that maybe we can kind of um transport onto the exercise piece um transport onto the exercise piece um transport onto the exercise piece because you can probably sense where because you can probably sense where because you can probably sense where this is going is he said and every five this is going is he said and every five this is going is he said and every five years update that number. And I was like years update that number. And I was like years update that number. And I was like really? He's like yeah every five years. really? He's like yeah every five years. really? He's like yeah every five years. He said you know you're in your 20s now He said you know you're in your 20s now He said you know you're in your 20s now at back then I was in my 20s. said the at back then I was in my 20s. said the at back then I was in my 20s. said the you could probably work 15 hours a day you could probably work 15 hours a day you could probably work 15 hours a day which I probably did. I probably at that which I probably did. I probably at that which I probably did. I probably at that time I was a little maniacal. I probably time I was a little maniacal. I probably time I was a little maniacal. I probably worked 15 hours a day five or six days a worked 15 hours a day five or six days a worked 15 hours a day five or six days a week. in graduate school that number week. in graduate school that number week. in graduate school that number actually went up but then I noticed I actually went up but then I noticed I actually went up but then I noticed I started getting sick a bit in when I was started getting sick a bit in when I was started getting sick a bit in when I was a postto so I had to throttle back right a postto so I had to throttle back right a postto so I had to throttle back right and so he I wonder if we could kind of and so he I wonder if we could kind of and so he I wonder if we could kind of transport that onto the exercise thing transport that onto the exercise thing transport that onto the exercise thing which is because we've got people which is because we've got people which is because we've got people listening now that are probably in their listening now that are probably in their listening now that are probably in their teens 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s men and women teens 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s men and women teens 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s men and women different goals sort of like what can I different goals sort of like what can I different goals sort of like what can I do every week for the next five years do every week for the next five years do every week for the next five years assuming you don't get injured no major assuming you don't get injured no major assuming you don't get injured no major life crisis I feel like that's kind of life crisis I feel like that's kind of life crisis I feel like that's kind of the way I approach this and it turns the way I approach this and it turns the way I approach this and it turns out for me it's just been three days a out for me it's just been three days a out for me it's just been three days a week of resistance training, two or week of resistance training, two or week of resistance training, two or three days a week of cardio, one full three days a week of cardio, one full three days a week of cardio, one full day off, and likewise with my work. I I, day off, and likewise with my work. I I, day off, and likewise with my work. I I, you know, I adjust every 5 years or so. you know, I adjust every 5 years or so. you know, I adjust every 5 years or so. And I'm wondering what your thoughts on And I'm wondering what your thoughts on And I'm wondering what your thoughts on I take no credit for this. This is all I take no credit for this. This is all I take no credit for this. This is all Bob Knight, MDP, PhD, uh, who but I Bob Knight, MDP, PhD, uh, who but I Bob Knight, MDP, PhD, uh, who but I thought, wow, like this simple thing is thought, wow, like this simple thing is thought, wow, like this simple thing is such a gem uh, for me because back then such a gem uh, for me because back then such a gem uh, for me because back then I thought I just need to work as much as I thought I just need to work as much as I thought I just need to work as much as possible, but he understood eventually possible, but he understood eventually possible, but he understood eventually it'll hit a wall. You need to update it'll hit a wall. You need to update it'll hit a wall. You need to update these schedules. So I think there's so these schedules. So I think there's so these schedules. So I think there's so much uh truth to this and not just with much uh truth to this and not just with much uh truth to this and not just with working out but like even nowadays if working out but like even nowadays if working out but like even nowadays if you're an entrepreneur on social media you're an entrepreneur on social media you're an entrepreneur on social media you feel guilty the rest of your life you feel guilty the rest of your life you feel guilty the rest of your life because you could always be doing more because you could always be doing more because you could always be doing more but it's like what's sustainable you but it's like what's sustainable you but it's like what's sustainable you could work now we can work I especially could work now we can work I especially could work now we can work I especially you how many comments you must get how you how many comments you must get how you how many comments you must get how many DMs you must get how many emails many DMs you must get how many emails many DMs you must get how many emails how many opportunities there are um like how many opportunities there are um like how many opportunities there are um like I realized for me with my career I'm I realized for me with my career I'm I realized for me with my career I'm like if I lift weights if I train like if I lift weights if I train like if I lift weights if I train clients science for a few hours. If I clients science for a few hours. If I clients science for a few hours. If I read research at night for a couple read research at night for a couple read research at night for a couple hours and make a social media post, um hours and make a social media post, um hours and make a social media post, um that's a busy day, you know, and that's a busy day, you know, and that's a busy day, you know, and respond to the comments and stuff and respond to the comments and stuff and respond to the comments and stuff &gt;&gt; that I did good. And we need to pat &gt;&gt; that I did good. And we need to pat &gt;&gt; that I did good. And we need to pat ourselves on the back. That's hard to ourselves on the back. That's hard to ourselves on the back. That's hard to sustain day in day out, week in week sustain day in day out, week in week sustain day in day out, week in week out, week out because you can take on out, week out because you can take on out, week out because you can take on too much and then you fizzle. You too much and then you fizzle. You too much and then you fizzle. You What's realistic? What's realistic? And What's realistic? What's realistic? And What's realistic? What's realistic? And I've had to learn quit taking on too I've had to learn quit taking on too I've had to learn quit taking on too much. quit and quit feeling guilty that much. quit and quit feeling guilty that much. quit and quit feeling guilty that that's a lot like you do this that's a lot like you do this that's a lot like you do this consistently. You have something consistently. You have something consistently. You have something sustainable. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function I've been super impressed by function simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. Along to get early access to function. Along to get early access to function. Along those lines, um, let's talk about those lines, um, let's talk about those lines, um, let's talk about glutes. When I was growing up, glutes weren't When I was growing up, glutes weren't When I was growing up, glutes weren't like a thing. I mean, people still had like a thing. I mean, people still had like a thing. I mean, people still had them, uh, but it wasn't a thing that was them, uh, but it wasn't a thing that was them, uh, but it wasn't a thing that was emphasized in the media. There weren't emphasized in the media. There weren't emphasized in the media. There weren't songs about them. uh it wasn't something songs about them. uh it wasn't something songs about them. uh it wasn't something that people selectively trained for. Uh that people selectively trained for. Uh that people selectively trained for. Uh nowadays you hear glutes are the new nowadays you hear glutes are the new nowadays you hear glutes are the new biceps etc. Uh setting aside biceps etc. Uh setting aside biceps etc. Uh setting aside different preferences about different preferences about different preferences about glutes, moderate glutes or no glutes, moderate glutes or no glutes, moderate glutes or no glutes, everybody has glutes. Could you describe everybody has glutes. Could you describe everybody has glutes. Could you describe for us what are the major functions of for us what are the major functions of for us what are the major functions of the glute and why it's useful to build the glute and why it's useful to build the glute and why it's useful to build strength and in some cases hypertrophy strength and in some cases hypertrophy strength and in some cases hypertrophy for the glutes for men and for women. for the glutes for men and for women. for the glutes for men and for women. &gt;&gt; The glutes do three main things. Hip &gt;&gt; The glutes do three main things. Hip &gt;&gt; The glutes do three main things. Hip extension, hip abduction, hip external extension, hip abduction, hip external extension, hip abduction, hip external rotation. They also do posterior pelvic rotation. They also do posterior pelvic rotation. They also do posterior pelvic tilt which is like hip extension but tilt which is like hip extension but tilt which is like hip extension but I'll explain all three roles. If I'll explain all three roles. If I'll explain all three roles. If you're sprinting, your leg is out in you're sprinting, your leg is out in you're sprinting, your leg is out in front of you. You power it down. You front of you. You power it down. You front of you. You power it down. You know, your foot touches down and you know, your foot touches down and you know, your foot touches down and you accelerate forward. That's hip accelerate forward. That's hip accelerate forward. That's hip extension. Front to back. The thigh is extension. Front to back. The thigh is extension. Front to back. The thigh is up. It's moving downwards. up. It's moving downwards. up. It's moving downwards. Most people are aware of hip extension. Most people are aware of hip extension. Most people are aware of hip extension. It also does hip external rotation, It also does hip external rotation, It also does hip external rotation, which means think of a baseball player, which means think of a baseball player, which means think of a baseball player, you know, about ready to swing a bat. you know, about ready to swing a bat. you know, about ready to swing a bat. They're going to rotate and the hip They're going to rotate and the hip They're going to rotate and the hip rotates laterally. So, you tw it twists rotates laterally. So, you tw it twists rotates laterally. So, you tw it twists the body laterally. the body laterally. the body laterally. And then abduction is simply raising And then abduction is simply raising And then abduction is simply raising your leg out to the side like you're your leg out to the side like you're your leg out to the side like you're doing a jumping jack. When you're bent doing a jumping jack. When you're bent doing a jumping jack. When you're bent over though, you can also do hip over though, you can also do hip over though, you can also do hip abduction. That's like doing the seated abduction. That's like doing the seated abduction. That's like doing the seated hip abduction machine. I think most hip abduction machine. I think most hip abduction machine. I think most people are probably not familiar with people are probably not familiar with people are probably not familiar with abduction and adduction. Um, could you abduction and adduction. Um, could you abduction and adduction. Um, could you explain abduction and adduction? I'm explain abduction and adduction? I'm explain abduction and adduction? I'm thinking about uh the exercise in the thinking about uh the exercise in the thinking about uh the exercise in the gym where people are seated. It looks gym where people are seated. It looks gym where people are seated. It looks like kind of like a recliner chair or a like kind of like a recliner chair or a like kind of like a recliner chair or a or a standard chair. And then there are or a standard chair. And then there are or a standard chair. And then there are these pads that either are on the these pads that either are on the these pads that either are on the outside of the knees or on the insides outside of the knees or on the insides outside of the knees or on the insides of the knees. And you're either of the knees. And you're either of the knees. And you're either squeezing in against resistance or squeezing in against resistance or squeezing in against resistance or you're pushing out against resistance. you're pushing out against resistance. you're pushing out against resistance. &gt;&gt; Yep. So the squeezing in, you're &gt;&gt; Yep. So the squeezing in, you're &gt;&gt; Yep. So the squeezing in, you're adducting. Those are your inner thigh adducting. Those are your inner thigh adducting. Those are your inner thigh muscles. And you can think of adduction muscles. And you can think of adduction muscles. And you can think of adduction as adding to the body. You're whereas as adding to the body. You're whereas as adding to the body. You're whereas abducting you think of the word taking abducting you think of the word taking abducting you think of the word taking away from the body. That's where you away from the body. That's where you away from the body. That's where you spread your legs outwards against spread your legs outwards against spread your legs outwards against resistance. Um so the when you're resistance. Um so the when you're resistance. Um so the when you're upright or leaning forward then you upright or leaning forward then you upright or leaning forward then you involve the glutius maximus more and a involve the glutius maximus more and a involve the glutius maximus more and a little bit less of the glutius medius or little bit less of the glutius medius or little bit less of the glutius medius or it might be the posterior fibers of the it might be the posterior fibers of the it might be the posterior fibers of the glutius medius not to get too glutius medius not to get too glutius medius not to get too complicated but um but that basically complicated but um but that basically complicated but um but that basically the glutes do the glutius maximus mainly the glutes do the glutius maximus mainly the glutes do the glutius maximus mainly I would say does you know hip extension I would say does you know hip extension I would say does you know hip extension is by far the most popular um and then is by far the most popular um and then is by far the most popular um and then hip ex hip external rotation is more in hip ex hip external rotation is more in hip ex hip external rotation is more in sports. Um, we don't have a lot of sports. Um, we don't have a lot of sports. Um, we don't have a lot of exercise that involve hip external exercise that involve hip external exercise that involve hip external rotation. There's a couple of good ones, rotation. There's a couple of good ones, rotation. There's a couple of good ones, but they're not very common. And then but they're not very common. And then but they're not very common. And then hip abduction, especially transverse hip abduction, especially transverse hip abduction, especially transverse plane hip abduction or the horizontal plane hip abduction or the horizontal plane hip abduction or the horizontal plane hip abduction like the seated hip plane hip abduction like the seated hip plane hip abduction like the seated hip abduction machine is effective, too. So, abduction machine is effective, too. So, abduction machine is effective, too. So, it's a very versatile muscle. You don't it's a very versatile muscle. You don't it's a very versatile muscle. You don't even have to focus on pelvic tilt. even have to focus on pelvic tilt. even have to focus on pelvic tilt. That's a more advanced concept. Same That's a more advanced concept. Same That's a more advanced concept. Same with like transverse plane hip with like transverse plane hip with like transverse plane hip abduction. mainly if you just know that abduction. mainly if you just know that abduction. mainly if you just know that the glutes pull the leg backwards as in the glutes pull the leg backwards as in the glutes pull the leg backwards as in sprinting or if you're in a deep squat sprinting or if you're in a deep squat sprinting or if you're in a deep squat or lunge and you stand up that's hip or lunge and you stand up that's hip or lunge and you stand up that's hip extension. It also raises the leg out to extension. It also raises the leg out to extension. It also raises the leg out to the side and also rotates the body the side and also rotates the body the side and also rotates the body outward not inward outward. And those outward not inward outward. And those outward not inward outward. And those are the roles of the glutes. And then are the roles of the glutes. And then are the roles of the glutes. And then how you create a proper program design how you create a proper program design how you create a proper program design is an interesting topic because most is an interesting topic because most is an interesting topic because most people in the past they've only focused people in the past they've only focused people in the past they've only focused on hip extension. In the past it was on hip extension. In the past it was on hip extension. In the past it was always just always just always just &gt;&gt; squat or deadlift. &gt;&gt; squat or deadlift. &gt;&gt; squat or deadlift. &gt;&gt; Squat or deadlift or lunge back in when &gt;&gt; Squat or deadlift or lunge back in when &gt;&gt; Squat or deadlift or lunge back in when in our era it was squat, deadlift, in our era it was squat, deadlift, in our era it was squat, deadlift, lunge. &gt;&gt; That's all people did. Those are &gt;&gt; That's all people did. Those are &gt;&gt; That's all people did. Those are vertical hip extension exercises vertical hip extension exercises vertical hip extension exercises &gt;&gt; and they're very effective. The &gt;&gt; and they're very effective. The &gt;&gt; and they're very effective. The thing is they also grow the legs very thing is they also grow the legs very thing is they also grow the legs very well. So, if you're a male and you want well. So, if you're a male and you want well. So, if you're a male and you want to grow the legs, yes, have at it. What to grow the legs, yes, have at it. What to grow the legs, yes, have at it. What if you're a woman that doesn't want a if you're a woman that doesn't want a if you're a woman that doesn't want a lot of leg growth or you're just trying lot of leg growth or you're just trying lot of leg growth or you're just trying to maximize your recoverable volume? to maximize your recoverable volume? to maximize your recoverable volume? I've noticed a very important phenomenon I've noticed a very important phenomenon I've noticed a very important phenomenon happen over throughout my career being happen over throughout my career being happen over throughout my career being the glute guy the glute guy the glute guy in the 90s. You remember it in the in the 90s. You remember it in the in the 90s. You remember it in the in the 90s it was people just did squats, the 90s it was people just did squats, the 90s it was people just did squats, lunges, deadlifts. That's how you lunges, deadlifts. That's how you lunges, deadlifts. That's how you developed your glutes. And then I come developed your glutes. And then I come developed your glutes. And then I come along and I earlier I mentioned these along and I earlier I mentioned these along and I earlier I mentioned these strength coaches that were doing glute strength coaches that were doing glute strength coaches that were doing glute activation. And the glute activation activation. And the glute activation activation. And the glute activation wasn't squats, deadlifts, lunges. We wasn't squats, deadlifts, lunges. We wasn't squats, deadlifts, lunges. We were doing glute bridges on the ground. were doing glute bridges on the ground. were doing glute bridges on the ground. We were doing fire hydrants. We were We were doing fire hydrants. We were We were doing fire hydrants. We were throwing bands around doing lateral throwing bands around doing lateral throwing bands around doing lateral bandwalks. What we were doing was using bandwalks. What we were doing was using bandwalks. What we were doing was using the glutes from different vectors. So the glutes from different vectors. So the glutes from different vectors. So instead of just going up and down in the instead of just going up and down in the instead of just going up and down in the sagittal plane um you know like what sagittal plane um you know like what sagittal plane um you know like what we've always done we were doing lateral we've always done we were doing lateral we've always done we were doing lateral and rotational stuff and also working and rotational stuff and also working and rotational stuff and also working the glutes from front to back. So I the glutes from front to back. So I the glutes from front to back. So I started this new terminology because we started this new terminology because we started this new terminology because we always had the planer terminology which always had the planer terminology which always had the planer terminology which was sagittal plane, frontal plane, was sagittal plane, frontal plane, was sagittal plane, frontal plane, transverse plane and I said think of transverse plane and I said think of transverse plane and I said think of vectors instead. You have axial loading vectors instead. You have axial loading vectors instead. You have axial loading which is your vertical squats, which is your vertical squats, which is your vertical squats, deadlifts, uh lunges, step-ups, split deadlifts, uh lunges, step-ups, split deadlifts, uh lunges, step-ups, split squats, good mornings, etc. Then you squats, good mornings, etc. Then you squats, good mornings, etc. Then you have your ant posterior loading. That's have your ant posterior loading. That's have your ant posterior loading. That's front to back. If you're doing a back front to back. If you're doing a back front to back. If you're doing a back extension, you know, a horizontal back extension, you know, a horizontal back extension, you know, a horizontal back extension, if you're doing a glute extension, if you're doing a glute extension, if you're doing a glute bridge, you're loaded from the front, bridge, you're loaded from the front, bridge, you're loaded from the front, pushing forward again, like pushing forward again, like pushing forward again, like pushing front to back on the body. So that's front to back on the body. So that's front to back on the body. So that's antroposterior vector. And then you have your lateral vector. And then you have your lateral vector. And then you have your lateral vector left to right. And then you have vector left to right. And then you have vector left to right. And then you have your rotational vector which is your rotational vector which is your rotational vector which is rotational force. I created this what I rotational force. I created this what I rotational force. I created this what I called rule of thirds. And I just said called rule of thirds. And I just said called rule of thirds. And I just said this is a way to maximize your this is a way to maximize your this is a way to maximize your recoverable volume. A third of your recoverable volume. A third of your recoverable volume. A third of your exercise selection should be vertical in exercise selection should be vertical in exercise selection should be vertical in nature. Those are the hardest to recover nature. Those are the hardest to recover nature. Those are the hardest to recover from. They also build your legs. They're from. They also build your legs. They're from. They also build your legs. They're probably the most efficient exercise probably the most efficient exercise probably the most efficient exercise because they work so much muscle mass. because they work so much muscle mass. because they work so much muscle mass. These are your variations of squats, These are your variations of squats, These are your variations of squats, deadlifts, lunges, split squats, deadlifts, lunges, split squats, deadlifts, lunges, split squats, step-ups. Good mornings. Then you have step-ups. Good mornings. Then you have step-ups. Good mornings. Then you have your horizontal movements. These don't your horizontal movements. These don't your horizontal movements. These don't beat you up as much. They don't work you beat you up as much. They don't work you beat you up as much. They don't work you as much in the stretch position. They as much in the stretch position. They as much in the stretch position. They work you in a squeeze position. These work you in a squeeze position. These work you in a squeeze position. These are your variations of hip thrust, glute are your variations of hip thrust, glute are your variations of hip thrust, glute bridges, back extensions, reverse bridges, back extensions, reverse bridges, back extensions, reverse hypers, 45 degree hypers, and to an hypers, 45 degree hypers, and to an hypers, 45 degree hypers, and to an extent cable kickbacks. They don't beat extent cable kickbacks. They don't beat extent cable kickbacks. They don't beat you up as much. And then the remaining you up as much. And then the remaining you up as much. And then the remaining third can be lateral rotary. These don't third can be lateral rotary. These don't third can be lateral rotary. These don't beat you up at all. They're your hip beat you up at all. They're your hip beat you up at all. They're your hip abduction movements. Your ca from a, you abduction movements. Your ca from a, you abduction movements. Your ca from a, you know, cable column, putting the know, cable column, putting the know, cable column, putting the ankle strap on or using ankle weights or ankle strap on or using ankle weights or ankle strap on or using ankle weights or putting a band on or um but these are putting a band on or um but these are putting a band on or um but these are your basically we what we did yesterday your basically we what we did yesterday your basically we what we did yesterday that glute medius exercise at the end. that glute medius exercise at the end. that glute medius exercise at the end. They're lateral. They build the glute They're lateral. They build the glute They're lateral. They build the glute medius and minimus and also the medius and minimus and also the medius and minimus and also the upper subdivision, the glute max, but upper subdivision, the glute max, but upper subdivision, the glute max, but they don't beat you up that much. they don't beat you up that much. they don't beat you up that much. they're not so hard to recover from. So they're not so hard to recover from. So they're not so hard to recover from. So that's where I said you can do, you that's where I said you can do, you that's where I said you can do, you know, with my that movement pattern know, with my that movement pattern know, with my that movement pattern checklist we said earlier where you pick checklist we said earlier where you pick checklist we said earlier where you pick one squat lunge, one hinge pull, one squat lunge, one hinge pull, one squat lunge, one hinge pull, one thrust bridge, and one abduction thrust bridge, and one abduction thrust bridge, and one abduction movement. You could do three sets of movement. You could do three sets of movement. You could do three sets of each of those. That's 12 sets. You do each of those. That's 12 sets. You do each of those. That's 12 sets. You do that three times a week. That's 36 sets that three times a week. That's 36 sets that three times a week. That's 36 sets per week. People would say that's per week. People would say that's per week. People would say that's overkill. But I was learning from the overkill. But I was learning from the overkill. But I was learning from the strength coaches back then, and we were strength coaches back then, and we were strength coaches back then, and we were doing similar workouts to that three doing similar workouts to that three doing similar workouts to that three times a week. all the popular strength times a week. all the popular strength times a week. all the popular strength coaches, they would do a coaches, they would do a coaches, they would do a uh a knee dominant movement and a hip uh a knee dominant movement and a hip uh a knee dominant movement and a hip dominant movement, meaning a squat lunge dominant movement, meaning a squat lunge dominant movement, meaning a squat lunge variation and then a hinge variation and variation and then a hinge variation and variation and then a hinge variation and they people could recover from it. Well, they people could recover from it. Well, they people could recover from it. Well, you I knew that the athletes could you I knew that the athletes could you I knew that the athletes could do that three times a week. They're do that three times a week. They're do that three times a week. They're recovering. I'm like, if the athletes recovering. I'm like, if the athletes recovering. I'm like, if the athletes can recover from it, then if you add in can recover from it, then if you add in can recover from it, then if you add in a thrust bridge movement and an and an a thrust bridge movement and an and an a thrust bridge movement and an and an abduction movement, it's not going to be abduction movement, it's not going to be abduction movement, it's not going to be too much more. especially because we too much more. especially because we too much more. especially because we were doing abduction and uh bridging were doing abduction and uh bridging were doing abduction and uh bridging movements in the warm-up. So, kind of movements in the warm-up. So, kind of movements in the warm-up. So, kind of how I became popular, I invented the hip how I became popular, I invented the hip how I became popular, I invented the hip thrust. I remember just going, "These thrust. I remember just going, "These thrust. I remember just going, "These movements are awesome. Why don't we load movements are awesome. Why don't we load movements are awesome. Why don't we load them up? Why don't make we make them up? Why don't make we make them up? Why don't make we make them harder? Why are we doing them as glute harder? Why are we doing them as glute harder? Why are we doing them as glute activation in the warm-up? Why don't we activation in the warm-up? Why don't we activation in the warm-up? Why don't we do them as a resistance exercise?" I'm do them as a resistance exercise?" I'm do them as a resistance exercise?" I'm like, "These guys are brilliant. They're like, "These guys are brilliant. They're like, "These guys are brilliant. They're they're using bands and bodyweight they're using bands and bodyweight they're using bands and bodyweight stuff, but why are we doing wimpy stuff, but why are we doing wimpy stuff, but why are we doing wimpy movements? Why don't we push the movements? Why don't we push the movements? Why don't we push the envelope on these? is I don't like doing envelope on these? is I don't like doing envelope on these? is I don't like doing high reps. You don't either. We hate high reps. You don't either. We hate high reps. You don't either. We hate high reps. I want to do low reps. I high reps. I want to do low reps. I high reps. I want to do low reps. I don't want to do 20 reps or something. don't want to do 20 reps or something. don't want to do 20 reps or something. How can I load up that bridge pattern? How can I load up that bridge pattern? How can I load up that bridge pattern? How? And that's how I came up with hip How? And that's how I came up with hip How? And that's how I came up with hip thrust. And then I'm like, how can I thrust. And then I'm like, how can I thrust. And then I'm like, how can I load up some of these abduction load up some of these abduction load up some of these abduction movements? And I came up with more movements? And I came up with more movements? And I came up with more movements to load up abduction. So then movements to load up abduction. So then movements to load up abduction. So then I said the rule of thirds. A third of I said the rule of thirds. A third of I said the rule of thirds. A third of your movements should be lateral rotary, your movements should be lateral rotary, your movements should be lateral rotary, a third horizontal, a third vertical. a third horizontal, a third vertical. a third horizontal, a third vertical. You can recover from it. But you're You can recover from it. But you're You can recover from it. But you're also, people will say that's 36 sets for also, people will say that's 36 sets for also, people will say that's 36 sets for the glute max. No, 12 of those sets are the glute max. No, 12 of those sets are the glute max. No, 12 of those sets are more for the glute medius and minimus, more for the glute medius and minimus, more for the glute medius and minimus, which are different muscles. They're which are different muscles. They're which are different muscles. They're different muscles than the glute max. different muscles than the glute max. different muscles than the glute max. So, it's really 24 sets for the glute So, it's really 24 sets for the glute So, it's really 24 sets for the glute max. There's some overlap there. But the max. There's some overlap there. But the max. There's some overlap there. But the point is, I've learned that people can point is, I've learned that people can point is, I've learned that people can recover from this system. And I learned recover from this system. And I learned recover from this system. And I learned a lot. I have to credit these strength a lot. I have to credit these strength a lot. I have to credit these strength coaches back in the day um for helping coaches back in the day um for helping coaches back in the day um for helping me come up with those ideas. And then I me come up with those ideas. And then I me come up with those ideas. And then I transitioned that into the bodybuilding transitioned that into the bodybuilding transitioned that into the bodybuilding world where people attacked me and said world where people attacked me and said world where people attacked me and said there's no way you can recover from it. there's no way you can recover from it. there's no way you can recover from it. And I'm going, trust me, they can And I'm going, trust me, they can And I'm going, trust me, they can recover. But the women listen because recover. But the women listen because recover. But the women listen because they're like, I want I want to train my they're like, I want I want to train my they're like, I want I want to train my glutes. I want to build my glutes more glutes. I want to build my glutes more glutes. I want to build my glutes more so than, you know, these men are so than, you know, these men are so than, you know, these men are telling me train five days a week, train telling me train five days a week, train telling me train five days a week, train upper body four days and legs once. I upper body four days and legs once. I upper body four days and legs once. I want to train I want to listen to this want to train I want to listen to this want to train I want to listen to this guy and train. It makes sense because I guy and train. It makes sense because I guy and train. It makes sense because I would always say back then someone said would always say back then someone said would always say back then someone said you need to put, you know, an inch you need to put, you know, an inch you need to put, you know, an inch around your glutes in the next month, around your glutes in the next month, around your glutes in the next month, you know, or you can you can win the, you know, or you can you can win the, you know, or you can you can win the, you know, I'll pay you a million dollars you know, I'll pay you a million dollars you know, I'll pay you a million dollars to put an inch around your glutes in two to put an inch around your glutes in two to put an inch around your glutes in two months or whatever. Are you going to months or whatever. Are you going to months or whatever. Are you going to train glutes once a week? No. You're train glutes once a week? No. You're train glutes once a week? No. You're going to train them three times a week. going to train them three times a week. going to train them three times a week. Same with arms Same with arms Same with arms &gt;&gt; or at least twice a week. &gt;&gt; or at least twice a week. &gt;&gt; or at least twice a week. &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I said, Andrew, I'll give you a &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I said, Andrew, I'll give you a &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I said, Andrew, I'll give you a million dollars if you put an inch million dollars if you put an inch million dollars if you put an inch around your arms in the next two months. around your arms in the next two months. around your arms in the next two months. you going to train them once a week? No, you going to train them once a week? No, you going to train them once a week? No, you'll probably train them every other you'll probably train them every other you'll probably train them every other day. Um, and you'll work, you'll realize day. Um, and you'll work, you'll realize day. Um, and you'll work, you'll realize the sweet spot where you can still the sweet spot where you can still the sweet spot where you can still recover from it. So, the people listen recover from it. So, the people listen recover from it. So, the people listen to me, what really what they listen to me, what really what they listen to me, what really what they listen to was they saw my before and after was they saw my before and after was they saw my before and after transformations. &gt;&gt; Before and afters on your social media &gt;&gt; Before and afters on your social media &gt;&gt; Before and afters on your social media are super impressive. I mean, clearly are super impressive. I mean, clearly are super impressive. I mean, clearly people get incredible results. I want people get incredible results. I want people get incredible results. I want to make sure I ask a few questions that to make sure I ask a few questions that to make sure I ask a few questions that I'm guessing are on people's minds now I'm guessing are on people's minds now I'm guessing are on people's minds now that everyone's thinking about glutes. that everyone's thinking about glutes. that everyone's thinking about glutes. Let's say a woman or man comes to you Let's say a woman or man comes to you Let's say a woman or man comes to you and says, "Hey, I want more lower glute and says, "Hey, I want more lower glute and says, "Hey, I want more lower glute max, the area where the glutes meet the max, the area where the glutes meet the max, the area where the glutes meet the hamstring." What is the movement that hamstring." What is the movement that hamstring." What is the movement that you prescribe? Let's make it extreme. you prescribe? Let's make it extreme. you prescribe? Let's make it extreme. Let's say they were only going to do one Let's say they were only going to do one Let's say they were only going to do one or two movements for their glutes and or two movements for their glutes and or two movements for their glutes and that's where they wanted more growth. that's where they wanted more growth. that's where they wanted more growth. What movements would you give them? What movements would you give them? What movements would you give them? &gt;&gt; I think the reverse lunge is the best um &gt;&gt; I think the reverse lunge is the best um &gt;&gt; I think the reverse lunge is the best um for the lower glute max. Um but it's for the lower glute max. Um but it's for the lower glute max. Um but it's almost too good. So, if you're going to almost too good. So, if you're going to almost too good. So, if you're going to train it three times a week, I would say train it three times a week, I would say train it three times a week, I would say don't do reverse lunge. Do good. don't do reverse lunge. Do good. don't do reverse lunge. Do good. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, once or twice. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, once or twice. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, once or twice. &gt;&gt; So, I would Yeah. So, if you're just &gt;&gt; So, I would Yeah. So, if you're just &gt;&gt; So, I would Yeah. So, if you're just going to train glutes once a week, going to train glutes once a week, going to train glutes once a week, reverse lunge is your go-to movement. reverse lunge is your go-to movement. reverse lunge is your go-to movement. Um, uh, we don't have a lot of Um, uh, we don't have a lot of Um, uh, we don't have a lot of research on what should you do a research on what should you do a research on what should you do a deficit, should you do Smith machine, deficit, should you do Smith machine, deficit, should you do Smith machine, should you do dumbbell, but they're all should you do dumbbell, but they're all should you do dumbbell, but they're all going to be effective. Um, deficit means going to be effective. Um, deficit means going to be effective. Um, deficit means stand on a box to get a little more stand on a box to get a little more stand on a box to get a little more range of motion. range of motion. range of motion. &gt;&gt; But, I like stepups because they don't &gt;&gt; But, I like stepups because they don't &gt;&gt; But, I like stepups because they don't tend to get you as sore. So, if you're tend to get you as sore. So, if you're tend to get you as sore. So, if you're training three times a week, you could training three times a week, you could training three times a week, you could do step-ups probably all three times do step-ups probably all three times do step-ups probably all three times &gt;&gt; and stepping up onto a box. &gt;&gt; and stepping up onto a box. &gt;&gt; and stepping up onto a box. &gt;&gt; But we used to do high stepups where &gt;&gt; But we used to do high stepups where &gt;&gt; But we used to do high stepups where you're more upright, foot is up higher. you're more upright, foot is up higher. you're more upright, foot is up higher. &gt;&gt; That's going to work more quads. I think &gt;&gt; That's going to work more quads. I think &gt;&gt; That's going to work more quads. I think the most glute dominant way to step up the most glute dominant way to step up the most glute dominant way to step up is to lean and just go to a thigh is to lean and just go to a thigh is to lean and just go to a thigh parallel position, parallel position, parallel position, &gt;&gt; meaning the thigh is parallel to the &gt;&gt; meaning the thigh is parallel to the &gt;&gt; meaning the thigh is parallel to the ground. So, you reach back. I think ground. So, you reach back. I think ground. So, you reach back. I think that's the most glute dominant way to do that's the most glute dominant way to do that's the most glute dominant way to do it. stepping back off the box so that it. stepping back off the box so that it. stepping back off the box so that the thigh that's still up on the on the thigh that's still up on the on the thigh that's still up on the on the box is parallel to the floor. the box is parallel to the floor. the box is parallel to the floor. &gt;&gt; Yep. And you lean you reach back, &gt;&gt; Yep. And you lean you reach back, &gt;&gt; Yep. And you lean you reach back, tap the control it all the way down, tap the control it all the way down, tap the control it all the way down, tap the foot down, then come up. But uh but the foot down, then come up. But uh but the foot down, then come up. But uh but you also have to like remember if you also have to like remember if you also have to like remember if you train glutes Monday, Wednesday, Friday, train glutes Monday, Wednesday, Friday, train glutes Monday, Wednesday, Friday, if you do train glutes three times a if you do train glutes three times a if you do train glutes three times a week, you have an extra day for recovery week, you have an extra day for recovery week, you have an extra day for recovery on the Friday. So that's where I could on the Friday. So that's where I could on the Friday. So that's where I could say do two sets of reverse lunges or say do two sets of reverse lunges or say do two sets of reverse lunges or walking lunges on the Friday because you walking lunges on the Friday because you walking lunges on the Friday because you have an extra day to recover. have an extra day to recover. have an extra day to recover. &gt;&gt; A lot of times when I'm training my &gt;&gt; A lot of times when I'm training my &gt;&gt; A lot of times when I'm training my clients, they'll go, "Coach, what else clients, they'll go, "Coach, what else clients, they'll go, "Coach, what else should I do?" Nothing. You're done. You should I do?" Nothing. You're done. You should I do?" Nothing. You're done. You did good. You got to train in two days. did good. You got to train in two days. did good. You got to train in two days. It's a different art to training glutes It's a different art to training glutes It's a different art to training glutes three times a week. I mean, think if you three times a week. I mean, think if you three times a week. I mean, think if you had to train pecs three times a week or had to train pecs three times a week or had to train pecs three times a week or biceps three times a week. You wouldn't biceps three times a week. You wouldn't biceps three times a week. You wouldn't do these marathon workouts. You'd know I do these marathon workouts. You'd know I do these marathon workouts. You'd know I got to have a good session in two days. got to have a good session in two days. got to have a good session in two days. I can't do too much. that this system I can't do too much. that this system I can't do too much. that this system works well, but it can be overdone. It works well, but it can be overdone. It works well, but it can be overdone. It needs to be t individualized and needs to be t individualized and needs to be t individualized and tinkered with so that you can keep tinkered with so that you can keep tinkered with so that you can keep coming back and being recovered. For the coming back and being recovered. For the coming back and being recovered. For the lower glute max, I'd say best movement lower glute max, I'd say best movement lower glute max, I'd say best movement is probably reverse lunge, but it can be is probably reverse lunge, but it can be is probably reverse lunge, but it can be too good. It can make you too sore. too good. It can make you too sore. too good. It can make you too sore. Sometimes it makes people's adductors, Sometimes it makes people's adductors, Sometimes it makes people's adductors, adductor magnus, super sore, and then adductor magnus, super sore, and then adductor magnus, super sore, and then two days later you have a crummy two days later you have a crummy two days later you have a crummy workout. If that's the case, don't do workout. If that's the case, don't do workout. If that's the case, don't do reverse lunges. Do step-ups instead. reverse lunges. Do step-ups instead. reverse lunges. Do step-ups instead. squats and RDL's and leg press fit in squats and RDL's and leg press fit in squats and RDL's and leg press fit in single leg press especially glute single leg press especially glute single leg press especially glute dominant with your foot higher up on the dominant with your foot higher up on the dominant with your foot higher up on the platform work good for that category as platform work good for that category as platform work good for that category as well &gt;&gt; for the upper glutius maximus we need &gt;&gt; for the upper glutius maximus we need &gt;&gt; for the upper glutius maximus we need more research because I thought probably more research because I thought probably more research because I thought probably hip thrusts are probably the best for hip thrusts are probably the best for hip thrusts are probably the best for that according to EMG electromyiography that according to EMG electromyiography that according to EMG electromyiography but EMG doesn't perfectly predict growth but EMG doesn't perfectly predict growth but EMG doesn't perfectly predict growth what I like about hip thrust is you can what I like about hip thrust is you can what I like about hip thrust is you can do a lot more volume lately I've been do a lot more volume lately I've been do a lot more volume lately I've been just prioritizing hip thrust I do nine just prioritizing hip thrust I do nine just prioritizing hip thrust I do nine sets every third day and I think that's sets every third day and I think that's sets every third day and I think that's overkill but I do I do different types overkill but I do I do different types overkill but I do I do different types like uh and I can recover from it. I like uh and I can recover from it. I like uh and I can recover from it. I don't even get sore from it. don't even get sore from it. don't even get sore from it. &gt;&gt; It's crazy. You can do so much volume &gt;&gt; It's crazy. You can do so much volume &gt;&gt; It's crazy. You can do so much volume but hip thrust I think theoretically but hip thrust I think theoretically but hip thrust I think theoretically people feel it more in the upper glute people feel it more in the upper glute people feel it more in the upper glute max but again we don't have evidence of max but again we don't have evidence of max but again we don't have evidence of this is to can you really different get this is to can you really different get this is to can you really different get differential growth. I would say for differential growth. I would say for differential growth. I would say for sure the seated hip abduction leaning sure the seated hip abduction leaning sure the seated hip abduction leaning forward though I don't think that's forward though I don't think that's forward though I don't think that's going to grow or at least like upright going to grow or at least like upright going to grow or at least like upright if you're perfectly upright at a 90 if you're perfectly upright at a 90 if you're perfectly upright at a 90 degree hip angle doing seated hip degree hip angle doing seated hip degree hip angle doing seated hip abduction I think that would target abduction I think that would target abduction I think that would target mostly upper glutius maximus without a mostly upper glutius maximus without a mostly upper glutius maximus without a lot of lower based on analyzing the lot of lower based on analyzing the lot of lower based on analyzing the fiber directions but that's just fiber directions but that's just fiber directions but that's just theoretical okay couple of uh practical theoretical okay couple of uh practical theoretical okay couple of uh practical questions what is the most common mistake that you what is the most common mistake that you what is the most common mistake that you see people making when they do hip see people making when they do hip see people making when they do hip thrusts on the hip thrust machine or thrusts on the hip thrust machine or thrusts on the hip thrust machine or using a barbell, you know, over using a barbell, you know, over using a barbell, you know, over their pelvis. Um, in the gym, I'm not their pelvis. Um, in the gym, I'm not their pelvis. Um, in the gym, I'm not talking about your clients. I'm talking about your clients. I'm talking about your clients. I'm talking about when you go into a gym, because I about when you go into a gym, because I about when you go into a gym, because I go into a gym, you'll see typically it's go into a gym, you'll see typically it's go into a gym, you'll see typically it's women doing hip thrust. women doing hip thrust. women doing hip thrust. &gt;&gt; Um, sometimes men, but most often it's &gt;&gt; Um, sometimes men, but most often it's &gt;&gt; Um, sometimes men, but most often it's women on a hip thrust machine um or a women on a hip thrust machine um or a women on a hip thrust machine um or a barbell uh loaded up with the pad or the barbell uh loaded up with the pad or the barbell uh loaded up with the pad or the towel wrapped around the barbell and towel wrapped around the barbell and towel wrapped around the barbell and they're doing hip thrust. What's the they're doing hip thrust. What's the they're doing hip thrust. What's the most common mistake that you see and most common mistake that you see and most common mistake that you see and what is the solution to that mistake? what is the solution to that mistake? what is the solution to that mistake? And this might not even be a mistake. And this might not even be a mistake. And this might not even be a mistake. This might be an advantage. We don't This might be an advantage. We don't This might be an advantage. We don't know yet because we haven't looked into know yet because we haven't looked into know yet because we haven't looked into range of motion on hip thrust. What we range of motion on hip thrust. What we range of motion on hip thrust. What we always said the first decade was um always said the first decade was um always said the first decade was um people are loading up too heavy and people are loading up too heavy and people are loading up too heavy and you're not reaching full hip extension. you're not reaching full hip extension. you're not reaching full hip extension. So you're not getting into that sort of So you're not getting into that sort of So you're not getting into that sort of reverse table pose. I think of it as reverse table pose. I think of it as reverse table pose. I think of it as like a in gymnastics I think they call a like a in gymnastics I think they call a like a in gymnastics I think they call a crab pose where you put your hands crab pose where you put your hands crab pose where you put your hands behind you, your feet are flat on the behind you, your feet are flat on the behind you, your feet are flat on the ground, you make right angles with your ground, you make right angles with your ground, you make right angles with your knees and you make your shoulder knees and you make your shoulder knees and you make your shoulder extension like a table extension like a table extension like a table &gt;&gt; like you could walk like a tabletop like &gt;&gt; like you could walk like a tabletop like &gt;&gt; like you could walk like a tabletop like reverse tabletop. That's essentially reverse tabletop. That's essentially reverse tabletop. That's essentially what the hip thrust is except you know what the hip thrust is except you know what the hip thrust is except you know you're not going to have your arms back you're not going to have your arms back you're not going to have your arms back that way. that way. that way. &gt;&gt; They're not reaching full hip extension. &gt;&gt; They're not reaching full hip extension. &gt;&gt; They're not reaching full hip extension. Okay. &gt;&gt; And the hip can go into hip &gt;&gt; And the hip can go into hip &gt;&gt; And the hip can go into hip hyperextension. With bent knees average hyperextension. With bent knees average hyperextension. With bent knees average is probably around 10°. With straight is probably around 10°. With straight is probably around 10°. With straight legs, you can get a little more hip legs, you can get a little more hip legs, you can get a little more hip hyperextension. You can get about 20 hyperextension. You can get about 20 hyperextension. You can get about 20 degrees. But there's a genetic comp like degrees. But there's a genetic comp like degrees. But there's a genetic comp like an anatomy component to that. Some an anatomy component to that. Some an anatomy component to that. Some people can get 40 degrees. Some people can get 40 degrees. Some people can get 40 degrees. Some people can get zero. They can't they have can get zero. They can't they have can get zero. They can't they have trouble just reaching neutral. But um trouble just reaching neutral. But um trouble just reaching neutral. But um you can go higher than like you can go higher than like you can go higher than like straight. A lot of times you can kind of straight. A lot of times you can kind of straight. A lot of times you can kind of almost be bowed almost be bowed almost be bowed &gt;&gt; bowed up. But it's important to &gt;&gt; bowed up. But it's important to &gt;&gt; bowed up. But it's important to make sure the hyperextension comes from make sure the hyperextension comes from make sure the hyperextension comes from the hip, not the lumbar spine. Mhm. the hip, not the lumbar spine. Mhm. the hip, not the lumbar spine. Mhm. &gt;&gt; So anyway, um just think of it like &gt;&gt; So anyway, um just think of it like &gt;&gt; So anyway, um just think of it like this. You do vertical movements to work this. You do vertical movements to work this. You do vertical movements to work the stretch position with the glutes. the stretch position with the glutes. the stretch position with the glutes. These place the most torque, the most These place the most torque, the most These place the most torque, the most loading on the hip when you're deep down loading on the hip when you're deep down loading on the hip when you're deep down in the stretch. in the stretch. in the stretch. &gt;&gt; Vertical movements like the squat, &gt;&gt; Vertical movements like the squat, &gt;&gt; Vertical movements like the squat, &gt;&gt; the squat, the lunge, they really load &gt;&gt; the squat, the lunge, they really load &gt;&gt; the squat, the lunge, they really load up the stretch position. So when you do up the stretch position. So when you do up the stretch position. So when you do hip thrust, don't try to make it a hip thrust, don't try to make it a hip thrust, don't try to make it a stretch position movement because you stretch position movement because you stretch position movement because you have better movements for working the have better movements for working the have better movements for working the stretch. I do think full range hip stretch. I do think full range hip stretch. I do think full range hip thrusts are best for glute growth thrusts are best for glute growth thrusts are best for glute growth compared to just doing partials. But compared to just doing partials. But compared to just doing partials. But make sure you're coming up all the way make sure you're coming up all the way make sure you're coming up all the way and reaching full hip extension. Maybe and reaching full hip extension. Maybe and reaching full hip extension. Maybe on if you do a set of 10, maybe your on if you do a set of 10, maybe your on if you do a set of 10, maybe your last two reps don't quite reach full hip last two reps don't quite reach full hip last two reps don't quite reach full hip extension, but it shouldn't be like extension, but it shouldn't be like extension, but it shouldn't be like where you're only getting a third of the where you're only getting a third of the where you're only getting a third of the way up. way up. way up. &gt;&gt; So really uh hump the ceiling, &gt;&gt; So really uh hump the ceiling, &gt;&gt; So really uh hump the ceiling, &gt;&gt; really squeezing at the top. I want to &gt;&gt; really squeezing at the top. I want to &gt;&gt; really squeezing at the top. I want to um make sure that we return to one um make sure that we return to one um make sure that we return to one specific thing before I move on to uh specific thing before I move on to uh specific thing before I move on to uh questions about stubborn body parts in questions about stubborn body parts in questions about stubborn body parts in general and how to overcome stubborn general and how to overcome stubborn general and how to overcome stubborn body parts. But the two the two relate. body parts. But the two the two relate. body parts. But the two the two relate. So let's say somebody wants to improve So let's say somebody wants to improve So let's say somebody wants to improve their glute development. They just want their glute development. They just want their glute development. They just want maybe bigger glutes or more rounded maybe bigger glutes or more rounded maybe bigger glutes or more rounded glutes or more shaped glutes. It's funny glutes or more shaped glutes. It's funny glutes or more shaped glutes. It's funny whenever we say bigger um when it comes whenever we say bigger um when it comes whenever we say bigger um when it comes to muscles oftentimes like the men to muscles oftentimes like the men to muscles oftentimes like the men typically are like yeah bigger. And the typically are like yeah bigger. And the typically are like yeah bigger. And the women are like well I more want shape. women are like well I more want shape. women are like well I more want shape. But of course, tone is something related But of course, tone is something related But of course, tone is something related to leanness combined with a bit of to leanness combined with a bit of to leanness combined with a bit of muscle density, etc. There's a bunch of muscle density, etc. There's a bunch of muscle density, etc. There's a bunch of stuff there. But stuff there. But stuff there. But &gt;&gt; well, let's just say women want m bigger &gt;&gt; well, let's just say women want m bigger &gt;&gt; well, let's just say women want m bigger muscles. It's hard for them to know that muscles. It's hard for them to know that muscles. It's hard for them to know that to know that they want bigger glutes. to know that they want bigger glutes. to know that they want bigger glutes. &gt;&gt; Women don't want a giant glute. But what &gt;&gt; Women don't want a giant glute. But what &gt;&gt; Women don't want a giant glute. But what they're saying is I want rounder glutes. they're saying is I want rounder glutes. they're saying is I want rounder glutes. So rounder glutes that you when you're So rounder glutes that you when you're So rounder glutes that you when you're when you're you look at the glute when you're you look at the glute when you're you look at the glute muscle, if it's there's not a lot of muscle, if it's there's not a lot of muscle, if it's there's not a lot of bulge to it, it's flat. It's bulge to it, it's flat. It's bulge to it, it's flat. It's &gt;&gt; atrophy. There's a hypertrophy. To get &gt;&gt; atrophy. There's a hypertrophy. To get &gt;&gt; atrophy. There's a hypertrophy. To get that round shape, you need that round shape, you need that round shape, you need &gt;&gt; bigger glute muscles. You need &gt;&gt; bigger glute muscles. You need &gt;&gt; bigger glute muscles. You need hypertrophy. They need hypertrophy hypertrophy. They need hypertrophy hypertrophy. They need hypertrophy specific training for the glutius specific training for the glutius specific training for the glutius maximus. And let's face it, most people maximus. And let's face it, most people maximus. And let's face it, most people don't have really good glute genetics. don't have really good glute genetics. don't have really good glute genetics. Most people their only well especially a Most people their only well especially a Most people their only well especially a lot of women who desire big glutes their lot of women who desire big glutes their lot of women who desire big glutes their only chance at getting big round only chance at getting big round only chance at getting big round muscular glutes like we're not big even muscular glutes like we're not big even muscular glutes like we're not big even just round glutes that they want is to just round glutes that they want is to just round glutes that they want is to do really optimal glute training and do really optimal glute training and do really optimal glute training and have the diet that matches it. So they have the diet that matches it. So they have the diet that matches it. So they need to know that they need to know that need to know that they need to know that need to know that they need to know that this advertising this advertising this advertising um campaigns with like Pilates and you um campaigns with like Pilates and you um campaigns with like Pilates and you know bar and all these classes that know bar and all these classes that know bar and all these classes that they say well these will give you long they say well these will give you long they say well these will give you long lean muscles. These are get a lot of the lean muscles. These are get a lot of the lean muscles. These are get a lot of the female specific marketing praise upon female specific marketing praise upon female specific marketing praise upon women's fears of getting too bulky too women's fears of getting too bulky too women's fears of getting too bulky too muscular. Um but for the glutes it's how muscular. Um but for the glutes it's how muscular. Um but for the glutes it's how are you going to grow the glutes if you are you going to grow the glutes if you are you going to grow the glutes if you don't get strong? How are you going to don't get strong? How are you going to don't get strong? How are you going to grow the glutes if you're just doing grow the glutes if you're just doing grow the glutes if you're just doing wimpy movements holding for time or like wimpy movements holding for time or like wimpy movements holding for time or like stretches? It can't happen. So, they do stretches? It can't happen. So, they do stretches? It can't happen. So, they do need to know what you're as what you're need to know what you're as what you're need to know what you're as what you're seeking is not glute tone, it's glute seeking is not glute tone, it's glute seeking is not glute tone, it's glute hypertrophy. &gt;&gt; Yeah, excellent point. And I think that &gt;&gt; Yeah, excellent point. And I think that &gt;&gt; Yeah, excellent point. And I think that and we can't speak for all women or all and we can't speak for all women or all and we can't speak for all women or all men certainly, but what seems to be the men certainly, but what seems to be the men certainly, but what seems to be the theme is that people want hypertrophy of theme is that people want hypertrophy of theme is that people want hypertrophy of specific muscles. specific muscles. specific muscles. They would like to replace what is They would like to replace what is They would like to replace what is currently atapost tissue fat with muscle currently atapost tissue fat with muscle currently atapost tissue fat with muscle and have more quoteunquote shape to a and have more quoteunquote shape to a and have more quoteunquote shape to a given body region. Right. Um but in the given body region. Right. Um but in the given body region. Right. Um but in the end as you point out this means more end as you point out this means more end as you point out this means more hypertrophy, more growth of those given hypertrophy, more growth of those given hypertrophy, more growth of those given muscles and then the amount of atapost muscles and then the amount of atapost muscles and then the amount of atapost tissue is handled by the calories in tissue is handled by the calories in tissue is handled by the calories in calor calories out formula plus a couple calor calories out formula plus a couple calor calories out formula plus a couple of other little details there that do of other little details there that do of other little details there that do matter but are far less important than matter but are far less important than matter but are far less important than calories in calories out. So, calories in calories out. So, calories in calories out. So, if somebody wants to grow their glutes, if somebody wants to grow their glutes, if somebody wants to grow their glutes, you've recommended the three types of you've recommended the three types of you've recommended the three types of movements that will do that well. A movements that will do that well. A movements that will do that well. A vertical movement, some squat, hip vertical movement, some squat, hip vertical movement, some squat, hip hinge, RDL's, uh, lunges, reverse hinge, RDL's, uh, lunges, reverse hinge, RDL's, uh, lunges, reverse lunges, step-ups, these kinds of things. lunges, step-ups, these kinds of things. lunges, step-ups, these kinds of things. Um, hip thrust seem which you invented. Um, hip thrust seem which you invented. Um, hip thrust seem which you invented. Yeah. Um, I didn't know that until Yeah. Um, I didn't know that until Yeah. Um, I didn't know that until recently, but that's awesome. that um recently, but that's awesome. that um recently, but that's awesome. that um hip thrust and then some something for hip thrust and then some something for hip thrust and then some something for the inner thigh the uh and the and the inner thigh the uh and the and the inner thigh the uh and the and the outer thigh, right? You're not I the outer thigh, right? You're not I the outer thigh, right? You're not I don't know if you're treating inner don't know if you're treating inner don't know if you're treating inner thigh and outer thigh uh both as thigh and outer thigh uh both as thigh and outer thigh uh both as relevant to the glutes, but something relevant to the glutes, but something relevant to the glutes, but something where you're where you're uh pushing where you're where you're uh pushing where you're where you're uh pushing your knees outward against resistance on your knees outward against resistance on your knees outward against resistance on the outside of the knees. the outside of the knees. the outside of the knees. &gt;&gt; So, abduction abduction. So, &gt;&gt; So, abduction abduction. So, &gt;&gt; So, abduction abduction. So, &gt;&gt; by the way, the inner thigh gets worked &gt;&gt; by the way, the inner thigh gets worked &gt;&gt; by the way, the inner thigh gets worked a lot when you do the vertical a lot when you do the vertical a lot when you do the vertical movements, the hip extension exercises movements, the hip extension exercises movements, the hip extension exercises like squats, lunges. Some people don't like squats, lunges. Some people don't like squats, lunges. Some people don't want that. So, that's where you got to want that. So, that's where you got to want that. So, that's where you got to get &gt;&gt; because it makes the leg bigger. &gt;&gt; because it makes the leg bigger. &gt;&gt; because it makes the leg bigger. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, that's something to talk about is &gt;&gt; So, that's something to talk about is &gt;&gt; So, that's something to talk about is what if you want to grow your glutes what if you want to grow your glutes what if you want to grow your glutes without growing the legs? without growing the legs? without growing the legs? &gt;&gt; Okay. Let's let's definitely talk about &gt;&gt; Okay. Let's let's definitely talk about &gt;&gt; Okay. Let's let's definitely talk about that. In the meantime, um, what I'm that. In the meantime, um, what I'm that. In the meantime, um, what I'm hearing is the person that wants to grow hearing is the person that wants to grow hearing is the person that wants to grow their glutes should be doing those three their glutes should be doing those three their glutes should be doing those three types of exercises, typically those types of exercises, typically those types of exercises, typically those three types of exercises at least twice three types of exercises at least twice three types of exercises at least twice a week and perhaps three times a week a week and perhaps three times a week a week and perhaps three times a week with the understanding that the third with the understanding that the third with the understanding that the third session in that week may have to be at session in that week may have to be at session in that week may have to be at slightly less intensity that Friday slightly less intensity that Friday slightly less intensity that Friday session before the weekend if you really session before the weekend if you really session before the weekend if you really beat up the glutes on your uh, previous beat up the glutes on your uh, previous beat up the glutes on your uh, previous two uh, glute days. But training your two uh, glute days. But training your two uh, glute days. But training your glutes twice a week might be sufficient. glutes twice a week might be sufficient. glutes twice a week might be sufficient. &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; I mean, there's not much evidence that &gt;&gt; I mean, there's not much evidence that &gt;&gt; I mean, there's not much evidence that three times a week is better than two three times a week is better than two three times a week is better than two times a week in the literature, but two times a week in the literature, but two times a week in the literature, but two times a week is safer. It's your safer times a week is safer. It's your safer times a week is safer. It's your safer bet because you're going to be bet because you're going to be bet because you're going to be recovered. Three times a week, it's more recovered. Three times a week, it's more recovered. Three times a week, it's more problematic. My opinion, you can get away with it. My opinion, you can get away with it. My opinion, you can get away with it. But for a lot of men, But for a lot of men, But for a lot of men, if you come to me and you're a man and if you come to me and you're a man and if you come to me and you're a man and you say, "Hey, I want more glute you say, "Hey, I want more glute you say, "Hey, I want more glute growth." I'm not going to tell you to do growth." I'm not going to tell you to do growth." I'm not going to tell you to do Booty by Brett. My Booty by Brett Booty by Brett. My Booty by Brett Booty by Brett. My Booty by Brett program is like um squat lunge movement, program is like um squat lunge movement, program is like um squat lunge movement, hinge movement, you know, thrust bridge hinge movement, you know, thrust bridge hinge movement, you know, thrust bridge movement, abduction, and we do one upper movement, abduction, and we do one upper movement, abduction, and we do one upper body press and one upper body pull. And body press and one upper body pull. And body press and one upper body pull. And you get really strong at those upper you get really strong at those upper you get really strong at those upper body movements because I'm always having body movements because I'm always having body movements because I'm always having you do chin-ups and push-ups and bench you do chin-ups and push-ups and bench you do chin-ups and push-ups and bench press and military press. It works well, press and military press. It works well, press and military press. It works well, but men have different goals. We also but men have different goals. We also but men have different goals. We also want to grow the biceps, the delts, the want to grow the biceps, the delts, the want to grow the biceps, the delts, the pecs, the lats. So, you don't tell them pecs, the lats. So, you don't tell them pecs, the lats. So, you don't tell them to do glutes, train glutes three times a to do glutes, train glutes three times a to do glutes, train glutes three times a week. You just say, "Look, what are you week. You just say, "Look, what are you week. You just say, "Look, what are you doing for legs? or you are you some guys doing for legs? or you are you some guys doing for legs? or you are you some guys will like you got the typical guy who will like you got the typical guy who will like you got the typical guy who skips legs who says like oh I just run skips legs who says like oh I just run skips legs who says like oh I just run on the treadmill for legs that guy needs on the treadmill for legs that guy needs on the treadmill for legs that guy needs to start training his legs also you have to start training his legs also you have to start training his legs also you have the guys that are like I just do leg the guys that are like I just do leg the guys that are like I just do leg press leg extension leg curls okay you press leg extension leg curls okay you press leg extension leg curls okay you should probably do more glutes but if should probably do more glutes but if should probably do more glutes but if you have a normal if the guy already you have a normal if the guy already you have a normal if the guy already does squats and deadlifts great add in does squats and deadlifts great add in does squats and deadlifts great add in hip thrust because they're not going to hip thrust because they're not going to hip thrust because they're not going to compromise your recovery just add in hip compromise your recovery just add in hip compromise your recovery just add in hip thrust and if you feel okay doing seated thrust and if you feel okay doing seated thrust and if you feel okay doing seated hip abduction throw that into more men hip abduction throw that into more men hip abduction throw that into more men are doing seated hip abduction and more are doing seated hip abduction and more are doing seated hip abduction and more men are doing hip thrust with the um men are doing hip thrust with the um men are doing hip thrust with the um advent of all these plate loaded advent of all these plate loaded advent of all these plate loaded machines you see now in gyms. They're machines you see now in gyms. They're machines you see now in gyms. They're making it way more convenient to hip making it way more convenient to hip making it way more convenient to hip thrust because people don't want to set thrust because people don't want to set thrust because people don't want to set it up. The setup back the first like it up. The setup back the first like it up. The setup back the first like decade we always you had to set up these decade we always you had to set up these decade we always you had to set up these the my OG followers will laugh at the my OG followers will laugh at the my OG followers will laugh at the times where we had to drag plates and times where we had to drag plates and times where we had to drag plates and barbells and aerobic steps and risers barbells and aerobic steps and risers barbells and aerobic steps and risers and benches all across the gym. Now you and benches all across the gym. Now you and benches all across the gym. Now you buckle in. buckle in. buckle in. &gt;&gt; Now you buckle in. It's so much more &gt;&gt; Now you buckle in. It's so much more &gt;&gt; Now you buckle in. It's so much more convenient. But just add in hip thrust convenient. But just add in hip thrust convenient. But just add in hip thrust or 45 degree hypers glute dominant or 45 degree hypers glute dominant or 45 degree hypers glute dominant fashion. &gt;&gt; So you're already doing the stretch &gt;&gt; So you're already doing the stretch &gt;&gt; So you're already doing the stretch position work. If hopefully the man is position work. If hopefully the man is position work. If hopefully the man is already for his quads, he's already for his quads, he's already for his quads, he's already doing squats or like lunges or split doing squats or like lunges or split doing squats or like lunges or split squats or deep leg press. He's already squats or deep leg press. He's already squats or deep leg press. He's already doing that. If he's already doing stiff doing that. If he's already doing stiff doing that. If he's already doing stiff leg deadlifts or RDL's, great. Just add leg deadlifts or RDL's, great. Just add leg deadlifts or RDL's, great. Just add in a squeeze position work because it's in a squeeze position work because it's in a squeeze position work because it's not going to t it's not going to you're not going to t it's not going to you're not going to t it's not going to you're going to be recovered. And I think going to be recovered. And I think going to be recovered. And I think there's some synergy to it. It's weird there's some synergy to it. It's weird there's some synergy to it. It's weird because like if you've only trained, we because like if you've only trained, we because like if you've only trained, we saw this with you yesterday. You have saw this with you yesterday. You have saw this with you yesterday. You have you have big glutes, but you don't train you have big glutes, but you don't train you have big glutes, but you don't train the extended range, the squeeze the extended range, the squeeze the extended range, the squeeze position. So, you're very weak compared position. So, you're very weak compared position. So, you're very weak compared to how strong you are in the flex to how strong you are in the flex to how strong you are in the flex position. You're you're you belt squat a position. You're you're you belt squat a position. You're you're you belt squat a ton of weight. You can you're strong in ton of weight. You can you're strong in ton of weight. You can you're strong in the flex position, but not the squeeze the flex position, but not the squeeze the flex position, but not the squeeze position. When you start getting that position. When you start getting that position. When you start getting that squeeze position strong, good things squeeze position strong, good things squeeze position strong, good things tend to happen across the body. So, it's tend to happen across the body. So, it's tend to happen across the body. So, it's not just for it's for function, too. not just for it's for function, too. not just for it's for function, too. And I've se I've heard just so many And I've se I've heard just so many And I've se I've heard just so many stories over the years of people going, stories over the years of people going, stories over the years of people going, "Man, when I start hip thrusting, my "Man, when I start hip thrusting, my "Man, when I start hip thrusting, my lower body mechanics change, my function lower body mechanics change, my function lower body mechanics change, my function change, I no longer get this type of change, I no longer get this type of change, I no longer get this type of pain. I know I feel myself being more pain. I know I feel myself being more pain. I know I feel myself being more functional." So, you do it for a functional." So, you do it for a functional." So, you do it for a function, too. But, I think it really function, too. But, I think it really function, too. But, I think it really adds to the glute growth because every adds to the glute growth because every adds to the glute growth because every man is sold with isolation movements or man is sold with isolation movements or man is sold with isolation movements or single joint movements. And it's weird single joint movements. And it's weird single joint movements. And it's weird because I've noticed men kind of getting because I've noticed men kind of getting because I've noticed men kind of getting salty of this glute phenomenon, this salty of this glute phenomenon, this salty of this glute phenomenon, this glute training phenomenon. So, if you glute training phenomenon. So, if you glute training phenomenon. So, if you No, I I've never heard like say you were No, I I've never heard like say you were No, I I've never heard like say you were do you posted a video of yourself doing do you posted a video of yourself doing do you posted a video of yourself doing curls on your Instagram. You're not curls on your Instagram. You're not curls on your Instagram. You're not going to get a bunch of men that go, going to get a bunch of men that go, going to get a bunch of men that go, "Bro, just do chin-ups, lol. Bro, just "Bro, just do chin-ups, lol. Bro, just "Bro, just do chin-ups, lol. Bro, just do pull supenated pull downs." You're do pull supenated pull downs." You're do pull supenated pull downs." You're wasting your time with that. With wasting your time with that. With wasting your time with that. With &gt;&gt; Yeah, there's this sort of understanding &gt;&gt; Yeah, there's this sort of understanding &gt;&gt; Yeah, there's this sort of understanding that compound end isolation movements that compound end isolation movements that compound end isolation movements are important. We we all know that if are important. We we all know that if are important. We we all know that if you're trying to maximize your arm size, you're trying to maximize your arm size, you're trying to maximize your arm size, yes, you can get big arms. If you have a yes, you can get big arms. If you have a yes, you can get big arms. If you have a really strong bench press, dips, really strong bench press, dips, really strong bench press, dips, shoulder press, you know, uh pull chin shoulder press, you know, uh pull chin shoulder press, you know, uh pull chin up, pull down, and rows, you're going to up, pull down, and rows, you're going to up, pull down, and rows, you're going to have big arms, but they're going to get have big arms, but they're going to get have big arms, but they're going to get bigger if you add in some dedicated bigger if you add in some dedicated bigger if you add in some dedicated elbow flexion and extension work. You're elbow flexion and extension work. You're elbow flexion and extension work. You're everyone knows that. And and all the everyone knows that. And and all the everyone knows that. And and all the women know that with glutes, too. It's women know that with glutes, too. It's women know that with glutes, too. It's the men that t tend to have a problem. the men that t tend to have a problem. the men that t tend to have a problem. They they like the old days like in my They they like the old days like in my They they like the old days like in my day we did this and they want to say ju day we did this and they want to say ju day we did this and they want to say ju quit wasting your time with those silly quit wasting your time with those silly quit wasting your time with those silly hip thrusts or there those kickbacks or hip thrusts or there those kickbacks or hip thrusts or there those kickbacks or that abduction just do squats and that abduction just do squats and that abduction just do squats and deadlifts and lunges. I will tell you deadlifts and lunges. I will tell you deadlifts and lunges. I will tell you the listeners your the listeners who the listeners your the listeners who the listeners your the listeners who train glutes know this. A lot of people train glutes know this. A lot of people train glutes know this. A lot of people don't end up with big glutes when they don't end up with big glutes when they don't end up with big glutes when they focus on squats and deadlifts. You can focus on squats and deadlifts. You can focus on squats and deadlifts. You can go to powerlifting competitions. These go to powerlifting competitions. These go to powerlifting competitions. These are people who make a their main are people who make a their main are people who make a their main hobby is squatting and deadlifting and hobby is squatting and deadlifting and hobby is squatting and deadlifting and they're in their singlets. You can't they're in their singlets. You can't they're in their singlets. You can't hide it. You go to local powerlifting hide it. You go to local powerlifting hide it. You go to local powerlifting competition. You will see competition. You will see competition. You will see &gt;&gt; singlets are like the wrestling, you &gt;&gt; singlets are like the wrestling, you &gt;&gt; singlets are like the wrestling, you know, &gt;&gt; in powerlifting. You'd think you'd see &gt;&gt; in powerlifting. You'd think you'd see &gt;&gt; in powerlifting. You'd think you'd see good glute development. You see, you're good glute development. You see, you're good glute development. You see, you're like, "How are these people squatting like, "How are these people squatting like, "How are these people squatting and deadlifting all the time and they and deadlifting all the time and they and deadlifting all the time and they don't have glutes?" My clients have don't have glutes?" My clients have don't have glutes?" My clients have better glute development than what you better glute development than what you better glute development than what you see at powerlifting competitions. It's see at powerlifting competitions. It's see at powerlifting competitions. It's because they're using the rule of because they're using the rule of because they're using the rule of thirds. They're training the glutes thirds. They're training the glutes thirds. They're training the glutes through different vectors. That can be a through different vectors. That can be a through different vectors. That can be a distraction if you get too carried away distraction if you get too carried away distraction if you get too carried away and want to do every glute exercise and want to do every glute exercise and want to do every glute exercise because sometimes it's like no, just get because sometimes it's like no, just get because sometimes it's like no, just get stronger at the basics. And then stronger at the basics. And then stronger at the basics. And then sometimes it's no, incorporate more sometimes it's no, incorporate more sometimes it's no, incorporate more variety. But I will say if men want to variety. But I will say if men want to variety. But I will say if men want to grow their glutes, so if you're a male grow their glutes, so if you're a male grow their glutes, so if you're a male listener right now and you say I would listener right now and you say I would listener right now and you say I would like to have more glute development, I'm like to have more glute development, I'm like to have more glute development, I'm already doing uh you know a type of already doing uh you know a type of already doing uh you know a type of squat or lunge. I'm already doing a squat or lunge. I'm already doing a squat or lunge. I'm already doing a type of like hinge like an RDL. Um just type of like hinge like an RDL. Um just type of like hinge like an RDL. Um just add in two sets of hip thrust twice a add in two sets of hip thrust twice a add in two sets of hip thrust twice a week. And if you want to throw in the week. And if you want to throw in the week. And if you want to throw in the seated hip abduction machine, do that seated hip abduction machine, do that seated hip abduction machine, do that too. You'll notice some good glute too. You'll notice some good glute too. You'll notice some good glute growth over time and especially get growth over time and especially get growth over time and especially get strong at the hip thrust. Start out like strong at the hip thrust. Start out like strong at the hip thrust. Start out like start out light. Master that mind muscle start out light. Master that mind muscle start out light. Master that mind muscle connection. Make sure you're using the connection. Make sure you're using the connection. Make sure you're using the full range and then gain strength over full range and then gain strength over full range and then gain strength over time. Get to where you can do 315 for 20 time. Get to where you can do 315 for 20 time. Get to where you can do 315 for 20 reps. If you don't like high reps, do reps. If you don't like high reps, do reps. If you don't like high reps, do 405 for 10 reps. Trust me, you will 405 for 10 reps. Trust me, you will 405 for 10 reps. Trust me, you will notice some improvements with if you notice some improvements with if you notice some improvements with if you control the weight through the full control the weight through the full control the weight through the full range of motion. That's very simple range of motion. That's very simple range of motion. That's very simple actionable advice. where is the actionable advice. where is the actionable advice. where is the bar for let's assume someone doesn't bar for let's assume someone doesn't bar for let's assume someone doesn't have access to a hip thruster machine um have access to a hip thruster machine um have access to a hip thruster machine um and they're using the barbell placed and they're using the barbell placed and they're using the barbell placed over the pelvis. over the pelvis. over the pelvis. &gt;&gt; So the bar for some people you just keep &gt;&gt; So the bar for some people you just keep &gt;&gt; So the bar for some people you just keep the bar right above the pubic bone and the bar right above the pubic bone and the bar right above the pubic bone and you it stays right there throughout the you it stays right there throughout the you it stays right there throughout the whole range of motion. whole range of motion. whole range of motion. &gt;&gt; Um probably like &gt;&gt; Um probably like &gt;&gt; Um probably like probably 66% of people can do it that probably 66% of people can do it that probably 66% of people can do it that way. If you have a type of hip anatomy way. If you have a type of hip anatomy way. If you have a type of hip anatomy where your like your pelvis is off to where your like your pelvis is off to where your like your pelvis is off to the side where the where when the bar is the side where the where when the bar is the side where the where when the bar is right above your pubic bone, it's going right above your pubic bone, it's going right above your pubic bone, it's going to be hitting your um you know your to be hitting your um you know your to be hitting your um you know your pelvic bones. Then it's excruciatingly pelvic bones. Then it's excruciatingly pelvic bones. Then it's excruciatingly painful. For those people, they push it painful. For those people, they push it painful. For those people, they push it forward as they come up. forward as they come up. forward as they come up. &gt;&gt; God. &gt;&gt; God. &gt;&gt; God. &gt;&gt; So what happens is probably onethird of &gt;&gt; So what happens is probably onethird of &gt;&gt; So what happens is probably onethird of my clients my clients my clients &gt;&gt; as they rise up, they push the bar up &gt;&gt; as they rise up, they push the bar up &gt;&gt; as they rise up, they push the bar up until they're on until they're on until they're on &gt;&gt; their upper thighs. &gt;&gt; their upper thighs. &gt;&gt; their upper thighs. &gt;&gt; Oh. Onto their upper thighs. Yeah, &gt;&gt; Oh. Onto their upper thighs. Yeah, &gt;&gt; Oh. Onto their upper thighs. Yeah, that's the what my women do. The that's the what my women do. The that's the what my women do. The men tend to keep it above the pubic men tend to keep it above the pubic men tend to keep it above the pubic bone. We have different pelvic anatomies bone. We have different pelvic anatomies bone. We have different pelvic anatomies and so I can get people to do it and so I can get people to do it and so I can get people to do it comfortably. It it takes time though. comfortably. It it takes time though. comfortably. It it takes time though. Everyone can do every client I've had Everyone can do every client I've had Everyone can do every client I've had can do hip thrusts. You learn to keep can do hip thrusts. You learn to keep can do hip thrusts. You learn to keep the bar right there in place. It stays the bar right there in place. It stays the bar right there in place. It stays put. It's scary to look at it. You might put. It's scary to look at it. You might put. It's scary to look at it. You might think it looks dangerous or hard to pull think it looks dangerous or hard to pull think it looks dangerous or hard to pull off. Also, no one starts with 405. You off. Also, no one starts with 405. You off. Also, no one starts with 405. You start off with body weight. You start off with body weight. You start off with body weight. You start over with the barbell, lightweight, and over with the barbell, lightweight, and over with the barbell, lightweight, and you build up the tolerance to that you build up the tolerance to that you build up the tolerance to that &gt;&gt; pain over time. It's the same as when &gt;&gt; pain over time. It's the same as when &gt;&gt; pain over time. It's the same as when you start doing like low bar squats or you start doing like low bar squats or you start doing like low bar squats or high bar squats. It's it's like, ah, high bar squats. It's it's like, ah, high bar squats. It's it's like, ah, this hurts. And then you if you have this hurts. And then you if you have this hurts. And then you if you have ever done zer things, ah, this hurts. Or ever done zer things, ah, this hurts. Or ever done zer things, ah, this hurts. Or front squats, this hurts like hell. Hook front squats, this hurts like hell. Hook front squats, this hurts like hell. Hook grip, ah, this hurts like hell. And then grip, ah, this hurts like hell. And then grip, ah, this hurts like hell. And then three weeks later, four weeks later, three weeks later, four weeks later, three weeks later, four weeks later, you're fine. You adapt. So the bar you're fine. You adapt. So the bar you're fine. You adapt. So the bar placement though does need to change placement though does need to change placement though does need to change depending on your hip anatomy. But those depending on your hip anatomy. But those depending on your hip anatomy. But those are the two main things people do. But are the two main things people do. But are the two main things people do. But when you there's a difference with how when you there's a difference with how when you there's a difference with how what I recommend for men and women to what I recommend for men and women to what I recommend for men and women to build their glutes. And with men, if you build their glutes. And with men, if you build their glutes. And with men, if you if you're worried about hip thrust, if you're worried about hip thrust, if you're worried about hip thrust, learn how to do glute dominant 45 degree learn how to do glute dominant 45 degree learn how to do glute dominant 45 degree hypers. That's an awesome glute hypers. That's an awesome glute hypers. That's an awesome glute exercise. It's hip extension. We call it exercise. It's hip extension. We call it exercise. It's hip extension. We call it the back extension. It's hip extension. the back extension. It's hip extension. the back extension. It's hip extension. And if you round the back, flare your And if you round the back, flare your And if you round the back, flare your feet out a little bit. feet out a little bit. feet out a little bit. &gt;&gt; When you round the back, you're shutting &gt;&gt; When you round the back, you're shutting &gt;&gt; When you round the back, you're shutting the erectors off the erectors off the erectors off &gt;&gt; and then you're using your glutes to &gt;&gt; and then you're using your glutes to &gt;&gt; and then you're using your glutes to pull you up. M pull you up. M pull you up. M &gt;&gt; it's an awesome hip extension exercise. &gt;&gt; it's an awesome hip extension exercise. &gt;&gt; it's an awesome hip extension exercise. It's it's a it's so add that in or hip It's it's a it's so add that in or hip It's it's a it's so add that in or hip thrust and then if you're comfortable thrust and then if you're comfortable thrust and then if you're comfortable doing seated hip eruction you're going doing seated hip eruction you're going doing seated hip eruction you're going to see results just from that alone. You to see results just from that alone. You to see results just from that alone. You don't have to don't have to don't have to &gt;&gt; pay attention to all this stuff we've &gt;&gt; pay attention to all this stuff we've &gt;&gt; pay attention to all this stuff we've talked about in this podcast just do a talked about in this podcast just do a talked about in this podcast just do a simple thing of adding in hip thrust or simple thing of adding in hip thrust or simple thing of adding in hip thrust or you can do glute bridges off the Smith you can do glute bridges off the Smith you can do glute bridges off the Smith machine. Those are kind of easy to set a machine. Those are kind of easy to set a machine. Those are kind of easy to set a bench down um and glute bridges or hip bench down um and glute bridges or hip bench down um and glute bridges or hip thrust. We'll put a link to I saw a clip thrust. We'll put a link to I saw a clip thrust. We'll put a link to I saw a clip that you've posted that made it really that you've posted that made it really that you've posted that made it really clear how the Smith machine can be clear how the Smith machine can be clear how the Smith machine can be useful, especially get angles that might useful, especially get angles that might useful, especially get angles that might be more difficult to get with the be more difficult to get with the be more difficult to get with the classic hip thruster approach. classic hip thruster approach. classic hip thruster approach. &gt;&gt; And then and then 45 degree hypers. Add &gt;&gt; And then and then 45 degree hypers. Add &gt;&gt; And then and then 45 degree hypers. Add one of those in twice a week it to your one of those in twice a week it to your one of those in twice a week it to your leg day. If you train legs once a week, leg day. If you train legs once a week, leg day. If you train legs once a week, start training legs twice a week and you start training legs twice a week and you start training legs twice a week and you know do a do a compound movement or a know do a do a compound movement or a know do a do a compound movement or a multi- joint movement for the multi- joint movement for the multi- joint movement for the quads, the hamstrings, and the glutes. quads, the hamstrings, and the glutes. quads, the hamstrings, and the glutes. and you'll be you you'll be able to and you'll be you you'll be able to and you'll be you you'll be able to recover just fine and that will help you recover just fine and that will help you recover just fine and that will help you grow your glutes. But also use train the grow your glutes. But also use train the grow your glutes. But also use train the glutes from different vectors. I'm glutes from different vectors. I'm glutes from different vectors. I'm telling you, I can say this with so much telling you, I can say this with so much telling you, I can say this with so much confidence. Um when you start doing hip confidence. Um when you start doing hip confidence. Um when you start doing hip thrust correctly and really feeling that thrust correctly and really feeling that thrust correctly and really feeling that squeeze if you've never done it before, squeeze if you've never done it before, squeeze if you've never done it before, good things start happening in the body. good things start happening in the body. good things start happening in the body. It's just um we should be strong at enra It's just um we should be strong at enra It's just um we should be strong at enra hip extension. And it if you look at the hip extension. And it if you look at the hip extension. And it if you look at the glutes on anatomy chart, it's kind of glutes on anatomy chart, it's kind of glutes on anatomy chart, it's kind of the keystone. It's like the keystone the keystone. It's like the keystone the keystone. It's like the keystone muscles that tie everything together. A muscles that tie everything together. A muscles that tie everything together. A lot of good things happen when you do lot of good things happen when you do lot of good things happen when you do that. And then just resist. You said that. And then just resist. You said that. And then just resist. You said what are the main errors? What are the what are the main errors? What are the what are the main errors? What are the common flaws with hip thrusting? I kind common flaws with hip thrusting? I kind common flaws with hip thrusting? I kind of got sidetracked, but it's not coming of got sidetracked, but it's not coming of got sidetracked, but it's not coming up all the way or uh like people's knee up all the way or uh like people's knee up all the way or uh like people's knee angle. If your feet are too far out, you angle. If your feet are too far out, you angle. If your feet are too far out, you feel it more in your hamstring. Your feel it more in your hamstring. Your feel it more in your hamstring. Your feet are too close. You feel it in feet are too close. You feel it in feet are too close. You feel it in the stretch in the rectus forous, you the stretch in the rectus forous, you the stretch in the rectus forous, you don't feel as much in the glutes. And don't feel as much in the glutes. And don't feel as much in the glutes. And just ego lifting. In fact, I kind of just ego lifting. In fact, I kind of just ego lifting. In fact, I kind of think it's this tight rope we walk where think it's this tight rope we walk where think it's this tight rope we walk where you got to push it hard and then all of you got to push it hard and then all of you got to push it hard and then all of a sudden you realize you watch a video a sudden you realize you watch a video a sudden you realize you watch a video if you record yourself or something, if you record yourself or something, if you record yourself or something, you're like, "Ah, I yeah, I was you're like, "Ah, I yeah, I was you're like, "Ah, I yeah, I was progressively overloading and now I now progressively overloading and now I now progressively overloading and now I now my form looks ugly. I got to dial it my form looks ugly. I got to dial it my form looks ugly. I got to dial it back." And that's a common thing we have back." And that's a common thing we have back." And that's a common thing we have to do with a lot of exercise. I to do with a lot of exercise. I to do with a lot of exercise. I realize I was a little too greedy with realize I was a little too greedy with realize I was a little too greedy with my progressive overload and my form my progressive overload and my form my progressive overload and my form is compromised. My range of motion has is compromised. My range of motion has is compromised. My range of motion has been compromised. I'm a little sloppier. been compromised. I'm a little sloppier. been compromised. I'm a little sloppier. I'm going to reset. and that you have to I'm going to reset. and that you have to I'm going to reset. and that you have to do that from time to time. do that from time to time. do that from time to time. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you. Those those are &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you. Those those are &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you. Those those are very helpful tips. And I'll just uh add very helpful tips. And I'll just uh add very helpful tips. And I'll just uh add that the uh glute medius exercise that the uh glute medius exercise that the uh glute medius exercise &gt;&gt; glute medius hip thrust &gt;&gt; glute medius hip thrust &gt;&gt; glute medius hip thrust &gt;&gt; glute medius &gt;&gt; glute medius &gt;&gt; glute medius &gt;&gt; it could be called like a plate standing &gt;&gt; it could be called like a plate standing &gt;&gt; it could be called like a plate standing abduction but the because you eventually abduction but the because you eventually abduction but the because you eventually use a plate but it works the grounded use a plate but it works the grounded use a plate but it works the grounded the glute medius of the grounded leg not the glute medius of the grounded leg not the glute medius of the grounded leg not the top not the up leg. It works the top not the up leg. It works the top not the up leg. It works the down leg the glute med. We'll put a link down leg the glute med. We'll put a link down leg the glute med. We'll put a link to that specific timestamp where you to that specific timestamp where you to that specific timestamp where you showed me the movement requires no uh showed me the movement requires no uh showed me the movement requires no uh equipment. I will say that adding those equipment. I will say that adding those equipment. I will say that adding those in, even though I now realize I wasn't in, even though I now realize I wasn't in, even though I now realize I wasn't doing them exactly right, but adding doing them exactly right, but adding doing them exactly right, but adding those in a few years ago um on the those in a few years ago um on the those in a few years ago um on the suggestion of Jeff Cavalier uh from suggestion of Jeff Cavalier uh from suggestion of Jeff Cavalier uh from Athleene X uh resolved what I thought Athleene X uh resolved what I thought Athleene X uh resolved what I thought was a back pain issue completely an was a back pain issue completely an was a back pain issue completely an ongoing nagging back issue that would ongoing nagging back issue that would ongoing nagging back issue that would leave me feeling completely debilitated, leave me feeling completely debilitated, leave me feeling completely debilitated, folded over folded over folded over often from sitting too much or even from often from sitting too much or even from often from sitting too much or even from certain mistakes made in training and certain mistakes made in training and certain mistakes made in training and getting glute media stronger. getting glute media stronger. getting glute media stronger. uh resolved that and what you just uh resolved that and what you just uh resolved that and what you just described yesterday and took me described yesterday and took me described yesterday and took me through was incredible because I could through was incredible because I could through was incredible because I could really feel the activation and I can really feel the activation and I can really feel the activation and I can really sense how it stabilizes the really sense how it stabilizes the really sense how it stabilizes the pelvis and does all the great things pelvis and does all the great things pelvis and does all the great things that people can look up the glute medius that people can look up the glute medius that people can look up the glute medius does. So, thank you for that. does. So, thank you for that. does. So, thank you for that. Although we're mainly talking about the Although we're mainly talking about the Although we're mainly talking about the glutes, you've also been giving us a glutes, you've also been giving us a glutes, you've also been giving us a beautiful description of how to beautiful description of how to beautiful description of how to prioritize a lagging muscle group. It prioritize a lagging muscle group. It prioritize a lagging muscle group. It just so happens that the glutes are just so happens that the glutes are just so happens that the glutes are lagging for most people. lagging for most people. lagging for most people. Let's transfer that to essentially any Let's transfer that to essentially any Let's transfer that to essentially any muscle group with the understanding that muscle group with the understanding that muscle group with the understanding that different muscle groups have different muscle groups have different muscle groups have different needs, right? Different size muscle needs, right? Different size muscle needs, right? Different size muscle groups recover more or less. It can groups recover more or less. It can groups recover more or less. It can handle different volumes. We certainly handle different volumes. We certainly handle different volumes. We certainly don't have time to get into all the don't have time to get into all the don't have time to get into all the details of that. And um it's highly details of that. And um it's highly details of that. And um it's highly individual as well. But what I'm taking individual as well. But what I'm taking individual as well. But what I'm taking away from what you've said so far is away from what you've said so far is away from what you've said so far is that if one does a really honest assessment if one does a really honest assessment if one does a really honest assessment of their development, their aesthetic of their development, their aesthetic of their development, their aesthetic development, their strength development, their strength development, their strength development, there almost always is one or two body there almost always is one or two body there almost always is one or two body parts that are lagging that need help parts that are lagging that need help parts that are lagging that need help that aesthetically or functionally or that aesthetically or functionally or that aesthetically or functionally or strength-wise or all of the above are strength-wise or all of the above are strength-wise or all of the above are behind the rest of the body. I think men behind the rest of the body. I think men behind the rest of the body. I think men more than women in my observation more than women in my observation more than women in my observation tend to focus a lot on their stronger tend to focus a lot on their stronger tend to focus a lot on their stronger lifts in the gym. Like, oh, if they can lifts in the gym. Like, oh, if they can lifts in the gym. Like, oh, if they can bench a lot and they've got really, you bench a lot and they've got really, you bench a lot and they've got really, you know, a lot of chest development, know, a lot of chest development, know, a lot of chest development, they'll like bench a lot. I always want they'll like bench a lot. I always want they'll like bench a lot. I always want to pull them aside. Like, listen, like to pull them aside. Like, listen, like to pull them aside. Like, listen, like lay off the benches. You see these guys lay off the benches. You see these guys lay off the benches. You see these guys with like heavy lower pec development, with like heavy lower pec development, with like heavy lower pec development, no upper pec development or just like no upper pec development or just like no upper pec development or just like huge chest and then like pipe arms and huge chest and then like pipe arms and huge chest and then like pipe arms and no forearms. you just kind of want to be no forearms. you just kind of want to be no forearms. you just kind of want to be like, "Listen, man." Like, is it really like, "Listen, man." Like, is it really like, "Listen, man." Like, is it really that necessary to like lean into your that necessary to like lean into your that necessary to like lean into your strengths that much? Could, you know, I strengths that much? Could, you know, I strengths that much? Could, you know, I think many people, men and women, could think many people, men and women, could think many people, men and women, could afford to do an assessment of like where afford to do an assessment of like where afford to do an assessment of like where they could prioritize. So, can we just they could prioritize. So, can we just they could prioritize. So, can we just transmit what you've already said so far transmit what you've already said so far transmit what you've already said so far and just say, listen, if I want to bring and just say, listen, if I want to bring and just say, listen, if I want to bring up my shoulders, for instance, maybe I up my shoulders, for instance, maybe I up my shoulders, for instance, maybe I train them two or three times a week. train them two or three times a week. train them two or three times a week. Um, currently I'm training them once a Um, currently I'm training them once a Um, currently I'm training them once a week, but really twice because I train week, but really twice because I train week, but really twice because I train my shoulders on shoulder. I have a my shoulders on shoulder. I have a my shoulders on shoulder. I have a shoulder and back day. It's actually a shoulder and back day. It's actually a shoulder and back day. It's actually a push pull upper body day minus push pull upper body day minus push pull upper body day minus arms. And then on arms day, I'm doing arms. And then on arms day, I'm doing arms. And then on arms day, I'm doing some reverse bench dips. I tend to do some reverse bench dips. I tend to do some reverse bench dips. I tend to do rear delt flies. Again, I do some things rear delt flies. Again, I do some things rear delt flies. Again, I do some things that I do dips. So, I'm basically that I do dips. So, I'm basically that I do dips. So, I'm basically hitting shoulders twice a week. But hitting shoulders twice a week. But hitting shoulders twice a week. But let's say I wanted to bring up my let's say I wanted to bring up my let's say I wanted to bring up my shoulder development or another muscle shoulder development or another muscle shoulder development or another muscle group. Would you suggest adding another group. Would you suggest adding another group. Would you suggest adding another day, like a third day, and then day, like a third day, and then day, like a third day, and then throttling back on some other aspect of throttling back on some other aspect of throttling back on some other aspect of my training, uh, just as you would for my training, uh, just as you would for my training, uh, just as you would for glutes? um because that seems to be what glutes? um because that seems to be what glutes? um because that seems to be what I'm taking from what you've said so far. I'm taking from what you've said so far. I'm taking from what you've said so far. &gt;&gt; So, absolutely. Um add volume to the &gt;&gt; So, absolutely. Um add volume to the &gt;&gt; So, absolutely. Um add volume to the lagging part and take some volume away. lagging part and take some volume away. lagging part and take some volume away. You can't just hammer everything. And I You can't just hammer everything. And I You can't just hammer everything. And I think that's one of the main um limiters think that's one of the main um limiters think that's one of the main um limiters of especially men um but also women with of especially men um but also women with of especially men um but also women with glutes like you want to do every glutes like you want to do every glutes like you want to do every movement there is. And people I want movement there is. And people I want movement there is. And people I want people to understand how easy it is to people to understand how easy it is to people to understand how easy it is to maintain size and strength. There's this maintain size and strength. There's this maintain size and strength. There's this classic study by Bickl. Um it took uh classic study by Bickl. Um it took uh classic study by Bickl. Um it took uh they to they looked at young and older they to they looked at young and older they to they looked at young and older subjects. I'm just going to focus on the subjects. I'm just going to focus on the subjects. I'm just going to focus on the younger subjects, but I think it was younger subjects, but I think it was younger subjects, but I think it was like four months. They did a like a they like four months. They did a like a they like four months. They did a like a they hammered quads like three times a week hammered quads like three times a week hammered quads like three times a week with three sets of squats, three sets of with three sets of squats, three sets of with three sets of squats, three sets of leg press, three sets of leg extensions. leg press, three sets of leg extensions. leg press, three sets of leg extensions. Three times a week. Three times a week. Three times a week. &gt;&gt; All three of those. Three times a week. &gt;&gt; All three of those. Three times a week. &gt;&gt; All three of those. Three times a week. &gt;&gt; All three. three times a week, grew &gt;&gt; All three. three times a week, grew &gt;&gt; All three. three times a week, grew their quads, quads got way bigger, their quads, quads got way bigger, their quads, quads got way bigger, &gt;&gt; 27 sets, and then one group just stopped &gt;&gt; 27 sets, and then one group just stopped &gt;&gt; 27 sets, and then one group just stopped training. &gt;&gt; One group did one-third the volume, so &gt;&gt; One group did one-third the volume, so &gt;&gt; One group did one-third the volume, so just one day a week. So instead of three just one day a week. So instead of three just one day a week. So instead of three days a week, they just did that same days a week, they just did that same days a week, they just did that same workout one day a week. And one group workout one day a week. And one group workout one day a week. And one group did one ninth the volume, meaning one did one ninth the volume, meaning one did one ninth the volume, meaning one meaning just one set of squats, one set meaning just one set of squats, one set meaning just one set of squats, one set of leg press, one set of leg extensions. of leg press, one set of leg extensions. of leg press, one set of leg extensions. So went from doing 27 sets a week to So went from doing 27 sets a week to So went from doing 27 sets a week to just three sets. just three sets. just three sets. And you look at it, they maintained most of you look at it, they maintained most of you look at it, they maintained most of their size and strength for their size and strength for their size and strength for &gt;&gt; doing one set &gt;&gt; doing one set &gt;&gt; doing one set &gt;&gt; for like for like 6 months &gt;&gt; for like for like 6 months &gt;&gt; for like for like 6 months &gt;&gt; doing just one set of &gt;&gt; doing just one set of &gt;&gt; doing just one set of &gt;&gt; squats, one set of leg press, one set of &gt;&gt; squats, one set of leg press, one set of &gt;&gt; squats, one set of leg press, one set of leg extensions. And so you can maintain leg extensions. And so you can maintain leg extensions. And so you can maintain very that was like this classic paper very that was like this classic paper very that was like this classic paper that but I kind of realized that too. that but I kind of realized that too. that but I kind of realized that too. I'm like man, it's really easy to I'm like man, it's really easy to I'm like man, it's really easy to maintain strength and size once you've maintain strength and size once you've maintain strength and size once you've built it up. It's hard to build. It's built it up. It's hard to build. It's built it up. It's hard to build. It's easy to maintain. And that could easy to maintain. And that could easy to maintain. And that could have something to do with this muscle have something to do with this muscle have something to do with this muscle memory concept where it's like well memory concept where it's like well memory concept where it's like well muscle memory has an epigenetics muscle memory has an epigenetics muscle memory has an epigenetics component to it and then a myionuclear component to it and then a myionuclear component to it and then a myionuclear component to it. But once you've gotten component to it. But once you've gotten component to it. But once you've gotten those nuclei uh fused as extra nuclei those nuclei uh fused as extra nuclei those nuclei uh fused as extra nuclei from the stem cells, the muscle stem from the stem cells, the muscle stem from the stem cells, the muscle stem cells, the satellite cells, and now cells, the satellite cells, and now cells, the satellite cells, and now they're now in the nucle they're now in they're now in the nucle they're now in they're now in the nucle they're now in the muscle fiber, they're there to stay. the muscle fiber, they're there to stay. the muscle fiber, they're there to stay. That's that's kind of debated, but it's That's that's kind of debated, but it's That's that's kind of debated, but it's but as long as you're lifting weights, but as long as you're lifting weights, but as long as you're lifting weights, it's hard to gain, it's easy to it's hard to gain, it's easy to it's hard to gain, it's easy to maintain. So, sticking with this concept maintain. So, sticking with this concept maintain. So, sticking with this concept of um of like maintain certain muscles, of um of like maintain certain muscles, of um of like maintain certain muscles, we know from the extreme high volume we know from the extreme high volume we know from the extreme high volume literature that for brief periods, if literature that for brief periods, if literature that for brief periods, if you specialize, you can blast a muscle you specialize, you can blast a muscle you specialize, you can blast a muscle with high volume and it can grow. it the with high volume and it can grow. it the with high volume and it can grow. it the it's almost like the more the it's almost like the more the it's almost like the more the more the marrier which is crazy for me more the marrier which is crazy for me more the marrier which is crazy for me because there's now five studies I because there's now five studies I because there's now five studies I believe there's the first was this believe there's the first was this believe there's the first was this radially study then there was Seanfeld radially study then there was Seanfeld radially study then there was Seanfeld two by anis there's another one I'm two by anis there's another one I'm two by anis there's another one I'm forgetting but the these are five forgetting but the these are five forgetting but the these are five studies showing that over 30 sets a week studies showing that over 30 sets a week studies showing that over 30 sets a week you get more dose response you get more you get more dose response you get more you get more dose response you get more growth the more volume you that you do growth the more volume you that you do growth the more volume you that you do some um some influencers have argued some um some influencers have argued some um some influencers have argued that it's just swelling you're getting that it's just swelling you're getting that it's just swelling you're getting more swelling but That is doubtful based more swelling but That is doubtful based more swelling but That is doubtful based on a study I think it was from Rafalo. on a study I think it was from Rafalo. on a study I think it was from Rafalo. It looked at like self like the swelling It looked at like self like the swelling It looked at like self like the swelling 3 days after and 5 days after. It looks 3 days after and 5 days after. It looks 3 days after and 5 days after. It looks like that's legit. But all of us know like that's legit. But all of us know like that's legit. But all of us know that's not sustainable. You can't just that's not sustainable. You can't just that's not sustainable. You can't just do 30 sets for every muscle group do 30 sets for every muscle group do 30 sets for every muscle group indefinitely. That's the recipe for indefinitely. That's the recipe for indefinitely. That's the recipe for disaster. What people should be looking disaster. What people should be looking disaster. What people should be looking is, wow, you can blast a muscle with is, wow, you can blast a muscle with is, wow, you can blast a muscle with high volume for brief periods and grow. high volume for brief periods and grow. high volume for brief periods and grow. So what does how does this So what does how does this So what does how does this translate for lagging muscles? For a lot translate for lagging muscles? For a lot translate for lagging muscles? For a lot of my followers, they're just on a of my followers, they're just on a of my followers, they're just on a permanent glute specialization routine. permanent glute specialization routine. permanent glute specialization routine. They want glutes so much and they They want glutes so much and they They want glutes so much and they don't want other muscle. Like a lot of don't want other muscle. Like a lot of don't want other muscle. Like a lot of my followers are like, I don't really my followers are like, I don't really my followers are like, I don't really care about my upper body or my quads or care about my upper body or my quads or care about my upper body or my quads or my hamstrings. I just want bigger my hamstrings. I just want bigger my hamstrings. I just want bigger glutes. &gt;&gt; This is mostly female followers. &gt;&gt; This is mostly female followers. &gt;&gt; This is mostly female followers. &gt;&gt; Mostly female followers. But I will say &gt;&gt; Mostly female followers. But I will say &gt;&gt; Mostly female followers. But I will say a lot of men care about we care about a lot of men care about we care about a lot of men care about we care about every muscle and we kind of look in the every muscle and we kind of look in the every muscle and we kind of look in the mirror and it's whatever your weak part mirror and it's whatever your weak part mirror and it's whatever your weak part is. Some people it's their calves, some is. Some people it's their calves, some is. Some people it's their calves, some people it's this. So can you follow? people it's this. So can you follow? people it's this. So can you follow? &gt;&gt; Unfortunately, it's not most guys &gt;&gt; Unfortunately, it's not most guys &gt;&gt; Unfortunately, it's not most guys neck. I see that a lot of guys need neck neck. I see that a lot of guys need neck neck. I see that a lot of guys need neck training and they don't do it. training and they don't do it. training and they don't do it. &gt;&gt; They don't do it. &gt;&gt; They don't do it. &gt;&gt; They don't do it. &gt;&gt; And it's amazing how neck training can &gt;&gt; And it's amazing how neck training can &gt;&gt; And it's amazing how neck training can positively affect the male positively affect the male positively affect the male aesthetic. Like you look at a strong aesthetic. Like you look at a strong aesthetic. Like you look at a strong neck makes somebody look strong. It also neck makes somebody look strong. It also neck makes somebody look strong. It also incidentally makes other lifts like for incidentally makes other lifts like for incidentally makes other lifts like for upper body go way up. You know if you upper body go way up. You know if you upper body go way up. You know if you guys look at your neck is jacked, but guys look at your neck is jacked, but guys look at your neck is jacked, but you've trained it for how many years? you've trained it for how many years? you've trained it for how many years? &gt;&gt; I train my neck twice a week. How many &gt;&gt; I train my neck twice a week. How many &gt;&gt; I train my neck twice a week. How many years? &gt;&gt; I've done it for I can't remember how &gt;&gt; I've done it for I can't remember how &gt;&gt; I've done it for I can't remember how many years. Many years. many years. Many years. many years. Many years. &gt;&gt; Like 10 years. &gt;&gt; Like 10 years. &gt;&gt; Like 10 years. &gt;&gt; At least 10 years. Um, &gt;&gt; At least 10 years. Um, &gt;&gt; At least 10 years. Um, &gt;&gt; because you have a thick neck and &gt;&gt; because you have a thick neck and &gt;&gt; because you have a thick neck and there's a study on that because the old there's a study on that because the old there's a study on that because the old adage was just do uh you don't need to adage was just do uh you don't need to adage was just do uh you don't need to train your neck. If you do deadlift, train your neck. If you do deadlift, train your neck. If you do deadlift, shrugs, you know, rows, it's going to shrugs, you know, rows, it's going to shrugs, you know, rows, it's going to grow. No, it doesn't. The study showed grow. No, it doesn't. The study showed grow. No, it doesn't. The study showed that they had one group doing that just that they had one group doing that just that they had one group doing that just the deadlifts, the shrugs, the rows, and the deadlifts, the shrugs, the rows, and the deadlifts, the shrugs, the rows, and another group doing neck flexion another group doing neck flexion another group doing neck flexion extension. The group doing the extension. The group doing the extension. The group doing the deadlifts and shrugs, they grew deadlifts and shrugs, they grew deadlifts and shrugs, they grew their traps, but not their neck muscles their traps, but not their neck muscles their traps, but not their neck muscles at all. You want to grow the neck at all. You want to grow the neck at all. You want to grow the neck muscles, you have to train the neck muscles, you have to train the neck muscles, you have to train the neck muscles. &gt;&gt; It's so critical. The neck is the upper &gt;&gt; It's so critical. The neck is the upper &gt;&gt; It's so critical. The neck is the upper spine. And and also nowadays, everyone's spine. And and also nowadays, everyone's spine. And and also nowadays, everyone's hunched over in the C-shaped position hunched over in the C-shaped position hunched over in the C-shaped position because we're texting all the time and because we're texting all the time and because we're texting all the time and we're sitting too much. But Jeff we're sitting too much. But Jeff we're sitting too much. But Jeff Cavalier has a great video on how to Cavalier has a great video on how to Cavalier has a great video on how to properly train the neck using a plate in properly train the neck using a plate in properly train the neck using a plate in the gym wrapped in a towel. How to do the gym wrapped in a towel. How to do the gym wrapped in a towel. How to do this with the mouth closed, nasal this with the mouth closed, nasal this with the mouth closed, nasal breathing, tongue on the roof of the breathing, tongue on the roof of the breathing, tongue on the roof of the mouth. There are a lot of things you can mouth. There are a lot of things you can mouth. There are a lot of things you can do wrong. So, neck training, I think, do wrong. So, neck training, I think, do wrong. So, neck training, I think, has to be approached correctly. Uh, and has to be approached correctly. Uh, and has to be approached correctly. Uh, and bridges are probably, according to Jeff, bridges are probably, according to Jeff, bridges are probably, according to Jeff, are probably not the best thing because are probably not the best thing because are probably not the best thing because you can slip a disc and it happens in a you can slip a disc and it happens in a you can slip a disc and it happens in a moment. I think neck training is vital. moment. I think neck training is vital. moment. I think neck training is vital. I think women shy away from neck I think women shy away from neck I think women shy away from neck training because they don't want a training because they don't want a training because they don't want a larger neck which I and so I haven't larger neck which I and so I haven't larger neck which I and so I haven't quite figured out the solution to hand quite figured out the solution to hand quite figured out the solution to hand off to them and I'm not a again I'm not off to them and I'm not a again I'm not off to them and I'm not a again I'm not a trainer. This is just my experience. a trainer. This is just my experience. a trainer. This is just my experience. &gt;&gt; Volume with like so I agree with you &gt;&gt; Volume with like so I agree with you &gt;&gt; Volume with like so I agree with you like and it's funny. I have an identical like and it's funny. I have an identical like and it's funny. I have an identical twin brother and he he's always like man twin brother and he he's always like man twin brother and he he's always like man I love your neck is bigger. I have this I love your neck is bigger. I have this I love your neck is bigger. I have this little bobble head. little bobble head. little bobble head. &gt;&gt; You have a properly sized and shaped &gt;&gt; You have a properly sized and shaped &gt;&gt; You have a properly sized and shaped neck. I don't I don't do neck training, neck. I don't I don't do neck training, neck. I don't I don't do neck training, but I think what happens is a lot of but I think what happens is a lot of but I think what happens is a lot of people &gt;&gt; like pull downs and military press and &gt;&gt; like pull downs and military press and &gt;&gt; like pull downs and military press and even like bench can irritate people's even like bench can irritate people's even like bench can irritate people's necks because we flex it. When I bench, necks because we flex it. When I bench, necks because we flex it. When I bench, I always want to be here. When I compete I always want to be here. When I compete I always want to be here. When I compete in a powerlifting, I had to learn how to in a powerlifting, I had to learn how to in a powerlifting, I had to learn how to &gt;&gt; I had to learn how to keep my head back. &gt;&gt; I had to learn how to keep my head back. &gt;&gt; I had to learn how to keep my head back. So, a lot of times we're just flexing it So, a lot of times we're just flexing it So, a lot of times we're just flexing it isomemmetrically. And I think that's isomemmetrically. And I think that's isomemmetrically. And I think that's what I do when I doing like chin-ups and what I do when I doing like chin-ups and what I do when I doing like chin-ups and stuff and I'm always like flexing it stuff and I'm always like flexing it stuff and I'm always like flexing it isomemmetrically, which can provide a isomemmetrically, which can provide a isomemmetrically, which can provide a stimulus. I'd get bigger a bigger neck stimulus. I'd get bigger a bigger neck stimulus. I'd get bigger a bigger neck if I train it. I think that's the hard if I train it. I think that's the hard if I train it. I think that's the hard part is I love having strong forearms. I part is I love having strong forearms. I part is I love having strong forearms. I love grip training. I love every muscle. love grip training. I love every muscle. love grip training. I love every muscle. How do you work it together in a How do you work it together in a How do you work it together in a comprehensive program and do it week in comprehensive program and do it week in comprehensive program and do it week in and week out? That's the hard part as and week out? That's the hard part as and week out? That's the hard part as how to train everything. So, we end up how to train everything. So, we end up how to train everything. So, we end up going the six lifts we mentioned. You going the six lifts we mentioned. You going the six lifts we mentioned. You know, you're going to get most of your know, you're going to get most of your know, you're going to get most of your muscles even like deadlifts are going to muscles even like deadlifts are going to muscles even like deadlifts are going to train your grip muscles, but it's like train your grip muscles, but it's like train your grip muscles, but it's like then how do you how do you hit all of then how do you how do you hit all of then how do you how do you hit all of them for maximum function? How do them for maximum function? How do them for maximum function? How do you strengthen everything? Well, I think you strengthen everything? Well, I think you strengthen everything? Well, I think &gt;&gt; not get distracted because timewise, &gt;&gt; not get distracted because timewise, &gt;&gt; not get distracted because timewise, you're right. I think the problem is you're right. I think the problem is you're right. I think the problem is when you try to say, I want every muscle when you try to say, I want every muscle when you try to say, I want every muscle in the body. I'm going to do, you know, in the body. I'm going to do, you know, in the body. I'm going to do, you know, 20 sets for my forearms, 20 sets for my 20 sets for my forearms, 20 sets for my 20 sets for my forearms, 20 sets for my biceps, my triceps, each head of the biceps, my triceps, each head of the biceps, my triceps, each head of the delt, my traps, my pecs, my lats, and delt, my traps, my pecs, my lats, and delt, my traps, my pecs, my lats, and upper pecs, lower pecs, upper lats, upper pecs, lower pecs, upper lats, upper pecs, lower pecs, upper lats, lower lats, erectors, glutes, quads, lower lats, erectors, glutes, quads, lower lats, erectors, glutes, quads, hamstrings, calves, adductors, you name hamstrings, calves, adductors, you name hamstrings, calves, adductors, you name it, I want it. And then you it's a it, I want it. And then you it's a it, I want it. And then you it's a recipe for disaster. So you have to recipe for disaster. So you have to recipe for disaster. So you have to specialize a little bit specialize a little bit specialize a little bit &gt;&gt; based on your goals, your &gt;&gt; based on your goals, your &gt;&gt; based on your goals, your preferences, your preferences, your preferences, your &gt;&gt; individual weaknesses as per your &gt;&gt; individual weaknesses as per your &gt;&gt; individual weaknesses as per your anatomy. &gt;&gt; And that's where you could say, look, &gt;&gt; And that's where you could say, look, &gt;&gt; And that's where you could say, look, um, what we've talked about throughout um, what we've talked about throughout um, what we've talked about throughout this podcast gives people some tools. this podcast gives people some tools. this podcast gives people some tools. It's like, look, the first set is the It's like, look, the first set is the It's like, look, the first set is the most important. It's for bringing up most important. It's for bringing up most important. It's for bringing up lagging muscle groups, but also what if lagging muscle groups, but also what if lagging muscle groups, but also what if you just wanted to maximize hypertrophy? you just wanted to maximize hypertrophy? you just wanted to maximize hypertrophy? What if a bodybuilder, a pro, like what What if a bodybuilder, a pro, like what What if a bodybuilder, a pro, like what if I it would be kind of cool if I could if I it would be kind of cool if I could if I it would be kind of cool if I could test this theory? I just don't think test this theory? I just don't think test this theory? I just don't think anyone would want to train this way. Um, anyone would want to train this way. Um, anyone would want to train this way. Um, if you said, "Look, I'm going to go on if you said, "Look, I'm going to go on if you said, "Look, I'm going to go on this blast and cruise type philosophy this blast and cruise type philosophy this blast and cruise type philosophy where it's hard to build, easy to where it's hard to build, easy to where it's hard to build, easy to maintain. So, in try instead of trying maintain. So, in try instead of trying maintain. So, in try instead of trying to build everything at once, I'm going to build everything at once, I'm going to build everything at once, I'm going to really prioritize one muscle from the to really prioritize one muscle from the to really prioritize one muscle from the upper body and one muscle from the lower upper body and one muscle from the lower upper body and one muscle from the lower body or two each month." So month one body or two each month." So month one body or two each month." So month one it's, you know, it's uh quads and pecs. it's, you know, it's uh quads and pecs. it's, you know, it's uh quads and pecs. And month two, it's back and hamstrings. And month two, it's back and hamstrings. And month two, it's back and hamstrings. Month three, it's delts and then glutes Month three, it's delts and then glutes Month three, it's delts and then glutes and adductors because they kind of go and adductors because they kind of go and adductors because they kind of go together. Maybe you throw arms into together. Maybe you throw arms into together. Maybe you throw arms into that. Delts and arms and then, you know, that. Delts and arms and then, you know, that. Delts and arms and then, you know, glutes and adductors. And then you glutes and adductors. And then you glutes and adductors. And then you rotate. You rotate through that cycle rotate. You rotate through that cycle rotate. You rotate through that cycle and you're doing all of it. you're just and you're doing all of it. you're just and you're doing all of it. you're just skewing the volume a lot and the and the skewing the volume a lot and the and the skewing the volume a lot and the and the focus, the progressive overload focus. focus, the progressive overload focus. focus, the progressive overload focus. So on the months that you're So on the months that you're So on the months that you're maintaining, you're just trying to do maintaining, you're just trying to do maintaining, you're just trying to do one or two sets, limited volume, trying one or two sets, limited volume, trying one or two sets, limited volume, trying to maintain your to maintain your to maintain your &gt;&gt; per exercise, two or three exercises. &gt;&gt; per exercise, two or three exercises. &gt;&gt; per exercise, two or three exercises. Well, this Well, this Well, this &gt;&gt; then you're really blasting the muscle &gt;&gt; then you're really blasting the muscle &gt;&gt; then you're really blasting the muscle that you're focused on. Theoretically, that you're focused on. Theoretically, that you're focused on. Theoretically, those would grow a lot during the focus those would grow a lot during the focus those would grow a lot during the focus month and then they maintain. Maybe month and then they maintain. Maybe month and then they maintain. Maybe that's a better way to grow muscle. It's that's a better way to grow muscle. It's that's a better way to grow muscle. It's just no one would ever do it. to me what just no one would ever do it. to me what just no one would ever do it. to me what you describe for glutes and what you're you describe for glutes and what you're you describe for glutes and what you're describing now for essentially any body describing now for essentially any body describing now for essentially any body part there's a common theme here which part there's a common theme here which part there's a common theme here which is that short periods of let's say four is that short periods of let's say four is that short periods of let's say four to six weeks a prioritization training to six weeks a prioritization training to six weeks a prioritization training with more a muscle three times a week with more a muscle three times a week with more a muscle three times a week different movements perhaps even different movements perhaps even different movements perhaps even different rep ranges different rep ranges different rep ranges &gt;&gt; and this is the key thing that I'm &gt;&gt; and this is the key thing that I'm &gt;&gt; and this is the key thing that I'm taking away from what you've said and taking away from what you've said and taking away from what you've said and then throttling back on the volume for then throttling back on the volume for then throttling back on the volume for other muscle groups not panicking that other muscle groups not panicking that other muscle groups not panicking that you're going to lose all your you're going to lose all your you're going to lose all your development in these other muscle groups development in these other muscle groups development in these other muscle groups &gt;&gt; is really what allows you to bring &gt;&gt; is really what allows you to bring &gt;&gt; is really what allows you to bring everything up to the more or less same everything up to the more or less same everything up to the more or less same level. And yet I also agree with the level. And yet I also agree with the level. And yet I also agree with the last sentence you said, most people lack last sentence you said, most people lack last sentence you said, most people lack the discipline or the just the ability the discipline or the just the ability the discipline or the just the ability to throttle back on the volume of work to throttle back on the volume of work to throttle back on the volume of work for body parts that they're strong in for body parts that they're strong in for body parts that they're strong in because it feels so damn good to train because it feels so damn good to train because it feels so damn good to train the things that you're strong in. And the things that you're strong in. And the things that you're strong in. And yet it's the exact opposite of what we yet it's the exact opposite of what we yet it's the exact opposite of what we need to do. I did that for delts, but it need to do. I did that for delts, but it need to do. I did that for delts, but it gets to a point where I'm so sick of gets to a point where I'm so sick of gets to a point where I'm so sick of doing delt raises for the front side and doing delt raises for the front side and doing delt raises for the front side and rear delt. You just get so sick of it. rear delt. You just get so sick of it. rear delt. You just get so sick of it. But I would do a lot of variety. But I But I would do a lot of variety. But I But I would do a lot of variety. But I started training more volume, more started training more volume, more started training more volume, more frequency. I wasn't necessarily focused frequency. I wasn't necessarily focused frequency. I wasn't necessarily focused on progressive overload either. Like on progressive overload either. Like on progressive overload either. Like I've preached progressive overload, but I've preached progressive overload, but I've preached progressive overload, but my delts grew at the age of 48 for now. my delts grew at the age of 48 for now. my delts grew at the age of 48 for now. 49, but they grew last year, which is 49, but they grew last year, which is 49, but they grew last year, which is hard to do at our age to have your hard to do at our age to have your hard to do at our age to have your all-time best delts after all these all-time best delts after all these all-time best delts after all these years of lifting. But I used I years of lifting. But I used I years of lifting. But I used I incorporated a lot of variety. I was incorporated a lot of variety. I was incorporated a lot of variety. I was doing lengthen partials, cables, doing lengthen partials, cables, doing lengthen partials, cables, machines, dumbbells, bands. I was doing machines, dumbbells, bands. I was doing machines, dumbbells, bands. I was doing it all. And just the extra volume grew it all. And just the extra volume grew it all. And just the extra volume grew my delts. I didn't get stronger at my delts. I didn't get stronger at my delts. I didn't get stronger at shoulder press or lateral raises. I was shoulder press or lateral raises. I was shoulder press or lateral raises. I was just hitting them more frequently, just hitting them more frequently, just hitting them more frequently, doing more volume. you reach a point doing more volume. you reach a point doing more volume. you reach a point where you're sick of it and you're like, where you're sick of it and you're like, where you're sick of it and you're like, I can't I don't want to do any more delt I can't I don't want to do any more delt I can't I don't want to do any more delt raises. &gt;&gt; So, it naturally lends itself to like &gt;&gt; So, it naturally lends itself to like &gt;&gt; So, it naturally lends itself to like four week spurts. You know, I do it four week spurts. You know, I do it four week spurts. You know, I do it for four weeks, then I throttle back. for four weeks, then I throttle back. for four weeks, then I throttle back. And &gt;&gt; with grip training, I was always like, &gt;&gt; with grip training, I was always like, &gt;&gt; with grip training, I was always like, man, I will never be able to hold on to man, I will never be able to hold on to man, I will never be able to hold on to the bar with my max deadlift weight. the bar with my max deadlift weight. the bar with my max deadlift weight. &gt;&gt; And then &gt;&gt; And then &gt;&gt; And then I did a powerlifting competition a lot I did a powerlifting competition a lot I did a powerlifting competition a lot of years ago. I'm like, shoot, I can't of years ago. I'm like, shoot, I can't of years ago. I'm like, shoot, I can't wear straps. I got to strengthen my wear straps. I got to strengthen my wear straps. I got to strengthen my grip. Well, what I learned was like grip. Well, what I learned was like grip. Well, what I learned was like chalk adds like 80 pounds to my grip. chalk adds like 80 pounds to my grip. chalk adds like 80 pounds to my grip. mixed grip adds another 80 pounds and mixed grip adds another 80 pounds and mixed grip adds another 80 pounds and using a really nurled bar adds like using a really nurled bar adds like using a really nurled bar adds like another 80 pounds to my grip. So, I've another 80 pounds to my grip. So, I've another 80 pounds to my grip. So, I've gotten to where I almost deadlifted gotten to where I almost deadlifted gotten to where I almost deadlifted 675 once. I got it so close to being 675 once. I got it so close to being 675 once. I got it so close to being locked out, but I could hold on to the locked out, but I could hold on to the locked out, but I could hold on to the bar. I once I focused on my grip bar. I once I focused on my grip bar. I once I focused on my grip training for like two, three months, I training for like two, three months, I training for like two, three months, I got it super strong. Now, I don't have got it super strong. Now, I don't have got it super strong. Now, I don't have to train it that much. Every once in a to train it that much. Every once in a to train it that much. Every once in a while, I notice, okay, my grip limited while, I notice, okay, my grip limited while, I notice, okay, my grip limited my deadlift. I got to train a few my deadlift. I got to train a few my deadlift. I got to train a few sessions and it's back to good. It's sessions and it's back to good. It's sessions and it's back to good. It's like you blend that into your motor like you blend that into your motor like you blend that into your motor programming or something. Now you use it programming or something. Now you use it programming or something. Now you use it more and it it's easier to maintain it more and it it's easier to maintain it more and it it's easier to maintain it for some reason, but you got to put in for some reason, but you got to put in for some reason, but you got to put in that work up front. that work up front. that work up front. &gt;&gt; So, these are just things that kind of &gt;&gt; So, these are just things that kind of &gt;&gt; So, these are just things that kind of led lend credence to what you're saying. led lend credence to what you're saying. led lend credence to what you're saying. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's calories, and zero gram of sugar. That's right, 28 grams of protein and 75% of right, 28 grams of protein and 75% of right, 28 grams of protein and 75% of its calories come from protein. This is its calories come from protein. This is its calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest protein 50% higher than the next closest protein 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. David protein bars also taste bar. David protein bars also taste bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip favorite bar is the chocolate chip favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough. But then again, I also cookie dough. But then again, I also cookie dough. But then again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter like the new chocolate peanut butter like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavor and the chocolate brownie flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavored. Basically, I like all the flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly flavors a lot. They're all incredibly flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest delicious. In fact, the toughest delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat challenge is knowing which ones to eat challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times per on which days and how many times per on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, but day. I limit myself to two per day, but day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm I absolutely love them. With David, I'm I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the able to get 28 grams of protein in the able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it easy calories of a snack, which makes it easy calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram of to hit my protein goals of 1 gram of to hit my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per protein per pound of body weight per protein per pound of body weight per day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without day, and it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me snack, and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. when I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious, and given They're incredibly delicious, and given They're incredibly delicious, and given that they have 28 g of protein, they're that they have 28 g of protein, they're that they have 28 g of protein, they're really satisfying for having just 150 really satisfying for having just 150 really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, calories. If you'd like to try David, calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. I take one week off every um say 14 to I take one week off every um say 14 to I take one week off every um say 14 to 16 weeks. I just don't lift on purpose. 16 weeks. I just don't lift on purpose. 16 weeks. I just don't lift on purpose. Sometimes life events dictate that. Most Sometimes life events dictate that. Most Sometimes life events dictate that. Most often it's deliberate. It's scheduled. often it's deliberate. It's scheduled. often it's deliberate. It's scheduled. and I do it because it keeps things and I do it because it keeps things and I do it because it keeps things fresh and I notice it hasn't hurt me. fresh and I notice it hasn't hurt me. fresh and I notice it hasn't hurt me. But what are your thoughts on layoffs of But what are your thoughts on layoffs of But what are your thoughts on layoffs of a week or longer in terms of them being a week or longer in terms of them being a week or longer in terms of them being beneficial? I mean, I will say if I go beneficial? I mean, I will say if I go beneficial? I mean, I will say if I go much longer than a week, like I've gone much longer than a week, like I've gone much longer than a week, like I've gone 10 days before and I'm just going crazy. 10 days before and I'm just going crazy. 10 days before and I'm just going crazy. I want to get back in the gym and train. I want to get back in the gym and train. I want to get back in the gym and train. Um, and I'm doing other things. I'm Um, and I'm doing other things. I'm Um, and I'm doing other things. I'm running, I'm doing exercise, I'm mov on running, I'm doing exercise, I'm mov on running, I'm doing exercise, I'm mov on vacation, typically I'm walking a ton, vacation, typically I'm walking a ton, vacation, typically I'm walking a ton, like 40,000 steps a day, like I'm like 40,000 steps a day, like I'm like 40,000 steps a day, like I'm backpacking or I'm doing some other backpacking or I'm doing some other backpacking or I'm doing some other movement of some kind. But um if I movement of some kind. But um if I movement of some kind. But um if I take more than 10 days off, I then take more than 10 days off, I then take more than 10 days off, I then start to notice that my urge to train start to notice that my urge to train start to notice that my urge to train actually starts to diminish again and actually starts to diminish again and actually starts to diminish again and then I start training again, it kind of then I start training again, it kind of then I start training again, it kind of comes back. So there's clearly something comes back. So there's clearly something comes back. So there's clearly something there and everybody's different, but there and everybody's different, but there and everybody's different, but what are your thoughts on layoffs of a what are your thoughts on layoffs of a what are your thoughts on layoffs of a week or longer? Do you are you okay with week or longer? Do you are you okay with week or longer? Do you are you okay with your clients saying, you know, I'm gonna your clients saying, you know, I'm gonna your clients saying, you know, I'm gonna take a week off and go to Hawaii and I'm take a week off and go to Hawaii and I'm take a week off and go to Hawaii and I'm just not going to lift. I'm just gonna just not going to lift. I'm just gonna just not going to lift. I'm just gonna lay around on the beach and have a good lay around on the beach and have a good lay around on the beach and have a good time um or you know, what are your time um or you know, what are your time um or you know, what are your thoughts on extended uh layoffs? thoughts on extended uh layoffs? thoughts on extended uh layoffs? &gt;&gt; So, this was something in the like early &gt;&gt; So, this was something in the like early &gt;&gt; So, this was something in the like early 2000s. I think his name was Brian Hcock. 2000s. I think his name was Brian Hcock. 2000s. I think his name was Brian Hcock. He he had this hypertrophy specific He he had this hypertrophy specific He he had this hypertrophy specific training and he called it strategic training and he called it strategic training and he called it strategic reconditioning or something like that. reconditioning or something like that. reconditioning or something like that. And you know, we always thought maybe And you know, we always thought maybe And you know, we always thought maybe there's something to it where it primes there's something to it where it primes there's something to it where it primes your you then it primed you to get your you then it primed you to get your you then it primed you to get newbie gains again. Um or at least it newbie gains again. Um or at least it newbie gains again. Um or at least it will actually help you grow more muscle. will actually help you grow more muscle. will actually help you grow more muscle. Um but it was always just kind of a Um but it was always just kind of a Um but it was always just kind of a theory. But in practice, a lot of theory. But in practice, a lot of theory. But in practice, a lot of bodybuilders don't tend to do that. They bodybuilders don't tend to do that. They bodybuilders don't tend to do that. They tend to tend to train year round. But tend to tend to train year round. But tend to tend to train year round. But the thing is you need to de lo. It's the thing is you need to de lo. It's the thing is you need to de lo. It's really hard to not get nagging pain. really hard to not get nagging pain. really hard to not get nagging pain. injuries. It's important to not injuries. It's important to not injuries. It's important to not necessarily take a week off, but chill necessarily take a week off, but chill necessarily take a week off, but chill for at least a few days, maybe a whole for at least a few days, maybe a whole for at least a few days, maybe a whole week. Um, but this was recently put to week. Um, but this was recently put to week. Um, but this was recently put to the test in the literature. Um, to the test in the literature. Um, to the test in the literature. Um, taking a week off. Um, Brad Shelford was taking a week off. Um, Brad Shelford was taking a week off. Um, Brad Shelford was on that paper and what they found was on that paper and what they found was on that paper and what they found was you didn't see better benefits taking you didn't see better benefits taking you didn't see better benefits taking the week off, but you also didn't lose the week off, but you also didn't lose the week off, but you also didn't lose much. So, it's like um, but what I want much. So, it's like um, but what I want much. So, it's like um, but what I want to talk about is this literature. I'm to talk about is this literature. I'm to talk about is this literature. I'm not well verssed in it. I'd have to I'm not well verssed in it. I'd have to I'm not well verssed in it. I'd have to go back and look, but um it's people who go back and look, but um it's people who go back and look, but um it's people who did periodic training. Like if you train did periodic training. Like if you train did periodic training. Like if you train for a few weeks and then take a week off for a few weeks and then take a week off for a few weeks and then take a week off and then train for a few for a few and then train for a few for a few and then train for a few for a few weeks, you yes, you lose strength, you weeks, you yes, you lose strength, you weeks, you yes, you lose strength, you decondition, you lose strength and some decondition, you lose strength and some decondition, you lose strength and some size, but you quickly gain it back. And size, but you quickly gain it back. And size, but you quickly gain it back. And this whole notion that you have to be this whole notion that you have to be this whole notion that you have to be training year round all the time, it's training year round all the time, it's training year round all the time, it's just not evidence-based just not evidence-based just not evidence-based based on a few studies that have shown based on a few studies that have shown based on a few studies that have shown that you they show similar results with that you they show similar results with that you they show similar results with people that take some periodic time off. people that take some periodic time off. people that take some periodic time off. You gain it back quickly due to like You gain it back quickly due to like You gain it back quickly due to like muscle memory. muscle memory. muscle memory. &gt;&gt; Here's where it can be beneficial. If it &gt;&gt; Here's where it can be beneficial. If it &gt;&gt; Here's where it can be beneficial. If it helps your psychological desire to train helps your psychological desire to train helps your psychological desire to train &gt;&gt; uh or if it helps heal nagging injuries &gt;&gt; uh or if it helps heal nagging injuries &gt;&gt; uh or if it helps heal nagging injuries or pain, then it can be beneficial. Um I or pain, then it can be beneficial. Um I or pain, then it can be beneficial. Um I don't recommend it to my followers, but don't recommend it to my followers, but don't recommend it to my followers, but I do recommend having times where you I do recommend having times where you I do recommend having times where you chill. Um life sometimes forces you into chill. Um life sometimes forces you into chill. Um life sometimes forces you into that. You either get sick or you get that. You either get sick or you get that. You either get sick or you get injured or you have to go on a vacation injured or you have to go on a vacation injured or you have to go on a vacation and you just don't have access to a gym. and you just don't have access to a gym. and you just don't have access to a gym. But I tend to um just listen to my body But I tend to um just listen to my body But I tend to um just listen to my body and there just times where you're and there just times where you're and there just times where you're pushing it hard and you just feel beat pushing it hard and you just feel beat pushing it hard and you just feel beat up and it's like have a few easy days. up and it's like have a few easy days. up and it's like have a few easy days. It doesn't have to be a week. It doesn't It doesn't have to be a week. It doesn't It doesn't have to be a week. It doesn't have to be could just be three training have to be could just be three training have to be could just be three training days and you'll come back refreshed. But days and you'll come back refreshed. But days and you'll come back refreshed. But I think it's a vital necessary crucial I think it's a vital necessary crucial I think it's a vital necessary crucial component of long-term lifting. And if component of long-term lifting. And if component of long-term lifting. And if you don't do that, you are going to you don't do that, you are going to you don't do that, you are going to it'll end up hurting you. It's it's you it'll end up hurting you. It's it's you it'll end up hurting you. It's it's you can't just train. can't just train. can't just train. It's like how do you how do you make It's like how do you how do you make It's like how do you how do you make sure you're not overreaching? Like how sure you're not overreaching? Like how sure you're not overreaching? Like how do you nail that perfect volume and do you nail that perfect volume and do you nail that perfect volume and effort and where you're not pushing it effort and where you're not pushing it effort and where you're not pushing it too hard where you're not inh too hard where you're not inh too hard where you're not inh inhibiting your muscle activation inhibiting your muscle activation inhibiting your muscle activation because you get things perfect and you because you get things perfect and you because you get things perfect and you can't predict your sleep and your stress can't predict your sleep and your stress can't predict your sleep and your stress and your recovery physiology all the and your recovery physiology all the and your recovery physiology all the time. So, I think it's a good idea to time. So, I think it's a good idea to time. So, I think it's a good idea to chill for a little bit and do lesser chill for a little bit and do lesser chill for a little bit and do lesser volume or do different exercises that volume or do different exercises that volume or do different exercises that are just easier on the body. And then are just easier on the body. And then are just easier on the body. And then you'll be pleasantly surprised like you'll be pleasantly surprised like you'll be pleasantly surprised like well, and what I always like doing with well, and what I always like doing with well, and what I always like doing with my clients is that's what I like with my clients is that's what I like with my clients is that's what I like with my Booty by Brett programming is I want my Booty by Brett programming is I want my Booty by Brett programming is I want my clients to know you don't have to my clients to know you don't have to my clients to know you don't have to squat and deadlift year round when squat and deadlift year round when squat and deadlift year round when you're doing a step up or a lunge with you're doing a step up or a lunge with you're doing a step up or a lunge with weight. That two studies show that one weight. That two studies show that one weight. That two studies show that one on step-ups, one on Bulgarian split on step-ups, one on Bulgarian split on step-ups, one on Bulgarian split squats. One group did bilateral, one squats. One group did bilateral, one squats. One group did bilateral, one group did single leg, and they both group did single leg, and they both group did single leg, and they both gained the same squat strength. Now, I'm gained the same squat strength. Now, I'm gained the same squat strength. Now, I'm not going to tell, you know, the world's not going to tell, you know, the world's not going to tell, you know, the world's strongest powerlifter, don't squat. You strongest powerlifter, don't squat. You strongest powerlifter, don't squat. You can maintain all your squat strength can maintain all your squat strength can maintain all your squat strength with single leg training. But for the with single leg training. But for the with single leg training. But for the masses, yes, it's a single leg squat masses, yes, it's a single leg squat masses, yes, it's a single leg squat pattern is the squat pattern. It builds pattern is the squat pattern. It builds pattern is the squat pattern. It builds your bilateral double leg strength as your bilateral double leg strength as your bilateral double leg strength as well. You don't have to do every lift well. You don't have to do every lift well. You don't have to do every lift year round. They transfer each other. year round. They transfer each other. year round. They transfer each other. Pick one exercise from that pattern Pick one exercise from that pattern Pick one exercise from that pattern and trust that you're going to maintain and trust that you're going to maintain and trust that you're going to maintain most of your strength. Yes. When you most of your strength. Yes. When you most of your strength. Yes. When you have the squat focused month and you have the squat focused month and you have the squat focused month and you put deadlifts and hip throws on the back put deadlifts and hip throws on the back put deadlifts and hip throws on the back burner, the next month, yes, your squat, burner, the next month, yes, your squat, burner, the next month, yes, your squat, you set a PR on squats. On week four, you set a PR on squats. On week four, you set a PR on squats. On week four, you're feeling good. You start off the you're feeling good. You start off the you're feeling good. You start off the new month now focusing on say deadlifts new month now focusing on say deadlifts new month now focusing on say deadlifts or hip thrust. Maybe you lost some or hip thrust. Maybe you lost some or hip thrust. Maybe you lost some strength, but it quickly comes back. And strength, but it quickly comes back. And strength, but it quickly comes back. And now by week four, you can PR on that, now by week four, you can PR on that, now by week four, you can PR on that, too. Things come back. You don't always too. Things come back. You don't always too. Things come back. You don't always have to. And I think that's something have to. And I think that's something have to. And I think that's something that's really hard for people. You get that's really hard for people. You get that's really hard for people. You get so tied to the lifts themselves. You get so tied to the lifts themselves. You get so tied to the lifts themselves. You get so tied to the routine and the I have to so tied to the routine and the I have to so tied to the routine and the I have to be doing every exercise. If I stop be doing every exercise. If I stop be doing every exercise. If I stop deadlifting, I'm going to shrink. If I deadlifting, I'm going to shrink. If I deadlifting, I'm going to shrink. If I stop squatting, I'm going to shrink. And stop squatting, I'm going to shrink. And stop squatting, I'm going to shrink. And the body's pretty resilient. You the body's pretty resilient. You the body's pretty resilient. You maintain your muscle. You maintain your maintain your muscle. You maintain your maintain your muscle. You maintain your strength. If you have to do a single leg strength. If you have to do a single leg strength. If you have to do a single leg pattern or if you're just training pattern or if you're just training pattern or if you're just training the movement patterns, you will retain the movement patterns, you will retain the movement patterns, you will retain those. If you're training it third in those. If you're training it third in those. If you're training it third in the workout, not setting PRs, but you're the workout, not setting PRs, but you're the workout, not setting PRs, but you're just doing it. Um, like I was really just doing it. Um, like I was really just doing it. Um, like I was really focusing on squats and deadlifts for focusing on squats and deadlifts for focusing on squats and deadlifts for like three, four months. And I do hip like three, four months. And I do hip like three, four months. And I do hip thrust just lightweight mind muscle thrust just lightweight mind muscle thrust just lightweight mind muscle connection focused, but I'm focusing on connection focused, but I'm focusing on connection focused, but I'm focusing on the squeeze position. So, I'm the squeeze position. So, I'm the squeeze position. So, I'm maintaining my squeeze strength that maintaining my squeeze strength that maintaining my squeeze strength that way. I'm focusing on my stretch strength way. I'm focusing on my stretch strength way. I'm focusing on my stretch strength through squats and deadlifts. So, the through squats and deadlifts. So, the through squats and deadlifts. So, the second I said, I'm going to do hip second I said, I'm going to do hip second I said, I'm going to do hip thrust first today. I haven't done hip thrust first today. I haven't done hip thrust first today. I haven't done hip thrust first in three months, four thrust first in three months, four thrust first in three months, four months. I did them first in the workout months. I did them first in the workout months. I did them first in the workout and I tied three PRs. I did three sets and I tied three PRs. I did three sets and I tied three PRs. I did three sets and all three tied PRs because I had and all three tied PRs because I had and all three tied PRs because I had that bottom position strength through that bottom position strength through that bottom position strength through the squats and the deadlifts. I had that the squats and the deadlifts. I had that the squats and the deadlifts. I had that top strength by doing the mind top strength by doing the mind top strength by doing the mind muscle connection stuff. It was there. I muscle connection stuff. It was there. I muscle connection stuff. It was there. I just was always training in a fatigued just was always training in a fatigued just was always training in a fatigued state. I think there's a benefit to state. I think there's a benefit to state. I think there's a benefit to mixing it around for that reason. And I mixing it around for that reason. And I mixing it around for that reason. And I wish more people knew wish more people knew wish more people knew &gt;&gt; especially when you're in pain. If &gt;&gt; especially when you're in pain. If &gt;&gt; especially when you're in pain. If squats are hurting you, don't do it for squats are hurting you, don't do it for squats are hurting you, don't do it for a while. Find a suitable alternative. If a while. Find a suitable alternative. If a while. Find a suitable alternative. If deadlifts are hurting you, don't do it deadlifts are hurting you, don't do it deadlifts are hurting you, don't do it for a while. If hip thrusts are hurting for a while. If hip thrusts are hurting for a while. If hip thrusts are hurting you, don't do it for a while. And the you, don't do it for a while. And the you, don't do it for a while. And the thing with hip thrust, people say you thing with hip thrust, people say you thing with hip thrust, people say you see on the internet people saying, you see on the internet people saying, you see on the internet people saying, "Oh, hip thrusts are bad for your back." "Oh, hip thrusts are bad for your back." "Oh, hip thrusts are bad for your back." Well, or like especially the scoop Well, or like especially the scoop Well, or like especially the scoop method is bad for your back. No, the method is bad for your back. No, the method is bad for your back. No, the scoop method is better for your back. scoop method is better for your back. scoop method is better for your back. Um, but hip thrusts don't hurt your back Um, but hip thrusts don't hurt your back Um, but hip thrusts don't hurt your back if you're doing it properly. You know if you're doing it properly. You know if you're doing it properly. You know what the what limits you is the bruising what the what limits you is the bruising what the what limits you is the bruising on your hips when you get freakishly on your hips when you get freakishly on your hips when you get freakishly strong. I have clients that are female strong. I have clients that are female strong. I have clients that are female clients that are hip thrusting in the clients that are hip thrusting in the clients that are hip thrusting in the 700 lb. Yeah, they're freaks. I have 700 lb. Yeah, they're freaks. I have 700 lb. Yeah, they're freaks. I have like five that have hip thrusted over like five that have hip thrusted over like five that have hip thrusted over 600 lb, maybe six. But yeah, most of 600 lb, maybe six. But yeah, most of 600 lb, maybe six. But yeah, most of them can do 315 for 20, 405 for 10, 495 them can do 315 for 20, 405 for 10, 495 them can do 315 for 20, 405 for 10, 495 for five. Most of them can do that and for five. Most of them can do that and for five. Most of them can do that and they weigh like an average of like 140 they weigh like an average of like 140 they weigh like an average of like 140 pounds. &gt;&gt; Because like you go to a powerlifting &gt;&gt; Because like you go to a powerlifting &gt;&gt; Because like you go to a powerlifting gym and what do they have? Squat racks. gym and what do they have? Squat racks. gym and what do they have? Squat racks. You go to a Olympic lifting training You go to a Olympic lifting training You go to a Olympic lifting training center, they have platforms with squat center, they have platforms with squat center, they have platforms with squat stands. You go to a glute lab, you're stands. You go to a glute lab, you're stands. You go to a glute lab, you're going to have 10 hip thrust stations. going to have 10 hip thrust stations. going to have 10 hip thrust stations. You're going to see 10 people hip You're going to see 10 people hip You're going to see 10 people hip thrusting. We get really freakishly good thrusting. We get really freakishly good thrusting. We get really freakishly good at hip thrusts. But the what limits at hip thrusts. But the what limits at hip thrusts. But the what limits people is the bruising and the pain at people is the bruising and the pain at people is the bruising and the pain at the hips. So, especially if you use like the hips. So, especially if you use like the hips. So, especially if you use like a rotisserie hip thrust, you get it. You a rotisserie hip thrust, you get it. You a rotisserie hip thrust, you get it. You can use about 10 to 20% more weight. can use about 10 to 20% more weight. can use about 10 to 20% more weight. They're typically the day after they They're typically the day after they They're typically the day after they really crush rotisserie, their hips are really crush rotisserie, their hips are really crush rotisserie, their hips are beat up, they're bruised or you can get beat up, they're bruised or you can get beat up, they're bruised or you can get abrasions or like sores there. So abrasions or like sores there. So abrasions or like sores there. So they're going, "Coach, my hips hurt." they're going, "Coach, my hips hurt." they're going, "Coach, my hips hurt." Okay, what do you do? Instead of hip Okay, what do you do? Instead of hip Okay, what do you do? Instead of hip thrust, now you do single leg hip thrust thrust, now you do single leg hip thrust thrust, now you do single leg hip thrust or you have partner hip thrust. You have or you have partner hip thrust. You have or you have partner hip thrust. You have someone sit backwards on your lap someone sit backwards on your lap someone sit backwards on your lap because the surface area is spread out because the surface area is spread out because the surface area is spread out and you hip thrust a human for high and you hip thrust a human for high and you hip thrust a human for high reps. Um because it doesn't hurt. It reps. Um because it doesn't hurt. It reps. Um because it doesn't hurt. It doesn't It lets those parts heal. So we doesn't It lets those parts heal. So we doesn't It lets those parts heal. So we have to mix things around. we have to have to mix things around. we have to have to mix things around. we have to switch it up. Um, also if Yeah, switch it up. Um, also if Yeah, switch it up. Um, also if Yeah, sometimes hip thrusts can make your sometimes hip thrusts can make your sometimes hip thrusts can make your knees a little sore if you do pause reps knees a little sore if you do pause reps knees a little sore if you do pause reps or like b bar plus band where you add or like b bar plus band where you add or like b bar plus band where you add extra resistance to make the top harder. extra resistance to make the top harder. extra resistance to make the top harder. So everything requires um it's a think So everything requires um it's a think So everything requires um it's a think the iron game is a thinking man's game. the iron game is a thinking man's game. the iron game is a thinking man's game. You can get great gains doing the very You can get great gains doing the very You can get great gains doing the very basics what we talked about in the basics what we talked about in the basics what we talked about in the beginning. The the listeners are going beginning. The the listeners are going beginning. The the listeners are going to be overwhelmed. It's going to be like to be overwhelmed. It's going to be like to be overwhelmed. It's going to be like look just do two full body workouts a look just do two full body workouts a look just do two full body workouts a week. Two hard sets. Warm up. Two hard week. Two hard sets. Warm up. Two hard week. Two hard sets. Warm up. Two hard sets in any rep range because the rep sets in any rep range because the rep sets in any rep range because the rep range doesn't matter so much. You can range doesn't matter so much. You can range doesn't matter so much. You can gain muscle with lower reps, medium gain muscle with lower reps, medium gain muscle with lower reps, medium reps, or higher reps. Mix it up to keep reps, or higher reps. Mix it up to keep reps, or higher reps. Mix it up to keep it interesting. Do you know, you'll get it interesting. Do you know, you'll get it interesting. Do you know, you'll get most of your gains doing it that way. most of your gains doing it that way. most of your gains doing it that way. You'll get 85% of your gains doing it You'll get 85% of your gains doing it You'll get 85% of your gains doing it that way. And you, the benefit is you that way. And you, the benefit is you that way. And you, the benefit is you won't be beat up. You'll be recovered. won't be beat up. You'll be recovered. won't be beat up. You'll be recovered. Um, and you'll be motivated to lift Um, and you'll be motivated to lift Um, and you'll be motivated to lift because you'll be looking forward to because you'll be looking forward to because you'll be looking forward to going to the gym. All this other stuff going to the gym. All this other stuff going to the gym. All this other stuff is for the extra 15%. The guys who are is for the extra 15%. The guys who are is for the extra 15%. The guys who are really into it, the people who are really into it, the people who are really into it, the people who are obsessed with it, like us, we're obsessed with it, like us, we're obsessed with it, like us, we're &gt;&gt; guys and girls. You're talking about men &gt;&gt; guys and girls. You're talking about men &gt;&gt; guys and girls. You're talking about men and women. and women. and women. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And and with guys, it tends to be full &gt;&gt; And and with guys, it tends to be full &gt;&gt; And and with guys, it tends to be full body hypertrophy. With women, it tends body hypertrophy. With women, it tends body hypertrophy. With women, it tends to be more glute specific because that's to be more glute specific because that's to be more glute specific because that's the that's what's popular, what's the that's what's popular, what's the that's what's popular, what's in vogue right now. Um but yeah, this in vogue right now. Um but yeah, this in vogue right now. Um but yeah, this extra 15% it's a thinking man's game, extra 15% it's a thinking man's game, extra 15% it's a thinking man's game, thinking woman's game. And it's, you thinking woman's game. And it's, you thinking woman's game. And it's, you know, you got to use strategy, you got know, you got to use strategy, you got know, you got to use strategy, you got to learn somewhat, you know, about the to learn somewhat, you know, about the to learn somewhat, you know, about the biomechanics and the physiology, but biomechanics and the physiology, but biomechanics and the physiology, but that's what makes it so fun. And like that's what makes it so fun. And like that's what makes it so fun. And like we're able to learn new things as we're able to learn new things as we're able to learn new things as we're approaching 50. How cool is that? approaching 50. How cool is that? approaching 50. How cool is that? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's an endless progression. And &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's an endless progression. And &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's an endless progression. And um I would say learn to enjoy training um I would say learn to enjoy training um I would say learn to enjoy training hard, which means different things for hard, which means different things for hard, which means different things for different people. People have different people. People have different people. People have different uh schedules, different pain thresholds, uh schedules, different pain thresholds, uh schedules, different pain thresholds, different goals. But um there are many, different goals. But um there are many, different goals. But um there are many, as you were saying yesterday, there are as you were saying yesterday, there are as you were saying yesterday, there are many paths to Rome. I really appreciate many paths to Rome. I really appreciate many paths to Rome. I really appreciate you taking so much time to be so you taking so much time to be so you taking so much time to be so thorough about what most people need at thorough about what most people need at thorough about what most people need at the beginning, what everyone needs at the beginning, what everyone needs at the beginning, what everyone needs at some point in terms of specialization some point in terms of specialization some point in terms of specialization and how to specialize because it's and how to specialize because it's and how to specialize because it's something that's not discussed often something that's not discussed often something that's not discussed often enough &gt;&gt; um with respect to balancing out &gt;&gt; um with respect to balancing out &gt;&gt; um with respect to balancing out aesthetics, strength, and just staying aesthetics, strength, and just staying aesthetics, strength, and just staying uninjured. And also it adds the novelty uninjured. And also it adds the novelty uninjured. And also it adds the novelty component. It makes it fun. Y component. It makes it fun. Y component. It makes it fun. Y &gt;&gt; we have some questions from the &gt;&gt; we have some questions from the &gt;&gt; we have some questions from the audience. Uh literally uh I solicited on audience. Uh literally uh I solicited on audience. Uh literally uh I solicited on social media for questions. I'm going to social media for questions. I'm going to social media for questions. I'm going to do something I rarely do during the do something I rarely do during the do something I rarely do during the podcast, which is to bring out my phone podcast, which is to bring out my phone podcast, which is to bring out my phone uh because I need to bring out my phone uh because I need to bring out my phone uh because I need to bring out my phone to get uh the questions that people to get uh the questions that people to get uh the questions that people listed off. And there are a ton of listed off. And there are a ton of listed off. And there are a ton of questions. So one of the most common questions. So one of the most common questions. So one of the most common questions here is what rep ranges should questions here is what rep ranges should questions here is what rep ranges should somebody use in order to bring up a somebody use in order to bring up a somebody use in order to bring up a lagging body part. So, let's assume it's lagging body part. So, let's assume it's lagging body part. So, let's assume it's glutes or arms. In this case, it was glutes or arms. In this case, it was glutes or arms. In this case, it was arms. Seems to be a male in this case. arms. Seems to be a male in this case. arms. Seems to be a male in this case. So, not surprisingly, arms. What rep So, not surprisingly, arms. What rep So, not surprisingly, arms. What rep ranges should they use? ranges should they use? ranges should they use? &gt;&gt; So, classic Brad Shonfeld paper, three &gt;&gt; So, classic Brad Shonfeld paper, three &gt;&gt; So, classic Brad Shonfeld paper, three sets of three versus three sets of 10 on sets of three versus three sets of 10 on sets of three versus three sets of 10 on the squat. Three sets of 10 grew more the squat. Three sets of 10 grew more the squat. Three sets of 10 grew more muscle. But in general, lightweight and muscle. But in general, lightweight and muscle. But in general, lightweight and heavyweight grow similar amounts of heavyweight grow similar amounts of heavyweight grow similar amounts of muscle, but you have to reach a certain muscle, but you have to reach a certain muscle, but you have to reach a certain amount of reps. The consensus is about amount of reps. The consensus is about amount of reps. The consensus is about five or six. So say it's six, you have five or six. So say it's six, you have five or six. So say it's six, you have to do at least six reps, but it could be to do at least six reps, but it could be to do at least six reps, but it could be all the way up to 30 they grow the same all the way up to 30 they grow the same all the way up to 30 they grow the same amount of muscle. There is some argument amount of muscle. There is some argument amount of muscle. There is some argument as to whether high reps create more as to whether high reps create more as to whether high reps create more muscle damage. There seems to be muscle damage. There seems to be muscle damage. There seems to be evidence of that. So if you train a evidence of that. So if you train a evidence of that. So if you train a muscle frequently, the lower side of muscle frequently, the lower side of muscle frequently, the lower side of things might be better. It also is kind things might be better. It also is kind things might be better. It also is kind of exercise dependent. Like single joint of exercise dependent. Like single joint of exercise dependent. Like single joint movements tend to be better done with movements tend to be better done with movements tend to be better done with higher reps. I think that's my opinion. higher reps. I think that's my opinion. higher reps. I think that's my opinion. But generally you could do if you like But generally you could do if you like But generally you could do if you like doing low reps, you could do sets of six doing low reps, you could do sets of six doing low reps, you could do sets of six and grow just fine. And if you love and grow just fine. And if you love and grow just fine. And if you love higher reps, you could do sets of 20 to higher reps, you could do sets of 20 to higher reps, you could do sets of 20 to 30 and grow just fine. I think variety 30 and grow just fine. I think variety 30 and grow just fine. I think variety is always the best case because it's is always the best case because it's is always the best case because it's boring and it it's kind of like boring and it it's kind of like boring and it it's kind of like different stress on the body to spare different stress on the body to spare different stress on the body to spare the joints. But if you don't like going the joints. But if you don't like going the joints. But if you don't like going heavy, you never have to. If you don't heavy, you never have to. If you don't heavy, you never have to. If you don't like going super high up, so you never like going super high up, so you never like going super high up, so you never have to. Lots of questions here about have to. Lots of questions here about have to. Lots of questions here about calves. In the video, uh we talked a calves. In the video, uh we talked a calves. In the video, uh we talked a little bit about this or a lot about little bit about this or a lot about little bit about this or a lot about this. Um, I have an asymmetry in calves this. Um, I have an asymmetry in calves this. Um, I have an asymmetry in calves due to an injury on my left calf, but due to an injury on my left calf, but due to an injury on my left calf, but it's coming up. Like last couple months, it's coming up. Like last couple months, it's coming up. Like last couple months, it's really been moving. And the tips it's really been moving. And the tips it's really been moving. And the tips you gave me yesterday, and again, you gave me yesterday, and again, you gave me yesterday, and again, there's a link to this in the show note there's a link to this in the show note there's a link to this in the show note captions were super helpful in captions were super helpful in captions were super helpful in particular around standing calf raises particular around standing calf raises particular around standing calf raises and about the um emphasizing partials in and about the um emphasizing partials in and about the um emphasizing partials in the stretched position at the end of the stretched position at the end of the stretched position at the end of the set. Could you uh reiterate those set. Could you uh reiterate those set. Could you uh reiterate those points and add to those points? Many points and add to those points? Many points and add to those points? Many people here want to grow their calves. people here want to grow their calves. people here want to grow their calves. All right. Calves are so genetic. So you All right. Calves are so genetic. So you All right. Calves are so genetic. So you have you have good calf genetics, you have you have good calf genetics, you have you have good calf genetics, you don't even need to train them. They're don't even need to train them. They're don't even need to train them. They're just huge. You have poor calf genetics, just huge. You have poor calf genetics, just huge. You have poor calf genetics, you might be feeling like, man, I can't you might be feeling like, man, I can't you might be feeling like, man, I can't do anything to bring them up. The do anything to bring them up. The do anything to bring them up. The evidence emerging is that there's not evidence emerging is that there's not evidence emerging is that there's not much use for seated calf raises or for much use for seated calf raises or for much use for seated calf raises or for really focusing on the top squeeze really focusing on the top squeeze really focusing on the top squeeze position. calves respond good to position. calves respond good to position. calves respond good to stretch. And you can do just straight up stretch. And you can do just straight up stretch. And you can do just straight up full range standing calf raises. You full range standing calf raises. You full range standing calf raises. You could also just do lengthen partials could also just do lengthen partials could also just do lengthen partials where you just do like the bottom half. where you just do like the bottom half. where you just do like the bottom half. And if you do full range cal raises, you And if you do full range cal raises, you And if you do full range cal raises, you might benefit from doing extended might benefit from doing extended might benefit from doing extended partials like lengthen supra sets where partials like lengthen supra sets where partials like lengthen supra sets where you keep going. You might be able to do you keep going. You might be able to do you keep going. You might be able to do three to five more reps at the end just three to five more reps at the end just three to five more reps at the end just doing the bottom portion. doing the bottom portion. doing the bottom portion. Focus on the stretch with cats. Focus on the stretch with cats. Focus on the stretch with cats. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. many questions about can a &gt;&gt; Fantastic. many questions about can a &gt;&gt; Fantastic. many questions about can a person grow muscle after age 40 and I'm person grow muscle after age 40 and I'm person grow muscle after age 40 and I'm going to dovetail this with the several going to dovetail this with the several going to dovetail this with the several questions from the women who asked can questions from the women who asked can questions from the women who asked can one build more muscle starting one build more muscle starting one build more muscle starting resistance training for the first time resistance training for the first time resistance training for the first time in pmenopause or menopause which is in pmenopause or menopause which is in pmenopause or menopause which is essentially a age question as well but essentially a age question as well but essentially a age question as well but it weaves in additional women it weaves in additional women it weaves in additional women specific issues specific issues specific issues &gt;&gt; absolutely but it just matters when you &gt;&gt; absolutely but it just matters when you &gt;&gt; absolutely but it just matters when you like whenever you start if you start like whenever you start if you start like whenever you start if you start training in your 80s. I think I think training in your 80s. I think I think training in your 80s. I think I think there's even evidence in maybe 90 year there's even evidence in maybe 90 year there's even evidence in maybe 90 year olds, they can grow muscle. olds, they can grow muscle. olds, they can grow muscle. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; But the caveat is that you start like &gt;&gt; But the caveat is that you start like &gt;&gt; But the caveat is that you start like you, Andrew, you and I won't be able to you, Andrew, you and I won't be able to you, Andrew, you and I won't be able to have this much muscle when we're 90. have this much muscle when we're 90. have this much muscle when we're 90. Obviously, &gt;&gt; I disagree. &gt;&gt; I disagree. &gt;&gt; I disagree. &gt;&gt; You I hope you I hope you're right. &gt;&gt; You I hope you I hope you're right. &gt;&gt; You I hope you I hope you're right. Well, maybe we will, but maybe you'll Well, maybe we will, but maybe you'll Well, maybe we will, but maybe you'll figure out these pro with your figure out these pro with your figure out these pro with your protocols. But my point is if you if you protocols. But my point is if you if you protocols. But my point is if you if you start training when you're 15 and you start training when you're 15 and you start training when you're 15 and you and you train optimally throughout your and you train optimally throughout your and you train optimally throughout your whole life, there will be a point where whole life, there will be a point where whole life, there will be a point where you peak with your muscle mass and then you peak with your muscle mass and then you peak with your muscle mass and then it there'll be a point, but it's the it there'll be a point, but it's the it there'll be a point, but it's the point is it's further than people think. point is it's further than people think. point is it's further than people think. People used to think, well, you'll People used to think, well, you'll People used to think, well, you'll probably start losing muscle mass in probably start losing muscle mass in probably start losing muscle mass in your 30s. No, it's probably more like in your 30s. No, it's probably more like in your 30s. No, it's probably more like in your 50s you can maintain all of it. But your 50s you can maintain all of it. But your 50s you can maintain all of it. But if you haven't started lifting, you will if you haven't started lifting, you will if you haven't started lifting, you will absolutely grow muscle. Will a absolutely grow muscle. Will a absolutely grow muscle. Will a 70-year-old who starts training for the 70-year-old who starts training for the 70-year-old who starts training for the first time grow muscle as much as you first time grow muscle as much as you first time grow muscle as much as you will when you're in your 20s? No. But will when you're in your 20s? No. But will when you're in your 20s? No. But you still will grow. It's just blunted a you still will grow. It's just blunted a you still will grow. It's just blunted a little bit. You know, age tends to dull little bit. You know, age tends to dull little bit. You know, age tends to dull everything, but you can absolutely grow everything, but you can absolutely grow everything, but you can absolutely grow and you should absolutely start. and you should absolutely start. and you should absolutely start. &gt;&gt; A couple of questions about muscle &gt;&gt; A couple of questions about muscle &gt;&gt; A couple of questions about muscle growth and maintenance training for growth and maintenance training for growth and maintenance training for women during pregnancy. Strength women during pregnancy. Strength women during pregnancy. Strength training during pregnancy is um very um training during pregnancy is um very um training during pregnancy is um very um well researched. It it is absolutely well researched. It it is absolutely well researched. It it is absolutely something you should do. It improves something you should do. It improves something you should do. It improves your outcomes with almost everything you your outcomes with almost everything you your outcomes with almost everything you know pregnancy delivery related. Um but know pregnancy delivery related. Um but know pregnancy delivery related. Um but there's a caveat that if you don't if there's a caveat that if you don't if there's a caveat that if you don't if you haven't lifted weights um you might you haven't lifted weights um you might you haven't lifted weights um you might not want to start lifting weights while not want to start lifting weights while not want to start lifting weights while you're pregnant. But you can absolutely you're pregnant. But you can absolutely you're pregnant. But you can absolutely if you've been if you're an avid lifter if you've been if you're an avid lifter if you've been if you're an avid lifter and you get pregnant, you should and you get pregnant, you should and you get pregnant, you should absolutely continue training. First absolutely continue training. First absolutely continue training. First trimester, this is generalizing, but trimester, this is generalizing, but trimester, this is generalizing, but first trimester you feel more morning first trimester you feel more morning first trimester you feel more morning sickness. You feel icky. It's hard to sickness. You feel icky. It's hard to sickness. You feel icky. It's hard to stay motivated and you feel you get stay motivated and you feel you get stay motivated and you feel you get morning sickness and like then second morning sickness and like then second morning sickness and like then second trimester things return more to normal trimester things return more to normal trimester things return more to normal and you're back to yourself again. And and you're back to yourself again. And and you're back to yourself again. And then third trimester is kind of day by then third trimester is kind of day by then third trimester is kind of day by day. Your belly is getting in the way. day. Your belly is getting in the way. day. Your belly is getting in the way. Some days feel off, but you will find Some days feel off, but you will find Some days feel off, but you will find movements that work well for you. Sumo movements that work well for you. Sumo movements that work well for you. Sumo squats tend to be well tolerated, you squats tend to be well tolerated, you squats tend to be well tolerated, you know. Um, but you can even hip know. Um, but you can even hip know. Um, but you can even hip thrust while you're pregnant. You just thrust while you're pregnant. You just thrust while you're pregnant. You just don't let the bar push into your belly. don't let the bar push into your belly. don't let the bar push into your belly. You keep it on the upper thighs and you You keep it on the upper thighs and you You keep it on the upper thighs and you don't go as deep. Do Smith machine and don't go as deep. Do Smith machine and don't go as deep. Do Smith machine and keep it on your upper thighs so it's not keep it on your upper thighs so it's not keep it on your upper thighs so it's not pushing against your belly and you'll do pushing against your belly and you'll do pushing against your belly and you'll do just fine. But you will find you will be just fine. But you will find you will be just fine. But you will find you will be able to go to the gym. You might be able to go to the gym. You might be able to go to the gym. You might be able to do leg press. you can always stay to do leg press. you can always stay to do leg press. you can always stay moving and stay fit. moving and stay fit. moving and stay fit. &gt;&gt; Several people asked how to grow lower &gt;&gt; Several people asked how to grow lower &gt;&gt; Several people asked how to grow lower glutes so they don't droop. I'm assuming glutes so they don't droop. I'm assuming glutes so they don't droop. I'm assuming they're talking about the region of the they're talking about the region of the they're talking about the region of the glutes right above the hamstrings and glutes right above the hamstrings and glutes right above the hamstrings and they're talking about presumably excess they're talking about presumably excess they're talking about presumably excess body fat and lack of muscle hypertrophy body fat and lack of muscle hypertrophy body fat and lack of muscle hypertrophy underneath. And it sounds like there's a underneath. And it sounds like there's a underneath. And it sounds like there's a growing um uh it's like a glute a growing um uh it's like a glute a growing um uh it's like a glute hamstring like hamstring like hamstring like um atapose hinge, you know? It's like I um atapose hinge, you know? It's like I um atapose hinge, you know? It's like I think what they're describing. I think I think what they're describing. I think I think what they're describing. I think I understand this question. Maybe understand this question. Maybe understand this question. Maybe &gt;&gt; they just don't want saggy glutes &gt;&gt; they just don't want saggy glutes &gt;&gt; they just don't want saggy glutes and they want to focus more on that. You and they want to focus more on that. You and they want to focus more on that. You want that. want that. want that. &gt;&gt; What's sagging though? Is it the body &gt;&gt; What's sagging though? Is it the body &gt;&gt; What's sagging though? Is it the body fat or is it the muscle that's fat or is it the muscle that's fat or is it the muscle that's sagging? It's the body fat. sagging? It's the body fat. sagging? It's the body fat. &gt;&gt; But if you had big glutes and you had &gt;&gt; But if you had big glutes and you had &gt;&gt; But if you had big glutes and you had that same amount of fat, it would look that same amount of fat, it would look that same amount of fat, it would look better if you had like better if you had like better if you had like &gt;&gt; stretched out over larger muscles. &gt;&gt; stretched out over larger muscles. &gt;&gt; stretched out over larger muscles. Exactly. So, it's the it's the it's the Exactly. So, it's the it's the it's the Exactly. So, it's the it's the it's the not having muscle and having more fat not having muscle and having more fat not having muscle and having more fat and that droopy appearance. So, yes, get and that droopy appearance. So, yes, get and that droopy appearance. So, yes, get strong at, you know, lunges, step ups, strong at, you know, lunges, step ups, strong at, you know, lunges, step ups, squats, RDL's, and hip thrusts. They squats, RDL's, and hip thrusts. They squats, RDL's, and hip thrusts. They will all grow your glutes well. They will all grow your glutes well. They will all grow your glutes well. They will all hit the lower glutes well. And will all hit the lower glutes well. And will all hit the lower glutes well. And uh and don't just do the exercise, get uh and don't just do the exercise, get uh and don't just do the exercise, get stronger at them. And then obviously, stronger at them. And then obviously, stronger at them. And then obviously, you want to have a an optimal body you want to have a an optimal body you want to have a an optimal body composition for you. Some women have composition for you. Some women have composition for you. Some women have what I call like genetic BBL what I call like genetic BBL what I call like genetic BBL programming. It's like, programming. It's like, programming. It's like, &gt;&gt; what does BBL stand for? &gt;&gt; what does BBL stand for? &gt;&gt; what does BBL stand for? &gt;&gt; BBL stands for the Brazilian buttlft. &gt;&gt; BBL stands for the Brazilian buttlft. &gt;&gt; BBL stands for the Brazilian buttlft. It's the fat injections into your It's the fat injections into your It's the fat injections into your glutes. They take I think they take fat glutes. They take I think they take fat glutes. They take I think they take fat from your stomach and inject it into from your stomach and inject it into from your stomach and inject it into your glutes. And it's really your glutes. And it's really your glutes. And it's really popular now, especially popular now, especially popular now, especially &gt;&gt; um you know, I'm in Fort Lauderdale now &gt;&gt; um you know, I'm in Fort Lauderdale now &gt;&gt; um you know, I'm in Fort Lauderdale now in the Miami. It's very common. And it's in the Miami. It's very common. And it's in the Miami. It's very common. And it's very common in like South American very common in like South American very common in like South American cultures, but some of my clients um you cultures, but some of my clients um you cultures, but some of my clients um you know, if they have like Caribbean or know, if they have like Caribbean or know, if they have like Caribbean or South American um heritage, it's like South American um heritage, it's like South American um heritage, it's like they gain weight, they keep their they gain weight, they keep their they gain weight, they keep their they keep like a lean abs and all their they keep like a lean abs and all their they keep like a lean abs and all their weight just goes to their butt. They're weight just goes to their butt. They're weight just goes to their butt. They're just genetically blessed just genetically blessed just genetically blessed &gt;&gt; and they're happy that way, right? &gt;&gt; and they're happy that way, right? &gt;&gt; and they're happy that way, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. they can carry off car they &gt;&gt; Yeah. they can carry off car they &gt;&gt; Yeah. they can carry off car they can pull off you know uh 30% body fat can pull off you know uh 30% body fat can pull off you know uh 30% body fat looking really aesthetically looking really aesthetically looking really aesthetically pleasing for their goals whereas other pleasing for their goals whereas other pleasing for their goals whereas other people can't um and so uh other people can't um and so uh other people can't um and so uh other people you know put on fat like men tend to you know put on fat like men tend to you know put on fat like men tend to store fat more in their bellies we have store fat more in their bellies we have store fat more in their bellies we have different fat storage but just even with different fat storage but just even with different fat storage but just even with women they tend to store fat differently women they tend to store fat differently women they tend to store fat differently if you store it like around your entire if you store it like around your entire if you store it like around your entire gluten it just makes it rounder versus gluten it just makes it rounder versus gluten it just makes it rounder versus kind of going to your saddle bag areas kind of going to your saddle bag areas kind of going to your saddle bag areas and just making the lower look really and just making the lower look really and just making the lower look really saggy. So, you're going to have to saggy. So, you're going to have to saggy. So, you're going to have to figure out your optimal body fat figure out your optimal body fat figure out your optimal body fat percentage and get there through diet percentage and get there through diet percentage and get there through diet and activity, but you can improve just and activity, but you can improve just and activity, but you can improve just through recmping, like gaining strength through recmping, like gaining strength through recmping, like gaining strength in your glutes specifically on those in your glutes specifically on those in your glutes specifically on those exercises and it'll just look better and exercises and it'll just look better and exercises and it'll just look better and better. &gt;&gt; Related to that, uh can somebody gain &gt;&gt; Related to that, uh can somebody gain &gt;&gt; Related to that, uh can somebody gain muscle while losing fat? Um either by muscle while losing fat? Um either by muscle while losing fat? Um either by training while in a caloric maintenance training while in a caloric maintenance training while in a caloric maintenance or deficit phase or deficit phase or deficit phase written more on this than anyone. written more on this than anyone. written more on this than anyone. &gt;&gt; In fact, Brad and Allen are my two of my &gt;&gt; In fact, Brad and Allen are my two of my &gt;&gt; In fact, Brad and Allen are my two of my best friends, Brad Shfield, and Allen best friends, Brad Shfield, and Allen best friends, Brad Shfield, and Allen Aragon. I argue with them all the time Aragon. I argue with them all the time Aragon. I argue with them all the time about this and they think that you about this and they think that you about this and they think that you should bulk and cut, you see better should bulk and cut, you see better should bulk and cut, you see better results that way. I don't think I mean results that way. I don't think I mean results that way. I don't think I mean there's one this Helm study um by there's one this Helm study um by there's one this Helm study um by Eric Helms and it showed that adding Eric Helms and it showed that adding Eric Helms and it showed that adding like a basically they the subjects like a basically they the subjects like a basically they the subjects gained just as much muscle in gained just as much muscle in gained just as much muscle in maintenance as they did with surplus. maintenance as they did with surplus. maintenance as they did with surplus. And all these studies on big surpluses And all these studies on big surpluses And all these studies on big surpluses just show that you gain more fat. This just show that you gain more fat. This just show that you gain more fat. This is a very controversial topic and most is a very controversial topic and most is a very controversial topic and most people will disagree with me on this, people will disagree with me on this, people will disagree with me on this, but I will say what is the stimulus for but I will say what is the stimulus for but I will say what is the stimulus for grow gaining muscle is working hard in grow gaining muscle is working hard in grow gaining muscle is working hard in the gym and pring. Do you have to be in the gym and pring. Do you have to be in the gym and pring. Do you have to be in a caloric surplus? Um the evidence a caloric surplus? Um the evidence a caloric surplus? Um the evidence doesn't appear. So I will tell you most doesn't appear. So I will tell you most doesn't appear. So I will tell you most of my clients recmp. They come to me. I of my clients recmp. They come to me. I of my clients recmp. They come to me. I attract already fit people who come to attract already fit people who come to attract already fit people who come to me and then I don't I don't I say, "Do me and then I don't I don't I say, "Do me and then I don't I don't I say, "Do you get enough protein?" They say, "Yes, you get enough protein?" They say, "Yes, you get enough protein?" They say, "Yes, I get around a pound per uh sorry, I get I get around a pound per uh sorry, I get I get around a pound per uh sorry, I get around a gram per pound of body weight around a gram per pound of body weight around a gram per pound of body weight per day." And I say, "Good. I'm not per day." And I say, "Good. I'm not per day." And I say, "Good. I'm not going to touch your diet. Let's just get going to touch your diet. Let's just get going to touch your diet. Let's just get strong." And they recmp. I've had strong." And they recmp. I've had strong." And they recmp. I've had clients that train with me for a whole clients that train with me for a whole clients that train with me for a whole year. They stay at 135 pounds the whole year. They stay at 135 pounds the whole year. They stay at 135 pounds the whole year. And at the end of the year, they year. And at the end of the year, they year. And at the end of the year, they show me, Brett, look at my jeans. I have show me, Brett, look at my jeans. I have show me, Brett, look at my jeans. I have this crazy like 5 inch gap of the old this crazy like 5 inch gap of the old this crazy like 5 inch gap of the old jeans they used to wear. meaning they jeans they used to wear. meaning they jeans they used to wear. meaning they stayed the same weight, but they lost stayed the same weight, but they lost stayed the same weight, but they lost all that their waist because you lose all that their waist because you lose all that their waist because you lose fat from the problem areas. You gain fat from the problem areas. You gain fat from the problem areas. You gain muscle in the muscle bellies that make muscle in the muscle bellies that make muscle in the muscle bellies that make you more look more athletic and it you more look more athletic and it you more look more athletic and it changes your appearance and your changes your appearance and your changes your appearance and your body composition a ton even though the body composition a ton even though the body composition a ton even though the scale weight doesn't change. But if you scale weight doesn't change. But if you scale weight doesn't change. But if you do want a bulk and cut, what I will say do want a bulk and cut, what I will say do want a bulk and cut, what I will say is just do mini bulks and mini cuts. is just do mini bulks and mini cuts. is just do mini bulks and mini cuts. Just gain five pounds and lose five Just gain five pounds and lose five Just gain five pounds and lose five pounds. You don't have to put on 30 lbs. pounds. You don't have to put on 30 lbs. pounds. You don't have to put on 30 lbs. That's old way of thinking and I That's old way of thinking and I That's old way of thinking and I think it does more harm than good. Men, think it does more harm than good. Men, think it does more harm than good. Men, we can bulk and we don't mind the way we can bulk and we don't mind the way we can bulk and we don't mind the way we look a little bit. We're like, "Look at look a little bit. We're like, "Look at look a little bit. We're like, "Look at check out Trapzilla." Women don't like check out Trapzilla." Women don't like check out Trapzilla." Women don't like the bulks as much. They don't They don't the bulks as much. They don't They don't the bulks as much. They don't They don't &gt;&gt; They don't like bulking, man. I &gt;&gt; They don't like bulking, man. I &gt;&gt; They don't like bulking, man. I &gt;&gt; You don't have to. &gt;&gt; You don't have to. &gt;&gt; You don't have to. &gt;&gt; I don't I can't I think I've done it &gt;&gt; I don't I can't I think I've done it &gt;&gt; I don't I can't I think I've done it once or twice many years ago. I don't once or twice many years ago. I don't once or twice many years ago. I don't like feeling weighed down with all that like feeling weighed down with all that like feeling weighed down with all that extra food and your digestion. It extra food and your digestion. It extra food and your digestion. It like you're constantly eating or going like you're constantly eating or going like you're constantly eating or going to the bathroom. It makes you sleepy. to the bathroom. It makes you sleepy. to the bathroom. It makes you sleepy. Like I think maintenance plus a couple Like I think maintenance plus a couple Like I think maintenance plus a couple hundred extra calories with hundred extra calories with hundred extra calories with &gt;&gt; mini bulks, mini cuts, but no one has to &gt;&gt; mini bulks, mini cuts, but no one has to &gt;&gt; mini bulks, mini cuts, but no one has to do these huge bulks and cuts. You get do these huge bulks and cuts. You get do these huge bulks and cuts. You get these bodybuilding coaches that push these bodybuilding coaches that push these bodybuilding coaches that push that on to like, you know, lifestyle that on to like, you know, lifestyle that on to like, you know, lifestyle clients or like clients that are already clients or like clients that are already clients or like clients that are already obese and or like or like very obese and or like or like very obese and or like or like very overweight and you're like, why are you overweight and you're like, why are you overweight and you're like, why are you they just need to cut they need to cut they just need to cut they need to cut they just need to cut they need to cut down per until they get down to the down per until they get down to the down per until they get down to the healthy body fat level. So you know healthy body fat level. So you know healthy body fat level. So you know I just want people to be more familiar I just want people to be more familiar I just want people to be more familiar with recmping. I've written about a lot. with recmping. I've written about a lot. with recmping. I've written about a lot. Check it out. Recomping. Check it out. Recomping. Check it out. Recomping. &gt;&gt; I'll just add to that because I can't &gt;&gt; I'll just add to that because I can't &gt;&gt; I'll just add to that because I can't resist. When people bulk, their skin resist. When people bulk, their skin resist. When people bulk, their skin gets really bad. You can they get acne gets really bad. You can they get acne gets really bad. You can they get acne and all sorts of stuff. Kyle Gillette, and all sorts of stuff. Kyle Gillette, and all sorts of stuff. Kyle Gillette, Dr. Kyle Gillette, he's an MD who's been Dr. Kyle Gillette, he's an MD who's been Dr. Kyle Gillette, he's an MD who's been a guest on this podcast u clarified a guest on this podcast u clarified a guest on this podcast u clarified a lot of things for me and I think a lot of things for me and I think a lot of things for me and I think a lot of other people when he said people that of other people when he said people that of other people when he said people that are carrying excess body fat, when they are carrying excess body fat, when they are carrying excess body fat, when they reduce the amount of fat they're reduce the amount of fat they're reduce the amount of fat they're carrying, their hormone profiles carrying, their hormone profiles carrying, their hormone profiles improve. People who are already really improve. People who are already really improve. People who are already really lean, if they go really submaintenance lean, if they go really submaintenance lean, if they go really submaintenance calories, their hormones tend to suffer. calories, their hormones tend to suffer. calories, their hormones tend to suffer. This is true for women. They sometimes This is true for women. They sometimes This is true for women. They sometimes will stop having periods. Uh but also will stop having periods. Uh but also will stop having periods. Uh but also for men, their testosterone will drop if for men, their testosterone will drop if for men, their testosterone will drop if they're eating too few calories. But men they're eating too few calories. But men they're eating too few calories. But men who are carrying too much body fat who are carrying too much body fat who are carrying too much body fat who lose body fat, their testosterone lose body fat, their testosterone lose body fat, their testosterone increases. So these rules about, you increases. So these rules about, you increases. So these rules about, you know, you if you cut calories, your know, you if you cut calories, your know, you if you cut calories, your testosterone drops depends on where testosterone drops depends on where testosterone drops depends on where you're starting from. you're starting from. you're starting from. &gt;&gt; A healthy body fat range. Maybe it's &gt;&gt; A healthy body fat range. Maybe it's &gt;&gt; A healthy body fat range. Maybe it's like 10 to 20% for men. Maybe it's 15 to like 10 to 20% for men. Maybe it's 15 to like 10 to 20% for men. Maybe it's 15 to 25% for women and just recmp. But if 25% for women and just recmp. But if 25% for women and just recmp. But if you're not in that range, if you're not in that range, if you're not in that range, if you're lower, then you need to bulk to be in an lower, then you need to bulk to be in an lower, then you need to bulk to be in an optimal hormonal profile. If you're optimal hormonal profile. If you're optimal hormonal profile. If you're overweight, you need to lose weight. So overweight, you need to lose weight. So overweight, you need to lose weight. So bulky and cutting is a strategy. But bulky and cutting is a strategy. But bulky and cutting is a strategy. But when you're in your healthy range, you when you're in your healthy range, you when you're in your healthy range, you don't have to. There's not much don't have to. There's not much don't have to. There's not much evidence. And if you do, do it, do mini, evidence. And if you do, do it, do mini, evidence. And if you do, do it, do mini, mini bulk, mini cut. mini bulk, mini cut. mini bulk, mini cut. &gt;&gt; I have a feeling I know the answer to &gt;&gt; I have a feeling I know the answer to &gt;&gt; I have a feeling I know the answer to this question, and it probably can be this question, and it probably can be this question, and it probably can be answered in uh one word. lifting or answered in uh one word. lifting or answered in uh one word. lifting or Pilates for strength training? Pilates for strength training? Pilates for strength training? &gt;&gt; Lifting. &gt;&gt; Lifting. &gt;&gt; Lifting. &gt;&gt; Thank you. How to grow glutes without &gt;&gt; Thank you. How to grow glutes without &gt;&gt; Thank you. How to grow glutes without growing legs and can quote hip dips be growing legs and can quote hip dips be growing legs and can quote hip dips be induced by lifting? So those are two induced by lifting? So those are two induced by lifting? So those are two important questions. Okay. Question one. important questions. Okay. Question one. important questions. Okay. Question one. I was the first person to make this a I was the first person to make this a I was the first person to make this a thing because I had so many women come thing because I had so many women come thing because I had so many women come to me back in like 2009, to me back in like 2009, to me back in like 2009, 2010. I think my first blog post was 2010. I think my first blog post was 2010. I think my first blog post was 2010 and I made two YouTube videos on 2010 and I made two YouTube videos on 2010 and I made two YouTube videos on it. How to grow your glutes without it. How to grow your glutes without it. How to grow your glutes without growing your legs. It's tricky because growing your legs. It's tricky because growing your legs. It's tricky because most of the best glute exercises are leg most of the best glute exercises are leg most of the best glute exercises are leg exercises. So you have to cut all of exercises. So you have to cut all of exercises. So you have to cut all of them out. If you want to grow your them out. If you want to grow your them out. If you want to grow your glutes without growing your legs, the glutes without growing your legs, the glutes without growing your legs, the nice thing is the plot can study and nice thing is the plot can study and nice thing is the plot can study and then a couple subsequent studies. This then a couple subsequent studies. This then a couple subsequent studies. This barley paper, it shows you can grow your barley paper, it shows you can grow your barley paper, it shows you can grow your glutes similarly effectively as like glutes similarly effectively as like glutes similarly effectively as like squats and step-ups for example um squats and step-ups for example um squats and step-ups for example um through hip thrusts. So, you can do hip through hip thrusts. So, you can do hip through hip thrusts. So, you can do hip thrust, you can do kickbacks, you could thrust, you can do kickbacks, you could thrust, you can do kickbacks, you could do 45 degree hypers, you can do 45 degree hypers, you can do 45 degree hypers, you can do abduction. Um, but you can't do all the abduction. Um, but you can't do all the abduction. Um, but you can't do all the squats and lunges and even the, you squats and lunges and even the, you squats and lunges and even the, you know, stiff leg deadlifts and stuff like know, stiff leg deadlifts and stuff like know, stiff leg deadlifts and stuff like that. You want to minimize those and that. You want to minimize those and that. You want to minimize those and just focus on mostly the isolation just focus on mostly the isolation just focus on mostly the isolation lifts. And you can probably do more lifts. And you can probably do more lifts. And you can probably do more volume for those. So here you could just volume for those. So here you could just volume for those. So here you could just do hip thrusts and kickbacks and do hip thrusts and kickbacks and do hip thrusts and kickbacks and abduction three times a week and do, you abduction three times a week and do, you abduction three times a week and do, you know, you might do you might do four know, you might do you might do four know, you might do you might do four sets of each because they don't make you sets of each because they don't make you sets of each because they don't make you real sore, but you require a separate real sore, but you require a separate real sore, but you require a separate strategy if you don't want the leg strategy if you don't want the leg strategy if you don't want the leg growth. But I will say many women think growth. But I will say many women think growth. But I will say many women think that they don't want the leg growth that they don't want the leg growth that they don't want the leg growth because they have fat on their legs and because they have fat on their legs and because they have fat on their legs and once they lean out, they actually like once they lean out, they actually like once they lean out, they actually like the way their legs look. So a lot of the way their legs look. So a lot of the way their legs look. So a lot of people improperly throw themselves into people improperly throw themselves into people improperly throw themselves into that category. And then the second that category. And then the second that category. And then the second question is, can you induce hip dips question is, can you induce hip dips question is, can you induce hip dips through weight training? Yes, hip dips, through weight training? Yes, hip dips, through weight training? Yes, hip dips, &gt;&gt; which are &gt;&gt; which are &gt;&gt; which are &gt;&gt; they're the hollow point formed from &gt;&gt; they're the hollow point formed from &gt;&gt; they're the hollow point formed from where the glute medius meets the glute where the glute medius meets the glute where the glute medius meets the glute maximus. They're maximus. They're maximus. They're &gt;&gt; like you could put a like a golf ball or &gt;&gt; like you could put a like a golf ball or &gt;&gt; like you could put a like a golf ball or tennis ball like on your hip and it kind tennis ball like on your hip and it kind tennis ball like on your hip and it kind of fits. of fits. of fits. &gt;&gt; No, not really. It wouldn't stick. &gt;&gt; No, not really. It wouldn't stick. &gt;&gt; No, not really. It wouldn't stick. That'd be pretty amazing. But like it's That'd be pretty amazing. But like it's That'd be pretty amazing. But like it's a hollow area and from the front you'll a hollow area and from the front you'll a hollow area and from the front you'll see like the see like the see like the &gt;&gt; No, I mean if are you talking about like &gt;&gt; No, I mean if are you talking about like &gt;&gt; No, I mean if are you talking about like if one lies on their side, it's like an if one lies on their side, it's like an if one lies on their side, it's like an area that you could you could like area that you could you could like area that you could you could like ideally that ideally that ideally that &gt;&gt; but they'd probably have to be flexing &gt;&gt; but they'd probably have to be flexing &gt;&gt; but they'd probably have to be flexing but Yeah. Like but Yeah. Like but Yeah. Like &gt;&gt; that would stay put. Yeah, would stay &gt;&gt; that would stay put. Yeah, would stay &gt;&gt; that would stay put. Yeah, would stay put if they're laying on their side. But put if they're laying on their side. But put if they're laying on their side. But I I've talked about this for a long I I've talked about this for a long I I've talked about this for a long time. &gt;&gt; I will tell you, if you get lean, you &gt;&gt; I will tell you, if you get lean, you &gt;&gt; I will tell you, if you get lean, you have to have hip dips. If you're lean, have to have hip dips. If you're lean, have to have hip dips. If you're lean, there's no muscle there. It's where the there's no muscle there. It's where the there's no muscle there. It's where the glute medius comes down straight down. glute medius comes down straight down. glute medius comes down straight down. The glute max runs diagonally and The glute max runs diagonally and The glute max runs diagonally and there's a hollow point in the middle there's a hollow point in the middle there's a hollow point in the middle where there is no muscle there. So when where there is no muscle there. So when where there is no muscle there. So when people come up with these hip dip people come up with these hip dip people come up with these hip dip workouts, they're full of it. You can't workouts, they're full of it. You can't workouts, they're full of it. You can't grow muscle in an imaginary space. you grow muscle in an imaginary space. you grow muscle in an imaginary space. you get lean enough and you know so like the get lean enough and you know so like the get lean enough and you know so like the solution is to get fat put in there or solution is to get fat put in there or solution is to get fat put in there or if hopefully you store fat there but if hopefully you store fat there but if hopefully you store fat there but once you get lean enough we all have hip once you get lean enough we all have hip once you get lean enough we all have hip dips so learn how to embrace them. The dips so learn how to embrace them. The dips so learn how to embrace them. The funny thing is you think of like Ronnie funny thing is you think of like Ronnie funny thing is you think of like Ronnie Coleman from behind flexing his glute Coleman from behind flexing his glute Coleman from behind flexing his glute like posing. Yes, you see this butterfly like posing. Yes, you see this butterfly like posing. Yes, you see this butterfly shape. The glutes are like a butterfly shape. The glutes are like a butterfly shape. The glutes are like a butterfly shape, but his hip dips don't look bad shape, but his hip dips don't look bad shape, but his hip dips don't look bad because you got these giant vasties, the because you got these giant vasties, the because you got these giant vasties, the outer quads that but with women outer quads that but with women outer quads that but with women without those outer quads, it can look without those outer quads, it can look without those outer quads, it can look unsightly. But that's because we've unsightly. But that's because we've unsightly. But that's because we've programmed to be worried about it. Learn programmed to be worried about it. Learn programmed to be worried about it. Learn to embrace it and say, "I like the hip to embrace it and say, "I like the hip to embrace it and say, "I like the hip dips. It means I'm lean. It means I'm dips. It means I'm lean. It means I'm dips. It means I'm lean. It means I'm strong. It means I'm muscular and strong. It means I'm muscular and strong. It means I'm muscular and athletic." And it's just something that athletic." And it's just something that athletic." And it's just something that is hard to avoid if you're training is hard to avoid if you're training is hard to avoid if you're training properly and getting lean. But can you properly and getting lean. But can you properly and getting lean. But can you make them worse through strength make them worse through strength make them worse through strength training? Yes, in my opinion, because training? Yes, in my opinion, because training? Yes, in my opinion, because you make it more pronounced and you get you make it more pronounced and you get you make it more pronounced and you get leaner. So if you're worried, really leaner. So if you're worried, really leaner. So if you're worried, really worried about it, try to maintain a worried about it, try to maintain a worried about it, try to maintain a higher body fat percentage. And maybe higher body fat percentage. And maybe higher body fat percentage. And maybe don't train as much glute medius and don't train as much glute medius and don't train as much glute medius and frontal plane hip abduction. and do frontal plane hip abduction. and do frontal plane hip abduction. and do seated hip abductions instead of like seated hip abductions instead of like seated hip abductions instead of like what we did yesterday which was more what we did yesterday which was more what we did yesterday which was more upright cuz maybe that maybe growing the upright cuz maybe that maybe growing the upright cuz maybe that maybe growing the glute medius and minimus especially the glute medius and minimus especially the glute medius and minimus especially the middle and anterior divisions but I will middle and anterior divisions but I will middle and anterior divisions but I will say all of my clients do plenty of say all of my clients do plenty of say all of my clients do plenty of abduction work and they look fine abduction work and they look fine abduction work and they look fine there's some really uh entertaining there's some really uh entertaining there's some really uh entertaining questions in here that are really questions in here that are really questions in here that are really specific to the topics that you cover specific to the topics that you cover specific to the topics that you cover and are expert in. Um, I understand that and are expert in. Um, I understand that and are expert in. Um, I understand that there's no such thing as spot reduction, there's no such thing as spot reduction, there's no such thing as spot reduction, but if somebody wants to lose fat from but if somebody wants to lose fat from but if somebody wants to lose fat from their abdominal region, is there their abdominal region, is there their abdominal region, is there anything they can do to accelerate loss anything they can do to accelerate loss anything they can do to accelerate loss of fat in that region? We've known that of fat in that region? We've known that of fat in that region? We've known that spot reduction is a myth since like the spot reduction is a myth since like the spot reduction is a myth since like the '9s. Um, research showing that yeah, you '9s. Um, research showing that yeah, you '9s. Um, research showing that yeah, you can do all the crunches you want. It can do all the crunches you want. It can do all the crunches you want. It doesn't target fat loss in that area. doesn't target fat loss in that area. doesn't target fat loss in that area. You can build muscle and so you can have You can build muscle and so you can have You can build muscle and so you can have sightspecific muscle growth, but not sightspecific muscle growth, but not sightspecific muscle growth, but not sightspecific fat loss. fat loss comes sightspecific fat loss. fat loss comes sightspecific fat loss. fat loss comes off from the entire body, which you do off from the entire body, which you do off from the entire body, which you do through caloric deficit, through eating through caloric deficit, through eating through caloric deficit, through eating less, moving more, or com any less, moving more, or com any less, moving more, or com any combination thereof, but also through combination thereof, but also through combination thereof, but also through recmping. Because if you gain 5 lbs, if recmping. Because if you gain 5 lbs, if recmping. Because if you gain 5 lbs, if you weigh 200 lb and you gain 10 pounds you weigh 200 lb and you gain 10 pounds you weigh 200 lb and you gain 10 pounds of muscle, lose 10 pounds of fat, you of muscle, lose 10 pounds of fat, you of muscle, lose 10 pounds of fat, you know, you've just lost 10 pounds of your know, you've just lost 10 pounds of your know, you've just lost 10 pounds of your you're um 5% less body fat levels. you're um 5% less body fat levels. you're um 5% less body fat levels. You're going to have less fat, you know, You're going to have less fat, you know, You're going to have less fat, you know, like. So, it's through you can do it like. So, it's through you can do it like. So, it's through you can do it through like that's not to say you through like that's not to say you through like that's not to say you shouldn't ever train your abs. It's just shouldn't ever train your abs. It's just shouldn't ever train your abs. It's just to say that your abs tend to look the to say that your abs tend to look the to say that your abs tend to look the best when you're your leanest, not when best when you're your leanest, not when best when you're your leanest, not when you're training your abs the most. you're training your abs the most. you're training your abs the most. &gt;&gt; Aesthetically speaking, should people &gt;&gt; Aesthetically speaking, should people &gt;&gt; Aesthetically speaking, should people train glutes differently depending on train glutes differently depending on train glutes differently depending on whether or not they have wide versus whether or not they have wide versus whether or not they have wide versus narrow hips? narrow hips? narrow hips? And I believe this is a woman asking the And I believe this is a woman asking the And I believe this is a woman asking the question. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So theoretically, like it doesn't &gt;&gt; Yeah. So theoretically, like it doesn't &gt;&gt; Yeah. So theoretically, like it doesn't just depend on the hips. It depends on just depend on the hips. It depends on just depend on the hips. It depends on like how the femur like how the femur like how the femur um because I wrote about this in my um because I wrote about this in my um because I wrote about this in my book. I just think people get like book. I just think people get like book. I just think people get like should you train differently for your should you train differently for your should you train differently for your glute genetics. Maybe if you feel like glute genetics. Maybe if you feel like glute genetics. Maybe if you feel like you're kind of like a V-shaped glutes, you're kind of like a V-shaped glutes, you're kind of like a V-shaped glutes, um then maybe you do more lower glutes um then maybe you do more lower glutes um then maybe you do more lower glutes and not as much upper, maybe you don't and not as much upper, maybe you don't and not as much upper, maybe you don't do abduction. But most of my clients do abduction. But most of my clients do abduction. But most of my clients train glutes the same way. A lot of train glutes the same way. A lot of train glutes the same way. A lot of questions about grip strength. You questions about grip strength. You questions about grip strength. You talked a little bit about training grip talked a little bit about training grip talked a little bit about training grip strength. Um, if somebody wanted to add strength. Um, if somebody wanted to add strength. Um, if somebody wanted to add some grip strength, maybe not do a full some grip strength, maybe not do a full some grip strength, maybe not do a full specialization phase of four weeks, but specialization phase of four weeks, but specialization phase of four weeks, but maybe they just wanted to add some grip maybe they just wanted to add some grip maybe they just wanted to add some grip strength and they're already hanging strength and they're already hanging strength and they're already hanging from the bar doing pikes for their abs, from the bar doing pikes for their abs, from the bar doing pikes for their abs, which I would argue is one of the best which I would argue is one of the best which I would argue is one of the best exercises for abs uh, and grip. What exercises for abs uh, and grip. What exercises for abs uh, and grip. What specific grip exercise would you specific grip exercise would you specific grip exercise would you suggest? So, assuming they're already suggest? So, assuming they're already suggest? So, assuming they're already deadlifting, they're doing stuff, deadlifting, they're doing stuff, deadlifting, they're doing stuff, they're using their grip for pulling and they're using their grip for pulling and they're using their grip for pulling and this kind of thing, hang in front of the this kind of thing, hang in front of the this kind of thing, hang in front of the bar, what uh if you had give one grip bar, what uh if you had give one grip bar, what uh if you had give one grip strength exercise, what would it be? strength exercise, what would it be? strength exercise, what would it be? &gt;&gt; Well, I would say if you're if you &gt;&gt; Well, I would say if you're if you &gt;&gt; Well, I would say if you're if you tend to get beat up with your low back, tend to get beat up with your low back, tend to get beat up with your low back, then hang. do static hangs or even then hang. do static hangs or even then hang. do static hangs or even hopefully you progress to one arm hangs hopefully you progress to one arm hangs hopefully you progress to one arm hangs where you can kind of do one- arm hangs where you can kind of do one- arm hangs where you can kind of do one- arm hangs where you brace yourself on the use the where you brace yourself on the use the where you brace yourself on the use the non-working arm to hold yourself in non-working arm to hold yourself in non-working arm to hold yourself in position. But if your low back is, you position. But if your low back is, you position. But if your low back is, you know, stellar, then you can do shrugs. know, stellar, then you can do shrugs. know, stellar, then you can do shrugs. You can do farmers walks. You know, You can do farmers walks. You know, You can do farmers walks. You know, walking is kind of hard at a gym to do walking is kind of hard at a gym to do walking is kind of hard at a gym to do just walking around with the dumbbells, just walking around with the dumbbells, just walking around with the dumbbells, but you could just stand in place. You but you could just stand in place. You but you could just stand in place. You could do shrugs. When you can't do any could do shrugs. When you can't do any could do shrugs. When you can't do any more shrugs, you just hold it for time. more shrugs, you just hold it for time. more shrugs, you just hold it for time. You can also just hold the last rep of You can also just hold the last rep of You can also just hold the last rep of your last set of deadlifts for time. All your last set of deadlifts for time. All your last set of deadlifts for time. All those things help out. They all add up those things help out. They all add up those things help out. They all add up to improving your grip strength. Last to improving your grip strength. Last to improving your grip strength. Last question. What is the most unusual but question. What is the most unusual but question. What is the most unusual but effective training tip that you've never effective training tip that you've never effective training tip that you've never heard or seen discussed in social media heard or seen discussed in social media heard or seen discussed in social media or out there? Like what's a maybe or out there? Like what's a maybe or out there? Like what's a maybe something from the past that no one something from the past that no one something from the past that no one talks about anymore or something that talks about anymore or something that talks about anymore or something that you just feel like people should talk you just feel like people should talk you just feel like people should talk about more in terms of training? This about more in terms of training? This about more in terms of training? This could be anything you like. It's like uh could be anything you like. It's like uh could be anything you like. It's like uh your choice. your choice. your choice. &gt;&gt; I would say what we talked about &gt;&gt; I would say what we talked about &gt;&gt; I would say what we talked about yesterday, the one set to failure. Who yesterday, the one set to failure. Who yesterday, the one set to failure. Who does it? Who does one set to failure? does it? Who does one set to failure? does it? Who does one set to failure? Two full body workouts a week. One set Two full body workouts a week. One set Two full body workouts a week. One set to failure to failure to failure &gt;&gt; of for each body part &gt;&gt; of for each body part &gt;&gt; of for each body part &gt;&gt; for Yeah. on like six to eight, like six &gt;&gt; for Yeah. on like six to eight, like six &gt;&gt; for Yeah. on like six to eight, like six to 10 exercises per day. You get the to 10 exercises per day. You get the to 10 exercises per day. You get the workout done in, you know, 45 minutes. workout done in, you know, 45 minutes. workout done in, you know, 45 minutes. So you're training an hour and a half a So you're training an hour and a half a So you're training an hour and a half a week and you probably could get week and you probably could get week and you probably could get 80% of your gains than you could through 80% of your gains than you could through 80% of your gains than you could through training, you know, for three times that training, you know, for three times that training, you know, for three times that much time. It's very timeefficient. It's much time. It's very timeefficient. It's much time. It's very timeefficient. It's just no one ever does it. I don't know just no one ever does it. I don't know just no one ever does it. I don't know anyone who does one set. You know, anyone who does one set. You know, anyone who does one set. You know, everyone does multiple sets, but it's a everyone does multiple sets, but it's a everyone does multiple sets, but it's a very efficient way to train. It's a very efficient way to train. It's a very efficient way to train. It's a very fun way to train because you come in fun way to train because you come in fun way to train because you come in with a goal. You're like, I need to try with a goal. You're like, I need to try with a goal. You're like, I need to try to beat my record. Well, the only thing to beat my record. Well, the only thing to beat my record. Well, the only thing I would say is shuffle the lifts around, I would say is shuffle the lifts around, I would say is shuffle the lifts around, shuffle the order around, and shuffle the order around, and shuffle the order around, and shuffle the variations around because, as we've the variations around because, as we've the variations around because, as we've mentioned, you can't just keep gaining mentioned, you can't just keep gaining mentioned, you can't just keep gaining strength for years on end. It doesn't strength for years on end. It doesn't strength for years on end. It doesn't work that way. work that way. work that way. &gt;&gt; So, train the whole body, one set to &gt;&gt; So, train the whole body, one set to &gt;&gt; So, train the whole body, one set to failure after a sufficient warm-up for failure after a sufficient warm-up for failure after a sufficient warm-up for each body part. And do that one, two, or each body part. And do that one, two, or each body part. And do that one, two, or three times a week. One, if you're going three times a week. One, if you're going three times a week. One, if you're going to do it once a week, you got to pour to do it once a week, you got to pour to do it once a week, you got to pour everything you've got into it. But if everything you've got into it. But if everything you've got into it. But if you do it two or three times a week, you do it two or three times a week, you do it two or three times a week, you can go, can go, can go, &gt;&gt; we talked about this yesterday. It gets &gt;&gt; we talked about this yesterday. It gets &gt;&gt; we talked about this yesterday. It gets to a point where you're I got to a point to a point where you're I got to a point to a point where you're I got to a point where I suck at squats, but I was where I suck at squats, but I was where I suck at squats, but I was doing 225 for 30. I was doing my best doing 225 for 30. I was doing my best doing 225 for 30. I was doing my best stiff leg deadlift. I It was 405 for stiff leg deadlift. I It was 405 for stiff leg deadlift. I It was 405 for either 20. I might have gotten 22. And either 20. I might have gotten 22. And either 20. I might have gotten 22. And then you get to a point where like what then you get to a point where like what then you get to a point where like what am I going to do? Go for 25? Yes, you am I going to do? Go for 25? Yes, you am I going to do? Go for 25? Yes, you can go heavier weight, but like it gets can go heavier weight, but like it gets can go heavier weight, but like it gets to the point where it's daunting. It to the point where it's daunting. It to the point where it's daunting. It makes you nervous just thinking about makes you nervous just thinking about makes you nervous just thinking about the exercise. So, at that point, you the exercise. So, at that point, you the exercise. So, at that point, you kind of got to learn to that's your body kind of got to learn to that's your body kind of got to learn to that's your body may be telling you you're about to get may be telling you you're about to get may be telling you you're about to get injured. Um, so maybe, yeah, he switch injured. Um, so maybe, yeah, he switch injured. Um, so maybe, yeah, he switch the exercise or start doing more volume. the exercise or start doing more volume. the exercise or start doing more volume. But it's a it's a strategy I wish more But it's a it's a strategy I wish more But it's a it's a strategy I wish more people knew about because a lot of people knew about because a lot of people knew about because a lot of people quit lifting because they think people quit lifting because they think people quit lifting because they think they have to do it for they have to do it for they have to do it for periods of time in your life where you periods of time in your life where you periods of time in your life where you get stressed out or like think times are get stressed out or like think times are get stressed out or like think times are tough. I got to work harder or put more tough. I got to work harder or put more tough. I got to work harder or put more hours into work or this responsibility hours into work or this responsibility hours into work or this responsibility comes in. You can just you can do brief comes in. You can just you can do brief comes in. You can just you can do brief workouts and they're very effective. workouts and they're very effective. workouts and they're very effective. Just doing 45 minutes a couple times a Just doing 45 minutes a couple times a Just doing 45 minutes a couple times a week. It'll help more people stick to week. It'll help more people stick to week. It'll help more people stick to weight training because they realize I weight training because they realize I weight training because they realize I don't have to be in the gym five hours a don't have to be in the gym five hours a don't have to be in the gym five hours a day. &gt;&gt; Love it. &gt;&gt; Love it. &gt;&gt; Love it. Brett Contrarus, Dr. Brett Contrarus, Brett Contrarus, Dr. Brett Contrarus, Brett Contrarus, Dr. Brett Contrarus, excuse me. Thank you so much. You've excuse me. Thank you so much. You've excuse me. Thank you so much. You've given us so much knowledge as really a given us so much knowledge as really a given us so much knowledge as really a master class not just in glute master class not just in glute master class not just in glute strengthening and hypertrophy but how to strengthening and hypertrophy but how to strengthening and hypertrophy but how to specialize in lagging body parts, how to specialize in lagging body parts, how to specialize in lagging body parts, how to prioritize training, periodized prioritize training, periodized prioritize training, periodized training, everything from calves, arms, training, everything from calves, arms, training, everything from calves, arms, glutes. Uh we talked about rep ranges. I glutes. Uh we talked about rep ranges. I glutes. Uh we talked about rep ranges. I mean, you know, I would take another mean, you know, I would take another mean, you know, I would take another hour to summarize everything you've told hour to summarize everything you've told hour to summarize everything you've told us in the preceding hours and it's just us in the preceding hours and it's just us in the preceding hours and it's just spectacular. uh you're one of the few spectacular. uh you're one of the few spectacular. uh you're one of the few people out there that is degreed in this people out there that is degreed in this people out there that is degreed in this area, continues to read the research, is area, continues to read the research, is area, continues to read the research, is clearly a practitioner. You practice clearly a practitioner. You practice clearly a practitioner. You practice what you preach, and perhaps most what you preach, and perhaps most what you preach, and perhaps most importantly, you train people who make phenomenal you train people who make phenomenal you train people who make phenomenal progress as a consequence of your progress as a consequence of your progress as a consequence of your training. And I know that you're very, training. And I know that you're very, training. And I know that you're very, very proud of your students, your very proud of your students, your very proud of your students, your clients for the hard work they put in clients for the hard work they put in clients for the hard work they put in and their dedication and the feedback and their dedication and the feedback and their dedication and the feedback they give you. And it's so wonderful they give you. And it's so wonderful they give you. And it's so wonderful that you take that and then you transmit that you take that and then you transmit that you take that and then you transmit it out to the world through your social it out to the world through your social it out to the world through your social media, through your course and here media, through your course and here media, through your course and here on this and on other podcasts. So, on this and on other podcasts. So, on this and on other podcasts. So, you're just a wealth of knowledge and I you're just a wealth of knowledge and I you're just a wealth of knowledge and I love uh the extent to which you share love uh the extent to which you share love uh the extent to which you share that knowledge and with such clarity and that knowledge and with such clarity and that knowledge and with such clarity and generosity. Uh it's just really generosity. Uh it's just really generosity. Uh it's just really spectacular to have this opportunity sit spectacular to have this opportunity sit spectacular to have this opportunity sit down with you and I know everyone's down with you and I know everyone's down with you and I know everyone's learned a ton and the best part is learned a ton and the best part is learned a ton and the best part is they're going to try this stuff. They're they're going to try this stuff. They're they're going to try this stuff. They're going to implement it and I'm sure going to implement it and I'm sure going to implement it and I'm sure you're going to get lots of questions. you're going to get lots of questions. you're going to get lots of questions. uh and at the same time you've opened uh and at the same time you've opened uh and at the same time you've opened this treasure trove for us. So thank you this treasure trove for us. So thank you this treasure trove for us. So thank you for coming here today. Thank you for all for coming here today. Thank you for all for coming here today. Thank you for all the work you've done and the work that the work you've done and the work that the work you've done and the work that you continue to do. One thing that's you continue to do. One thing that's you continue to do. One thing that's very clear is that you are a lifelong very clear is that you are a lifelong very clear is that you are a lifelong learner and that you continue to bring learner and that you continue to bring learner and that you continue to bring in more knowledge and that you'll in more knowledge and that you'll in more knowledge and that you'll continue to share that knowledge. I also continue to share that knowledge. I also continue to share that knowledge. I also want to thank you for the uh in-person want to thank you for the uh in-person want to thank you for the uh in-person training session yesterday. Uh we have a training session yesterday. Uh we have a training session yesterday. Uh we have a again a link to that in the show notes again a link to that in the show notes again a link to that in the show notes caption so people can see these caption so people can see these caption so people can see these movements. You can see how they're movements. You can see how they're movements. You can see how they're supposed to be done correctly. You can supposed to be done correctly. You can supposed to be done correctly. You can see where I was making mistakes. You can see where I was making mistakes. You can see where I was making mistakes. You can see where uh those mistakes were see where uh those mistakes were see where uh those mistakes were corrected thanks to uh your instruction. corrected thanks to uh your instruction. corrected thanks to uh your instruction. And listen, I hope you come back again And listen, I hope you come back again And listen, I hope you come back again and update us on the latest that you and update us on the latest that you and update us on the latest that you learn and incorporate because you're learn and incorporate because you're learn and incorporate because you're not just about the peer-reviewed not just about the peer-reviewed not just about the peer-reviewed studies. You're about that, but you're studies. You're about that, but you're studies. You're about that, but you're really about the real world knowledge really about the real world knowledge really about the real world knowledge that works. So, thank you ever so much. that works. So, thank you ever so much. that works. So, thank you ever so much. &gt;&gt; Well, let me offer my thanks right back. &gt;&gt; Well, let me offer my thanks right back. &gt;&gt; Well, let me offer my thanks right back. You are a pioneer. you have helped me You are a pioneer. you have helped me You are a pioneer. you have helped me with your protocols and through um your with your protocols and through um your with your protocols and through um your focus on you know health and focus on you know health and focus on you know health and neuroscience to just with pract neuroscience to just with pract neuroscience to just with pract practical tips to help us all. I can't practical tips to help us all. I can't practical tips to help us all. I can't tell you how many people that I know tell you how many people that I know tell you how many people that I know follow you. And when I told them I'm follow you. And when I told them I'm follow you. And when I told them I'm going to come on your podcast, they're going to come on your podcast, they're going to come on your podcast, they're like, "What?" It's like I finally made like, "What?" It's like I finally made like, "What?" It's like I finally made it in their eyes being on your podcast. it in their eyes being on your podcast. it in their eyes being on your podcast. It's really cool to have you ask me to It's really cool to have you ask me to It's really cool to have you ask me to come on because men tend to invite come on because men tend to invite come on because men tend to invite guests on their show for what they want guests on their show for what they want guests on their show for what they want to learn and you have probably 50% to learn and you have probably 50% to learn and you have probably 50% female listeners and they're all about female listeners and they're all about female listeners and they're all about the glutes even if you aren't all about the glutes even if you aren't all about the glutes even if you aren't all about the glutes or uh you don't care if you the glutes or uh you don't care if you the glutes or uh you don't care if you grow bigger glutes. A lot of your grow bigger glutes. A lot of your grow bigger glutes. A lot of your followers do. So that's where I'm glad followers do. So that's where I'm glad followers do. So that's where I'm glad to come in because yeah, we'll read in to come in because yeah, we'll read in to come in because yeah, we'll read in the comments most of the men will be the comments most of the men will be the comments most of the men will be like just do squats and lunges and it's like just do squats and lunges and it's like just do squats and lunges and it's like the women can write back, do you do like the women can write back, do you do like the women can write back, do you do pec deck? Do you do lateral raises? Do pec deck? Do you do lateral raises? Do pec deck? Do you do lateral raises? Do you do curls? Then quit being you do curls? Then quit being you do curls? Then quit being hypocritical. We can isolate the glutes. hypocritical. We can isolate the glutes. hypocritical. We can isolate the glutes. We can add in more volume as long as we We can add in more volume as long as we We can add in more volume as long as we can recover from it. It's only going to can recover from it. It's only going to can recover from it. It's only going to make our glutes even bigger. And I'm make our glutes even bigger. And I'm make our glutes even bigger. And I'm glad they got to be exposed to the to my glad they got to be exposed to the to my glad they got to be exposed to the to my methods and my material. So, thank you methods and my material. So, thank you methods and my material. So, thank you for inviting me on. I would always love for inviting me on. I would always love for inviting me on. I would always love to come back in the future down the road to come back in the future down the road to come back in the future down the road as we learn more and share the wealth. as we learn more and share the wealth. as we learn more and share the wealth. So, thanks right back at you. So, thanks right back at you. So, thanks right back at you. &gt;&gt; Well, once again, thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Well, once again, thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Well, once again, thank you so much. We'll have you back again. Appreciate We'll have you back again. Appreciate We'll have you back again. Appreciate you. Thank you for joining me for you. Thank you for joining me for you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Brett today's discussion with Dr. Brett today's discussion with Dr. Brett Contrarus. To learn more about Brett's Contrarus. To learn more about Brett's Contrarus. To learn more about Brett's work and to find links to his various work and to find links to his various work and to find links to his various websites and courses, please see the websites and courses, please see the websites and courses, please see the show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning show note captions. If you're learning from andor enjoying this podcast, please from andor enjoying this podcast, please from andor enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Brett today's discussion with Dr. Brett today's discussion with Dr. Brett Contrarus. And last, but certainly not Contrarus. And last, but certainly not Contrarus. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]