Everyone's focused on changing behavior. Everyone's focused on changing behavior. Everyone's focused on changing behavior. Everyone's focused on increasing Everyone's focused on increasing Everyone's focused on increasing willpower to overcome this tendency. And willpower to overcome this tendency. And willpower to overcome this tendency. And it's like, why not just change the it's like, why not just change the it's like, why not just change the tendency? That sounds so simple, but tendency? That sounds so simple, but tendency? That sounds so simple, but that's literally what we do in that's literally what we do in that's literally what we do in psychotherapy every day. When we come in psychotherapy every day. When we come in psychotherapy every day. When we come in and someone has a narcissistic and someone has a narcissistic and someone has a narcissistic personality disorder, this is personality disorder, this is personality disorder, this is personality. This is who they are. And personality. This is who they are. And personality. This is who they are. And we can psychotherapize them to be we can psychotherapize them to be we can psychotherapize them to be someone else. For their natural thoughts someone else. For their natural thoughts someone else. For their natural thoughts to change, for the way that they see the to change, for the way that they see the to change, for the way that they see the world to change, for their behaviors to world to change, for their behaviors to world to change, for their behaviors to change on its own. It doesn't require change on its own. It doesn't require change on its own. It doesn't require willpower is necessary when you are willpower is necessary when you are willpower is necessary when you are trying to not be narcissistic. It is not trying to not be narcissistic. It is not trying to not be narcissistic. It is not necessary when you are no longer necessary when you are no longer necessary when you are no longer narcissistic. So, we've done it in narcissistic. So, we've done it in narcissistic. So, we've done it in psychotherapy. We know that if your psychotherapy. We know that if your psychotherapy. We know that if your self-esteem changes, if your sense of self-esteem changes, if your sense of self-esteem changes, if your sense of being changes, treatment-refractory being changes, treatment-refractory being changes, treatment-refractory depression will change. Trauma, PTSD depression will change. Trauma, PTSD depression will change. Trauma, PTSD will change. Welcome to the Huberman Lab will change. Welcome to the Huberman Lab will change. Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science Podcast, where we discuss science Podcast, where we discuss science [music] and science-based tools for everyday and science-based tools for everyday and science-based tools for everyday life. &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Alok Kanojia, also known as today is Dr. Alok Kanojia, also known as today is Dr. Alok Kanojia, also known as Dr. K. Dr. K is a psychiatrist and Dr. K. Dr. K is a psychiatrist and Dr. K. Dr. K is a psychiatrist and online mental health educator. He has a online mental health educator. He has a online mental health educator. He has a very unique background, having trained very unique background, having trained very unique background, having trained and earned his medical degree in the and earned his medical degree in the and earned his medical degree in the United States, but also having studied United States, but also having studied United States, but also having studied as a monk for 7 years. Today, we discuss as a monk for 7 years. Today, we discuss as a monk for 7 years. Today, we discuss powerful tools for increasing your powerful tools for increasing your powerful tools for increasing your self-understanding and mental health, self-understanding and mental health, self-understanding and mental health, and for rewiring your nervous system. and for rewiring your nervous system. and for rewiring your nervous system. Specifically, how you can unlearn Specifically, how you can unlearn Specifically, how you can unlearn unhealthy thought patterns and behaviors unhealthy thought patterns and behaviors unhealthy thought patterns and behaviors and replace them with ones that truly and replace them with ones that truly and replace them with ones that truly serve you and those around you. Much of serve you and those around you. Much of serve you and those around you. Much of today's discussion centers around today's discussion centers around today's discussion centers around differences between Eastern and Western differences between Eastern and Western differences between Eastern and Western concepts of things like the ego and what concepts of things like the ego and what concepts of things like the ego and what makes up our self-concept. That portion makes up our self-concept. That portion makes up our self-concept. That portion of the conversation will no doubt have of the conversation will no doubt have of the conversation will no doubt have you rethinking why you do what you do in you rethinking why you do what you do in you rethinking why you do what you do in virtually everything, and he provides a virtually everything, and he provides a virtually everything, and he provides a roadmap for clearly defining your best roadmap for clearly defining your best roadmap for clearly defining your best goals and for increasing things like goals and for increasing things like goals and for increasing things like your energy and drive, not through your energy and drive, not through your energy and drive, not through hacks, but by tapping into deep hacks, but by tapping into deep hacks, but by tapping into deep intrinsic motivation. In fact, intrinsic motivation. In fact, intrinsic motivation. In fact, throughout today's episode, Dr. K throughout today's episode, Dr. K throughout today's episode, Dr. K explains specific practices that you can explains specific practices that you can explains specific practices that you can use to help rewire your nervous system, use to help rewire your nervous system, use to help rewire your nervous system, resolve traumas, and come to a much resolve traumas, and come to a much resolve traumas, and come to a much clearer understanding of how best to clearer understanding of how best to clearer understanding of how best to apply your efforts in work, school, and apply your efforts in work, school, and apply your efforts in work, school, and relationships. We also discuss social relationships. We also discuss social relationships. We also discuss social media, dating and relationships, media, dating and relationships, media, dating and relationships, addiction and pornography. So, there are addiction and pornography. So, there are addiction and pornography. So, there are a lot of topics covered. And I have to a lot of topics covered. And I have to a lot of topics covered. And I have to say, this is a conversation unlike any say, this is a conversation unlike any say, this is a conversation unlike any other that I've had on or off the other that I've had on or off the other that I've had on or off the podcast. Dr. K offers a completely new podcast. Dr. K offers a completely new podcast. Dr. K offers a completely new perspective on how to resolve common perspective on how to resolve common perspective on how to resolve common struggles that we all face. And in doing struggles that we all face. And in doing struggles that we all face. And in doing so, he offers a lot of practical tools. so, he offers a lot of practical tools. so, he offers a lot of practical tools. So, this should be a very valuable So, this should be a very valuable So, this should be a very valuable conversation for anyone wishing to conversation for anyone wishing to conversation for anyone wishing to better understand themselves at the better understand themselves at the better understand themselves at the theoretical and psychological level, but theoretical and psychological level, but theoretical and psychological level, but also who wishes to implement specific also who wishes to implement specific also who wishes to implement specific tools to improve some or all aspects of tools to improve some or all aspects of tools to improve some or all aspects of their life. Before we begin, I'd like to their life. Before we begin, I'd like to their life. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Alok And now, for my discussion with Dr. Alok And now, for my discussion with Dr. Alok Kanojia. Dr. K, welcome. Andrew Huberman, thank Dr. K, welcome. Andrew Huberman, thank Dr. K, welcome. Andrew Huberman, thank you for having me. So interested in you for having me. So interested in you for having me. So interested in you and the knowledge you hold. you and the knowledge you hold. you and the knowledge you hold. Today, we're going to talk about Today, we're going to talk about Today, we're going to talk about a number of things. I mean, Ayurveda and a number of things. I mean, Ayurveda and a number of things. I mean, Ayurveda and East-West medicine, motivation and East-West medicine, motivation and East-West medicine, motivation and dopamine, but I want to start dopamine, but I want to start dopamine, but I want to start with the internet. Okay. You had an with the internet. Okay. You had an with the internet. Okay. You had an interesting upbringing, so very interesting upbringing, so very interesting upbringing, so very different than mine, not just because of different than mine, not just because of different than mine, not just because of our age difference. our age difference. our age difference. But you grew up on the internet. Yeah. But you grew up on the internet. Yeah. But you grew up on the internet. Yeah. And so, you really have an empathy for And so, you really have an empathy for And so, you really have an empathy for people on the internet, on social media. people on the internet, on social media. people on the internet, on social media. Now, everyone's on the internet. Now, everyone's on the internet. Now, everyone's on the internet. What was it that drew you to screens and What was it that drew you to screens and What was it that drew you to screens and that interface that interface that interface with such a of magnetism? You know, I with such a of magnetism? You know, I with such a of magnetism? You know, I was like a gifted kid growing up was like a gifted kid growing up was like a gifted kid growing up and I think that one of the things that and I think that one of the things that and I think that one of the things that we don't really appreciate is we don't really appreciate is we don't really appreciate is um how school moves at the pace of the um how school moves at the pace of the um how school moves at the pace of the slowest kid. slowest kid. slowest kid. So, school was incredibly boring for me. So, school was incredibly boring for me. So, school was incredibly boring for me. Um and then I was also uh young, so I Um and then I was also uh young, so I Um and then I was also uh young, so I was a year ahead. And um so I was like was a year ahead. And um so I was like was a year ahead. And um so I was like early on when I was a 5-year-old in early on when I was a 5-year-old in early on when I was a 5-year-old in first grade and I was competing against first grade and I was competing against first grade and I was competing against 7-year-olds like on the playground or in 7-year-olds like on the playground or in 7-year-olds like on the playground or in gym class. in gym class. in gym class. I sucked at sports. So, the one I sucked at sports. So, the one I sucked at sports. So, the one thing that I really got addicted to was thing that I really got addicted to was thing that I really got addicted to was this idea of like a computer game where this idea of like a computer game where this idea of like a computer game where like when you beat level one, like level like when you beat level one, like level like when you beat level one, like level two is there. You know, and then if you two is there. You know, and then if you two is there. You know, and then if you beat level two, like level three is beat level two, like level three is beat level two, like level three is there. If you fail at level three, you there. If you fail at level three, you there. If you fail at level three, you get to try level three again. So, it was get to try level three again. So, it was get to try level three again. So, it was the only activity that was like the only activity that was like the only activity that was like cognitively to my pacing. cognitively to my pacing. cognitively to my pacing. Um and so that really drew me in and Um and so that really drew me in and Um and so that really drew me in and I didn't realize that until years later. I didn't realize that until years later. I didn't realize that until years later. Uh you know, my parents were big fans of Uh you know, my parents were big fans of Uh you know, my parents were big fans of putting us into school like young and if putting us into school like young and if putting us into school like young and if you can skip grades, like that's great, you can skip grades, like that's great, you can skip grades, like that's great, right? Cuz life is a race and the right? Cuz life is a race and the right? Cuz life is a race and the faster you finish, the better things faster you finish, the better things faster you finish, the better things are. Um but I didn't realize how Um but I didn't realize how Um but I didn't realize how developmentally challenging it is to be developmentally challenging it is to be developmentally challenging it is to be like a 5-year-old or a 6-year-old in like a 5-year-old or a 6-year-old in like a 5-year-old or a 6-year-old in school with like 7-year-olds or school with like 7-year-olds or school with like 7-year-olds or 8-year-olds. So, I think that's what 8-year-olds. So, I think that's what 8-year-olds. So, I think that's what originally drew me in. If you don't mind originally drew me in. If you don't mind originally drew me in. If you don't mind me asking, so you me asking, so you me asking, so you were first-generation immigrant parents from first-generation immigrant parents from first-generation immigrant parents from India. &gt;&gt; Yep. Um I mean, I grew up in the South &gt;&gt; Yep. Um I mean, I grew up in the South &gt;&gt; Yep. Um I mean, I grew up in the South Bay in Palo Alto, so I'm familiar with Bay in Palo Alto, so I'm familiar with Bay in Palo Alto, so I'm familiar with intense academic environments. intense academic environments. intense academic environments. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Increasingly so in the last, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. Increasingly so in the last, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. Increasingly so in the last, you know, 10, 20 years, but even when I was know, 10, 20 years, but even when I was know, 10, 20 years, but even when I was there, it was you it was intense. Did there, it was you it was intense. Did there, it was you it was intense. Did you feel that as pressure? Absolutely. I you feel that as pressure? Absolutely. I you feel that as pressure? Absolutely. I mean, I my earliest memories of are mean, I my earliest memories of are mean, I my earliest memories of are of my grandmother telling me I'm going of my grandmother telling me I'm going of my grandmother telling me I'm going to make a great doctor one day. to make a great doctor one day. to make a great doctor one day. Um and when I was like 15 years old, Um and when I was like 15 years old, Um and when I was like 15 years old, people would ask me like I'd go to like people would ask me like I'd go to like people would ask me like I'd go to like a party, right? With my parents and a party, right? With my parents and a party, right? With my parents and their friends and people would ask me, their friends and people would ask me, their friends and people would ask me, "What do you want to be when you grow "What do you want to be when you grow "What do you want to be when you grow up?" And so I was like, "I'm going to be a And so I was like, "I'm going to be a And so I was like, "I'm going to be a doctor. And everyone was like, "Wow, doctor. And everyone was like, "Wow, doctor. And everyone was like, "Wow, impressive." You know, so my 15-year-old impressive." You know, so my 15-year-old impressive." You know, so my 15-year-old brain was like brain was like brain was like looking at this like amazing idea looking at this like amazing idea looking at this like amazing idea of what a doctor was. And both my of what a doctor was. And both my of what a doctor was. And both my parents are doctors. My dad was an parents are doctors. My dad was an parents are doctors. My dad was an amazing doctor. amazing doctor. amazing doctor. Um I suppose my mom is too, but my dad was I suppose my mom is too, but my dad was I suppose my mom is too, but my dad was one of the seminal researchers in like one of the seminal researchers in like one of the seminal researchers in like graft-versus-host disease. It's how he graft-versus-host disease. It's how he graft-versus-host disease. It's how he landed his job at MD Anderson. So he landed his job at MD Anderson. So he landed his job at MD Anderson. So he like came from India and like was an like came from India and like was an like came from India and like was an oncologist. Um and so I also remember like he used Um and so I also remember like he used Um and so I also remember like he used to back then HIPAA wasn't I think to back then HIPAA wasn't I think to back then HIPAA wasn't I think there wasn't even a HIPAA law. So he there wasn't even a HIPAA law. So he there wasn't even a HIPAA law. So he would have, you know, patients over to would have, you know, patients over to would have, you know, patients over to our house and stuff like that. He would our house and stuff like that. He would our house and stuff like that. He would throw a Thanksgiving party every year throw a Thanksgiving party every year throw a Thanksgiving party every year where like he would invite all of his where like he would invite all of his where like he would invite all of his patients, all cancer survivors and patients, all cancer survivors and patients, all cancer survivors and things like that. Um and so my dad things like that. Um and so my dad things like that. Um and so my dad was really like a mythical figure. was really like a mythical figure. was really like a mythical figure. Uh incredibly charismatic. Uh incredibly charismatic. Uh incredibly charismatic. And so I was like oh yeah, I'm going And so I was like oh yeah, I'm going And so I was like oh yeah, I'm going to be that. to be that. to be that. And so it became a huge part of my ego. And so it became a huge part of my ego. And so it became a huge part of my ego. Um and then it turns out that ego is not Um and then it turns out that ego is not Um and then it turns out that ego is not a great way to motivate Well, it can be a great way to motivate Well, it can be a great way to motivate Well, it can be a great way to motivate yourself. a great way to motivate yourself. a great way to motivate yourself. Um but then I ran into trouble when I Um but then I ran into trouble when I Um but then I ran into trouble when I hit college because I had never learned hit college because I had never learned hit college because I had never learned how to study. So either I like absorbed how to study. So either I like absorbed how to study. So either I like absorbed everything and did well on the test. So everything and did well on the test. So everything and did well on the test. So I went straight from like A's to F's. I went straight from like A's to F's. I went straight from like A's to F's. And then got addicted to video games, And then got addicted to video games, And then got addicted to video games, failed out of college. failed out of college. failed out of college. But your original question was Was I But your original question was Was I But your original question was Was I into computers and why? And that's into computers and why? And that's into computers and why? And that's probably has something to do with that. probably has something to do with that. probably has something to do with that. &gt;&gt; Well, it sounds like you were so into &gt;&gt; Well, it sounds like you were so into &gt;&gt; Well, it sounds like you were so into computers you eventually went over the computers you eventually went over the computers you eventually went over the cliff of computers with this addiction. cliff of computers with this addiction. cliff of computers with this addiction. But I want to talk about the addiction, But I want to talk about the addiction, But I want to talk about the addiction, but I think this is a perfect frame and but I think this is a perfect frame and but I think this is a perfect frame and maybe we'll jump back and forth as we maybe we'll jump back and forth as we maybe we'll jump back and forth as we move forward. Um move forward. Um move forward. Um this is a perfect frame this is a perfect frame this is a perfect frame for what I have heard and wonder about a what I have heard and wonder about a what I have heard and wonder about a lot, which is, you know, I'm Gen X. lot, which is, you know, I'm Gen X. lot, which is, you know, I'm Gen X. Okay. You're Millennial. Yeah. And I'm Okay. You're Millennial. Yeah. And I'm Okay. You're Millennial. Yeah. And I'm told that the generations right behind Gen X that the generations right behind Gen X that the generations right behind Gen X um perhaps had more perhaps had more perhaps had more uh love and encouragement to feel their uh love and encouragement to feel their uh love and encouragement to feel their feelings, um notions of what trauma and feelings, um notions of what trauma and feelings, um notions of what trauma and addiction were, but maybe that there addiction were, but maybe that there addiction were, but maybe that there wasn't this universally high standards wasn't this universally high standards wasn't this universally high standards set for all of them. That's the set for all of them. That's the set for all of them. That's the narrative that you see in the in the narrative that you see in the in the narrative that you see in the in the news right now. Oh, you know, this news right now. Oh, you know, this news right now. Oh, you know, this coddled generation, etc. You had high coddled generation, etc. You had high coddled generation, etc. You had high standards set for you. standards set for you. standards set for you. When you look out on your peers and you When you look out on your peers and you When you look out on your peers and you look out on the internet for millennials look out on the internet for millennials look out on the internet for millennials and younger, and younger, and younger, do you think that we can make it a do you think that we can make it a do you think that we can make it a general statement about Oh, yeah, you general statement about Oh, yeah, you general statement about Oh, yeah, you know, all this appreciation and know, all this appreciation and know, all this appreciation and understanding about what addiction and understanding about what addiction and understanding about what addiction and trauma and feelings are, um you know, trauma and feelings are, um you know, trauma and feelings are, um you know, that just was foreign to my generation, that just was foreign to my generation, that just was foreign to my generation, frankly, that it helped or hurt to have frankly, that it helped or hurt to have frankly, that it helped or hurt to have this awareness of kind of self this awareness of kind of self this awareness of kind of self and what one needs and all of that. and what one needs and all of that. and what one needs and all of that. Do do you think that it Yeah, do you Do do you think that it Yeah, do you Do do you think that it Yeah, do you think it helped or it hurt um think it helped or it hurt um think it helped or it hurt um development? Well, so Andrew, I'm delighted to be Well, so Andrew, I'm delighted to be Well, so Andrew, I'm delighted to be speaking to a scientist um because I speaking to a scientist um because I speaking to a scientist um because I think it helped and hurt. think it helped and hurt. think it helped and hurt. Right? So so this is as you know, things Right? So so this is as you know, things Right? So so this is as you know, things are multifactorial. It's rarely one are multifactorial. It's rarely one are multifactorial. It's rarely one thing or another thing. So I think a lot thing or another thing. So I think a lot thing or another thing. So I think a lot of people picked up ground with of people picked up ground with of people picked up ground with awareness of feelings. As a awareness of feelings. As a awareness of feelings. As a psychiatrist, you know, I work with psychiatrist, you know, I work with psychiatrist, you know, I work with people who were unaware of the family people who were unaware of the family people who were unaware of the family dynamics going on in their life, in dynamics going on in their life, in dynamics going on in their life, in their household, unaware of their household, unaware of their household, unaware of their emotions, um growing up with things like emotions, um growing up with things like emotions, um growing up with things like avoidant attachment and having avoidant attachment and having avoidant attachment and having difficulty forming connections. So I difficulty forming connections. So I difficulty forming connections. So I think it is always good to be more think it is always good to be more think it is always good to be more aware. I think actually awareness is aware. I think actually awareness is aware. I think actually awareness is probably the single factor that probably the single factor that probably the single factor that correlates the most with like success correlates the most with like success correlates the most with like success and happiness. and happiness. and happiness. The challenge, the really subtle thing, The challenge, the really subtle thing, The challenge, the really subtle thing, is that talking about emotions is that talking about emotions is that talking about emotions isn't the same as actually being aware isn't the same as actually being aware isn't the same as actually being aware of them. So I think what started to of them. So I think what started to of them. So I think what started to happen is a lot of this dialogue around happen is a lot of this dialogue around happen is a lot of this dialogue around trauma, a lot of this dialogue around trauma, a lot of this dialogue around trauma, a lot of this dialogue around feelings, has actually been hijacked in feelings, has actually been hijacked in feelings, has actually been hijacked in very subtle ways by other parts of our very subtle ways by other parts of our very subtle ways by other parts of our mind, other parts like for example our mind, other parts like for example our mind, other parts like for example our ego. And so And so And so it's kind of like this therapy speak has it's kind of like this therapy speak has it's kind of like this therapy speak has like and this happens and you can look at any and this happens and you can look at any and this happens and you can look at any population. And if you have someone population. And if you have someone population. And if you have someone who's like sociopathic or if you have who's like sociopathic or if you have who's like sociopathic or if you have someone who's histrionic or narcissistic someone who's histrionic or narcissistic someone who's histrionic or narcissistic and everyone is talking feelings, they and everyone is talking feelings, they and everyone is talking feelings, they will do that too but in a sociopathic will do that too but in a sociopathic will do that too but in a sociopathic way. Feelings have now started to be way. Feelings have now started to be way. Feelings have now started to be used as a form of manipulation, right? used as a form of manipulation, right? used as a form of manipulation, right? So people will use like I see this all So people will use like I see this all So people will use like I see this all the time, speaking of the internet in the time, speaking of the internet in the time, speaking of the internet in its modern incarnation. its modern incarnation. its modern incarnation. We all talk about boundaries, but people We all talk about boundaries, but people We all talk about boundaries, but people have started to use boundaries as a form have started to use boundaries as a form have started to use boundaries as a form of control for other human beings. You of control for other human beings. You of control for other human beings. You know, my boundary is that you don't text know, my boundary is that you don't text know, my boundary is that you don't text anyone after 8:00 p.m. anyone after 8:00 p.m. anyone after 8:00 p.m. My my boundary is that, you know, every My my boundary is that, you know, every My my boundary is that, you know, every time I call you, you need to answer the time I call you, you need to answer the time I call you, you need to answer the phone. So it's really bizarre how like phone. So it's really bizarre how like phone. So it's really bizarre how like the basic like psychological the basic like psychological the basic like psychological stuff can hijack stuff can hijack stuff can hijack like our psychological patterns can like our psychological patterns can like our psychological patterns can hijack like we hijack like we hijack like we all this mental health speak. Another all this mental health speak. Another all this mental health speak. Another really good example of this is really good example of this is really good example of this is so I remember I was I was so I remember I was I was so I remember I was I was seeing a an assault victim in the seeing a an assault victim in the seeing a an assault victim in the emergency room at Mass General emergency room at Mass General emergency room at Mass General Hospital many years ago. And so the MIT Hospital many years ago. And so the MIT Hospital many years ago. And so the MIT chief of security was campus security chief of security was campus security chief of security was campus security was there. And so I was talking to them was there. And so I was talking to them was there. And so I was talking to them a little bit about, you know, a little bit about, you know, a little bit about, you know, because there were other students with because there were other students with because there were other students with the student who had been assaulted with the student who had been assaulted with the student who had been assaulted and they were kind of talking to me and they were kind of talking to me and they were kind of talking to me about safety and I remember something about safety and I remember something about safety and I remember something that the MIT chief told me that I I've that the MIT chief told me that I I've that the MIT chief told me that I I've never forgotten. never forgotten. never forgotten. We're talking about safety and he's We're talking about safety and he's We're talking about safety and he's like, my job is not to make people feel like, my job is not to make people feel like, my job is not to make people feel safe. My job is to make people safe. And safe. My job is to make people safe. And safe. My job is to make people safe. And there's actually a big difference. there's actually a big difference. there's actually a big difference. And so something interesting has And so something interesting has And so something interesting has happened. We have all become more happened. We have all become more happened. We have all become more narcissistic because that's what the narcissistic because that's what the narcissistic because that's what the internet does to us. And so now if I am internet does to us. And so now if I am internet does to us. And so now if I am hurt that is no longer my hurt that is no longer my hurt that is no longer my responsibility, that is because you did responsibility, that is because you did responsibility, that is because you did something wrong. Does that make sense? something wrong. Does that make sense? something wrong. Does that make sense? Like fundamentally if I feel hurt, that Like fundamentally if I feel hurt, that Like fundamentally if I feel hurt, that is often times tied to you doing is often times tied to you doing is often times tied to you doing something wrong. something wrong. something wrong. So there's this tendency towards So there's this tendency towards So there's this tendency towards victimization, where you'll see even people who are where you'll see even people who are where you'll see even people who are like playing the victim card, which like playing the victim card, which like playing the victim card, which doesn't mean that which doesn't mean that which doesn't mean that we shouldn't be believing victims. I we shouldn't be believing victims. I we shouldn't be believing victims. I think that's exactly what happens is we think that's exactly what happens is we think that's exactly what happens is we started to realize that we're not taking started to realize that we're not taking started to realize that we're not taking victims seriously, but then all the victims seriously, but then all the victims seriously, but then all the chameleons in our society were looking chameleons in our society were looking chameleons in our society were looking at this pattern, and they were at this pattern, and they were at this pattern, and they were realizing, "Okay, realizing, "Okay, realizing, "Okay, the fastest way for me to get ahead is the fastest way for me to get ahead is the fastest way for me to get ahead is to claim to be a victim." to claim to be a victim." to claim to be a victim." So, there are all kinds of weird So, there are all kinds of weird So, there are all kinds of weird permutations that are happening right now with this that are happening right now with this that are happening right now with this sort of emphasis on feeling. sort of emphasis on feeling. sort of emphasis on feeling. Um one more evidence-based example of Um one more evidence-based example of Um one more evidence-based example of this is, you know, we're seeing this is, you know, we're seeing this is, you know, we're seeing the prevalence of mood disorders, the prevalence of mood disorders, the prevalence of mood disorders, anxiety disorders, addictions, body anxiety disorders, addictions, body anxiety disorders, addictions, body dysmorphia. Basically, everything is dysmorphia. Basically, everything is dysmorphia. Basically, everything is getting worse. getting worse. getting worse. And so, one weird thing that started to And so, one weird thing that started to And so, one weird thing that started to happen is as we've talked more about happen is as we've talked more about happen is as we've talked more about feelings, there is something called a there is something called a there is something called a transdiagnostic factor, which we can get transdiagnostic factor, which we can get transdiagnostic factor, which we can get into. I don't know if you're familiar into. I don't know if you're familiar into. I don't know if you're familiar with these or not, but with these or not, but with these or not, but so, if you look at like all of the so, if you look at like all of the so, if you look at like all of the mental illnesses, mental illnesses, mental illnesses, there are certain attributes there are certain attributes there are certain attributes that are risk factor for multiple mental that are risk factor for multiple mental that are risk factor for multiple mental illnesses. So, a good example of illnesses. So, a good example of illnesses. So, a good example of transdiagnostic factors are transdiagnostic factors are transdiagnostic factors are perfectionism and rumination. and rumination. and rumination. So, rumination So, rumination So, rumination doesn't make you depressed. Doesn't doesn't make you depressed. Doesn't doesn't make you depressed. Doesn't necessarily make you anxious. But, if necessarily make you anxious. But, if necessarily make you anxious. But, if you have a high index of rumination, you have a high index of rumination, you have a high index of rumination, you are more likely to have a major are more likely to have a major are more likely to have a major depressive disorder, you're more likely depressive disorder, you're more likely depressive disorder, you're more likely to have an anxiety disorder. Does that to have an anxiety disorder. Does that to have an anxiety disorder. Does that kind of make sense? kind of make sense? kind of make sense? &gt;&gt; Mhm. If you are perfectionistic, you are &gt;&gt; Mhm. If you are perfectionistic, you are &gt;&gt; Mhm. If you are perfectionistic, you are more likely to be depressed, you are more likely to be depressed, you are more likely to be depressed, you are more likely to be anxious. more likely to be anxious. more likely to be anxious. So, there's one interesting So, there's one interesting So, there's one interesting transdiagnostic factor which has gotten transdiagnostic factor which has gotten transdiagnostic factor which has gotten way worse, which is something called way worse, which is something called way worse, which is something called distress tolerance. distress tolerance. distress tolerance. So, human beings' capacity So, human beings' capacity So, human beings' capacity to sit with things and tolerate things to sit with things and tolerate things to sit with things and tolerate things that they do not find comfortable is that they do not find comfortable is that they do not find comfortable is starting to tank. And as that starts to starting to tank. And as that starts to starting to tank. And as that starts to tank, we're seeing we're seeing we're seeing an just an explosion of mental illness. just an explosion of mental illness. just an explosion of mental illness. Glucose is a key player in how our body Glucose is a key player in how our body Glucose is a key player in how our body functions. Not just in the long term, functions. Not just in the long term, functions. Not just in the long term, but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's but in every moment of our lives. That's because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our because it is the major fuel for our cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. cells, especially our brain cells. Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain Glucose directly impacts our brain function, mood, and energy levels, and function, mood, and energy levels, and function, mood, and energy levels, and it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of it may even affect our levels of tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I tenacity and willpower. This is why I use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from use the continuous glucose monitor from Lingo. I absolutely love it, and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it, and I'm Lingo. I absolutely love it, and I'm thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of thrilled to have them as a sponsor of the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my the podcast. Lingo helps me track my glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the glucose in real time to see how the foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take foods I eat and the actions I take impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your impact my glucose. When glucose in your body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive body spikes or crashes, your cognitive and physical performance do, too. In and physical performance do, too. In and physical performance do, too. In fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys fact, large glucose peaks and valleys lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, lead to brain fog, fatigue, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, irritability, and hunger. What you eat, of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your of course, plays a major role in your glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes glucose. Some foods cause sharp spikes and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But and big crashes, and others do not. But not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how not everyone is the same in terms of how they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing they respond to particular foods. Seeing your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you your glucose in real time helps you build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that build eating and other habits that support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental support metabolic health, mental clarity, and sustained energy. If you'd clarity, and sustained energy. If you'd clarity, and sustained energy. If you'd like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering like to try Lingo, Lingo is offering Huberman podcast listeners in the US 10% Huberman podcast listeners in the US 10% Huberman podcast listeners in the US 10% off a 4-week Lingo plan. Terms and off a 4-week Lingo plan. Terms and off a 4-week Lingo plan. Terms and conditions apply. Visit conditions apply. Visit conditions apply. Visit hellolingo.com/huberman for more information. The Lingo glucose for more information. The Lingo glucose for more information. The Lingo glucose system is for users 18 and older not on system is for users 18 and older not on system is for users 18 and older not on insulin. It is not intended for the insulin. It is not intended for the insulin. It is not intended for the diagnosis of diseases, including diagnosis of diseases, including diagnosis of diseases, including diabetes. Individual responses may vary. diabetes. Individual responses may vary. diabetes. Individual responses may vary. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Juve. Juve makes medical-grade red light Juve. Juve makes medical-grade red light Juve. Juve makes medical-grade red light therapy devices. therapy devices. therapy devices. Now, there's one thing that I have Now, there's one thing that I have Now, there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast consistently emphasized on this podcast consistently emphasized on this podcast is the incredible impact that light can is the incredible impact that light can is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology and our health. Now, have on our biology and our health. Now, have on our biology and our health. Now, in addition to sunlight, which I've in addition to sunlight, which I've in addition to sunlight, which I've talked about a lot on this podcast, red talked about a lot on this podcast, red talked about a lot on this podcast, red light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light have been specifically shown to have been specifically shown to have been specifically shown to have positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellular and organ health. aspects of cellular and organ health. aspects of cellular and organ health. These include faster muscle recovery, These include faster muscle recovery, These include faster muscle recovery, improved skin health, wound healing, improved skin health, wound healing, improved skin health, wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, improved mitochondrial inflammation, improved mitochondrial inflammation, improved mitochondrial function, and even improvements in function, and even improvements in function, and even improvements in vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red light devices out there. But, what sets light devices out there. But, what sets light devices out there. But, what sets Joovv lights apart, and why they're my Joovv lights apart, and why they're my Joovv lights apart, and why they're my preferred red light therapy device, is preferred red light therapy device, is preferred red light therapy device, is that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning they use the wavelengths, meaning they use the wavelengths, meaning they use the specific wavelengths of red light, near specific wavelengths of red light, near specific wavelengths of red light, near infrared, and infrared light in infrared, and infrared light in infrared, and infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal combination to trigger the optimal combination to trigger the optimal cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use the Joovv whole body panel about three the Joovv whole body panel about three the Joovv whole body panel about three to four times a week, usually for about to four times a week, usually for about to four times a week, usually for about 10 to 20 minutes per session, and I use 10 to 20 minutes per session, and I use 10 to 20 minutes per session, and I use the Joovv handheld light both at home the Joovv handheld light both at home the Joovv handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you would like to and when I travel. If you would like to and when I travel. If you would like to try Joovv, they're offering up to $400 try Joovv, they're offering up to $400 try Joovv, they're offering up to $400 off select products for listeners of off select products for listeners of off select products for listeners of this podcast. To learn more, visit this podcast. To learn more, visit this podcast. To learn more, visit Joovv, spelled j o v {dot} com {slash} The moment you o v {dot} com {slash} The moment you o v {dot} com {slash} The moment you said that we're seeing a reduction said that we're seeing a reduction said that we're seeing a reduction in distress tolerance, I heard in my in distress tolerance, I heard in my in distress tolerance, I heard in my head voices on the internet head voices on the internet head voices on the internet saying, "Oh, so we're just supposed to saying, "Oh, so we're just supposed to saying, "Oh, so we're just supposed to push our feelings aside? Like we're just push our feelings aside? Like we're just push our feelings aside? Like we're just supposed to accept everything that supposed to accept everything that supposed to accept everything that happens to us? We're supposed to, you happens to us? We're supposed to, you happens to us? We're supposed to, you know, and of course know, and of course know, and of course I don't actually believe that, but I can I don't actually believe that, but I can I don't actually believe that, but I can empathize a bit with that with that empathize a bit with that with that empathize a bit with that with that notion, right? Like there's these things notion, right? Like there's these things notion, right? Like there's these things are always uh on a continuum. It's a are always uh on a continuum. It's a are always uh on a continuum. It's a it's a push-pull, right? I mean, I was it's a push-pull, right? I mean, I was it's a push-pull, right? I mean, I was going to raise the same thing around the going to raise the same thing around the going to raise the same thing around the standards that were set for you. Some standards that were set for you. Some standards that were set for you. Some people who grow up with very high people who grow up with very high people who grow up with very high standards set for them by parents, standards set for them by parents, standards set for them by parents, teachers, or coaches might internalize teachers, or coaches might internalize teachers, or coaches might internalize that as, "Oh, that must mean I'm very that as, "Oh, that must mean I'm very that as, "Oh, that must mean I'm very capable." In fact, in one of my favorite capable." In fact, in one of my favorite capable." In fact, in one of my favorite books, The Last Lecture by Randy Pausch, books, The Last Lecture by Randy Pausch, books, The Last Lecture by Randy Pausch, he talks about um he was a computer he talks about um he was a computer he talks about um he was a computer scientist at Carnegie Mellon, he scientist at Carnegie Mellon, he scientist at Carnegie Mellon, he eventually died, and he gave this last eventually died, and he gave this last eventually died, and he gave this last lecture, which is an incredible lecture, which is an incredible lecture, which is an incredible lecture, and he said, "The moment that your and he said, "The moment that your and he said, "The moment that your parents, coaches, and teachers stop parents, coaches, and teachers stop parents, coaches, and teachers stop pushing you is the moment you should pushing you is the moment you should pushing you is the moment you should worry because they've given up on you." worry because they've given up on you." worry because they've given up on you." But, you if you're pushed, people But, you if you're pushed, people But, you if you're pushed, people believe in you, that there's a chance believe in you, that there's a chance believe in you, that there's a chance you might actually accomplish something. you might actually accomplish something. you might actually accomplish something. They believe in you. They believe in you. They believe in you. But, you could also internalize it as But, you could also internalize it as But, you could also internalize it as overwhelm. Yeah. Like And so, I think this notion Yeah. Like And so, I think this notion Yeah. Like And so, I think this notion of distress tolerance, like what are of distress tolerance, like what are of distress tolerance, like what are what are the standards, what are the um what are the standards, what are the um what are the standards, what are the um standards for distress tolerance, for standards for distress tolerance, for standards for distress tolerance, for performance, for being a {quote} performance, for being a {quote} performance, for being a {quote} functional member of society while also functional member of society while also functional member of society while also {quote} honoring one's feelings. About {quote} honoring one's feelings. About {quote} honoring one's feelings. About feeling one feelings, there's no feeling one feelings, there's no feeling one feelings, there's no road map, road map, road map, I believe, I believe, I believe, to how to navigate that. What you said, how to navigate that. What you said, how to navigate that. What you said, there is no road map. That happens to be there is no road map. That happens to be there is no road map. That happens to be true and it happens to be wrong. So I true and it happens to be wrong. So I true and it happens to be wrong. So I know it's confusing, so let me explain. know it's confusing, so let me explain. know it's confusing, so let me explain. So here's the first thing to understand. So here's the first thing to understand. So here's the first thing to understand. The way that we collect information, The way that we collect information, The way that we collect information, this is why I love being a clinician. this is why I love being a clinician. this is why I love being a clinician. So like, you know, you talked about the So like, you know, you talked about the So like, you know, you talked about the last lecture. So this person was saying last lecture. So this person was saying last lecture. So this person was saying if people don't push you, that means if people don't push you, that means if people don't push you, that means that they don't, you know, care about that they don't, you know, care about that they don't, you know, care about you, they're not invested in you, they you, they're not invested in you, they you, they're not invested in you, they don't the moment that you give up on don't the moment that you give up on don't the moment that you give up on someone is the moment that you stop someone is the moment that you stop someone is the moment that you stop pushing them, right? Makes perfect pushing them, right? Makes perfect pushing them, right? Makes perfect sense. And then there are also people who have And then there are also people who have And then there are also people who have been pushed to the point where they like been pushed to the point where they like been pushed to the point where they like crack under pressure. That's actually crack under pressure. That's actually crack under pressure. That's actually way more common. And so generally way more common. And so generally way more common. And so generally speaking, pressure, speaking, pressure, speaking, pressure, you know, just like any other part of you know, just like any other part of you know, just like any other part of biology, exert pressure on some part on biology, exert pressure on some part on biology, exert pressure on some part on some joint, on some part of soft tissue, some joint, on some part of soft tissue, some joint, on some part of soft tissue, will develop a callus. It'll become will develop a callus. It'll become will develop a callus. It'll become tough. So, this is where the reason there's this is where the reason there's this is where the reason there's no road map is because people aren't the no road map is because people aren't the no road map is because people aren't the same. Right? So we all have unique genetics, Right? So we all have unique genetics, Right? So we all have unique genetics, we all have unique experiences, we all we all have unique experiences, we all we all have unique experiences, we all have a unique internal dialogue. And so have a unique internal dialogue. And so have a unique internal dialogue. And so the whole point of personality, and we the whole point of personality, and we the whole point of personality, and we can define personality like by the can define personality like by the can define personality like by the technical terms, which is it is the way technical terms, which is it is the way technical terms, which is it is the way that you interpret information, the way that you interpret information, the way that you interpret information, the way you perceive the world, your internal you perceive the world, your internal you perceive the world, your internal reactions, and the behaviors that you reactions, and the behaviors that you reactions, and the behaviors that you engage in. engage in. engage in. So you can take literally, So you can take literally, So you can take literally, you know, two different human beings in you know, two different human beings in you know, two different human beings in the exact same situation. I've worked the exact same situation. I've worked the exact same situation. I've worked with a couple of survivors of like with a couple of survivors of like with a couple of survivors of like genocidal conflicts. And the really genocidal conflicts. And the really genocidal conflicts. And the really interesting thing about that is not interesting thing about that is not interesting thing about that is not everybody gets PTSD. everybody gets PTSD. everybody gets PTSD. Which is like really weird, right? Like Which is like really weird, right? Like Which is like really weird, right? Like if you think about this is like a if you think about this is like a if you think about this is like a genocidal conflict. So we have tons of genocidal conflict. So we have tons of genocidal conflict. So we have tons of people who all experience the same people who all experience the same people who all experience the same thing, but their reactions to them are thing, but their reactions to them are thing, but their reactions to them are really different. really different. really different. That's what's fun about being a That's what's fun about being a That's what's fun about being a clinician. What I try to focus on and clinician. What I try to focus on and clinician. What I try to focus on and what I learned I looked for a roadmap. what I learned I looked for a roadmap. what I learned I looked for a roadmap. And what I found is that there's not a And what I found is that there's not a And what I found is that there's not a roadmap. There are thousands of roadmap. There are thousands of roadmap. There are thousands of roadmaps. And those roadmaps come down to and this And those roadmaps come down to and this And those roadmaps come down to and this is I think a huge problem is I think a huge problem is I think a huge problem in the information in the information in the information based world we live in. So everyone has based world we live in. So everyone has based world we live in. So everyone has problems, right? And they're looking for problems, right? And they're looking for problems, right? And they're looking for solutions, which is great. solutions, which is great. solutions, which is great. The problem the biggest mistake that I The problem the biggest mistake that I The problem the biggest mistake that I see people make especially high performers people make especially high performers people make especially high performers is a problem of misdiagnosis. is a problem of misdiagnosis. is a problem of misdiagnosis. So really good example of this I had a So really good example of this I had a So really good example of this I had a patient come into my office, worked in a patient come into my office, worked in a patient come into my office, worked in finance, was at a very successful finance, was at a very successful finance, was at a very successful firm. Came in and was like I have really bad Came in and was like I have really bad Came in and was like I have really bad anxiety. Like it's really starting like anxiety. Like it's really starting like anxiety. Like it's really starting like I can't eat. Like I can't sleep. My wife I can't eat. Like I can't sleep. My wife I can't eat. Like I can't sleep. My wife is really worried about me. So he's is really worried about me. So he's is really worried about me. So he's like, you know, I've got really bad like, you know, I've got really bad like, you know, I've got really bad anxiety. So we start talking about it and he's So we start talking about it and he's So we start talking about it and he's like you know, I'm afraid I'm going to like you know, I'm afraid I'm going to like you know, I'm afraid I'm going to get fired. get fired. get fired. And we work together for about uh 12 And we work together for about uh 12 And we work together for about uh 12 months and then he realizes this months and then he realizes this months and then he realizes this environment is not where he's happy. environment is not where he's happy. environment is not where he's happy. And the reason he's going to get fired And the reason he's going to get fired And the reason he's going to get fired is because he doesn't fit in. is because he doesn't fit in. is because he doesn't fit in. And he decides to quit. And he decides to quit. And he decides to quit. So what's really interesting is if we So what's really interesting is if we So what's really interesting is if we had just solved that if we'd made his had just solved that if we'd made his had just solved that if we'd made his anxiety go away anxiety go away anxiety go away he would have perpetuated in an he would have perpetuated in an he would have perpetuated in an unhealthy system. unhealthy system. unhealthy system. And and this is the thing that I think And and this is the thing that I think And and this is the thing that I think we forget when we're talking about our we forget when we're talking about our we forget when we're talking about our emotions. Like Andrew, which part of the brain does Andrew, which part of the brain does Andrew, which part of the brain does anxiety come from? It's a circuit wide anxiety come from? It's a circuit wide anxiety come from? It's a circuit wide phenomenon. Sure. If we had how is it phenomenon. Sure. If we had how is it phenomenon. Sure. If we had how is it taught? If you had to teach someone taught? If you had to teach someone taught? If you had to teach someone who's taking an undergraduate who's taking an undergraduate who's taking an undergraduate neuroscience class and maybe you neuroscience class and maybe you neuroscience class and maybe you wouldn't teach it this way. But if you wouldn't teach it this way. But if you wouldn't teach it this way. But if you had to localize it to somewhere where had to localize it to somewhere where had to localize it to somewhere where would you localize it? would you localize it? would you localize it? &gt;&gt; To one structure? Yeah. &gt;&gt; To one structure? Yeah. &gt;&gt; To one structure? Yeah. &gt;&gt; everyone would say amygdala. I teach &gt;&gt; everyone would say amygdala. I teach &gt;&gt; everyone would say amygdala. I teach neuroanatomy to medical students. So or neuroanatomy to medical students. So or neuroanatomy to medical students. So or I did until very recently. So I did until very recently. So I did until very recently. So &gt;&gt; I'm totally with the limbic &gt;&gt; I'm totally with the limbic &gt;&gt; I'm totally with the limbic system as a whole, right? But the system as a whole, right? But the system as a whole, right? But the amygdala. And the really interesting amygdala. And the really interesting amygdala. And the really interesting thing is like thing is like thing is like crocodiles have amygdalas. crocodiles have amygdalas. crocodiles have amygdalas. Right? So we sometimes forget that Right? So we sometimes forget that Right? So we sometimes forget that these negative emotions are actually these negative emotions are actually these negative emotions are actually really important for us. They're really important for us. They're really important for us. They're really healthy for us. healthy for us. healthy for us. One other really interesting example of One other really interesting example of One other really interesting example of this is this is this is you know, I work with a lot of like you know, I work with a lot of like you know, I work with a lot of like gamers on the internet. So sometimes gamers on the internet. So sometimes gamers on the internet. So sometimes they'll try to they'll try to they'll try to engage in mating behaviors. engage in mating behaviors. engage in mating behaviors. And they'll creep people out. And they'll creep people out. And they'll creep people out. And one of the really interesting things one of the really interesting things one of the really interesting things that I realized is embarrassment that I realized is embarrassment that I realized is embarrassment is the best way to not creep someone is the best way to not creep someone is the best way to not creep someone out. So if I violate one of your out. So if I violate one of your out. So if I violate one of your boundaries and then I express embarrassment, that and then I express embarrassment, that and then I express embarrassment, that signals to you signals to you signals to you that I realize I did something wrong. that I realize I did something wrong. that I realize I did something wrong. So if I violate one of your boundaries So if I violate one of your boundaries So if I violate one of your boundaries and then I express embarrassment, that's and then I express embarrassment, that's and then I express embarrassment, that's a really important empathic signal. And a really important empathic signal. And a really important empathic signal. And now we have all of this like content on now we have all of this like content on now we have all of this like content on the internet telling people to be the internet telling people to be the internet telling people to be relentlessly confident. And when they relentlessly confident. And when they relentlessly confident. And when they become relentlessly confident, they no become relentlessly confident, they no become relentlessly confident, they no longer express embarrassment. longer express embarrassment. longer express embarrassment. Embarrassment is a really important Embarrassment is a really important Embarrassment is a really important signal to send. In the example you gave, signal to send. In the example you gave, signal to send. In the example you gave, it's very clear that somebody violated it's very clear that somebody violated it's very clear that somebody violated somebody's boundary. They felt somebody's boundary. They felt somebody's boundary. They felt embarrassment. Showing that embarrassment. Showing that embarrassment. Showing that embarrassment shows that they have some embarrassment shows that they have some embarrassment shows that they have some sort of empathic attunement or awareness sort of empathic attunement or awareness sort of empathic attunement or awareness that makes them perhaps a little less that makes them perhaps a little less that makes them perhaps a little less creepy and a little bit safer as opposed creepy and a little bit safer as opposed creepy and a little bit safer as opposed to if they just kept Exactly. going to if they just kept Exactly. going to if they just kept Exactly. going forward, right? However, if it was a bit forward, right? However, if it was a bit forward, right? However, if it was a bit vague, like let's say that they did vague, like let's say that they did vague, like let's say that they did something a flirtation and it wasn't really clear a flirtation and it wasn't really clear a flirtation and it wasn't really clear what it was and the other person said, what it was and the other person said, what it was and the other person said, "Hey, like that doesn't feel good to "Hey, like that doesn't feel good to "Hey, like that doesn't feel good to me." And then they acted very me." And then they acted very me." And then they acted very embarrassed and the person who said it embarrassed and the person who said it embarrassed and the person who said it didn't feel good to them didn't feel good to them didn't feel good to them would quite understandably think, "Oh, would quite understandably think, "Oh, would quite understandably think, "Oh, it must have been really bad." Right? it must have been really bad." Right? it must have been really bad." Right? Oftentimes the dynamics are subtle where Oftentimes the dynamics are subtle where Oftentimes the dynamics are subtle where people don't really know how they should people don't really know how they should people don't really know how they should feel about something. At the extremes we feel about something. At the extremes we feel about something. At the extremes we know. So I'm going to reverse Russian know. So I'm going to reverse Russian know. So I'm going to reverse Russian doll us because I was all over the doll us because I was all over the doll us because I was all over the place. So you asked about a road map, place. So you asked about a road map, place. So you asked about a road map, then I gave the example of anxiety, then I gave the example of anxiety, then I gave the example of anxiety, then I gave the example of embarrassment I gave the example of embarrassment I gave the example of embarrassment as another emotion that's helpful. And as another emotion that's helpful. And as another emotion that's helpful. And you're Now you're asking a question, so you're Now you're asking a question, so you're Now you're asking a question, so we're going to do it in reverse order. we're going to do it in reverse order. we're going to do it in reverse order. Sure. But I want to get back to that Sure. But I want to get back to that Sure. But I want to get back to that road map because I think it's a road map because I think it's a road map because I think it's a beautiful question. I wrote it down. We beautiful question. I wrote it down. We beautiful question. I wrote it down. We haven't forgotten. haven't forgotten. haven't forgotten. &gt;&gt; Great. Let's talk about the ambiguous &gt;&gt; Great. Let's talk about the ambiguous &gt;&gt; Great. Let's talk about the ambiguous interactions. This is fascinating. So, I interactions. This is fascinating. So, I interactions. This is fascinating. So, I saw a really cool study where I saw a really cool study where I saw a really cool study where when two people are flirting and that's when two people are flirting and that's when two people are flirting and that's taped and a neutral observer is watching taped and a neutral observer is watching taped and a neutral observer is watching it, they accurately detect flirting only it, they accurately detect flirting only it, they accurately detect flirting only about 30% of the time. Different studies about 30% of the time. Different studies about 30% of the time. Different studies show 24 to 42%. You're saying ambiguity show 24 to 42%. You're saying ambiguity show 24 to 42%. You're saying ambiguity is a problem. No, ambiguity is a problem. No, ambiguity is a problem. No, ambiguity is exactly what's supposed to happen. So, exactly what's supposed to happen. So, exactly what's supposed to happen. So, if you think about what flirting is, if you think about what flirting is, if you think about what flirting is, flirting is flirting is flirting is a way to preserve plausible deniability. a way to preserve plausible deniability. a way to preserve plausible deniability. It's a way to make you feel safe, right? It's a way to make you feel safe, right? It's a way to make you feel safe, right? So, if I if I am really Andrew, I'm So, if I if I am really Andrew, I'm So, if I if I am really Andrew, I'm really interested in your body, bro. But really interested in your body, bro. But really interested in your body, bro. But if I say that, it it's you know, if I say that, it it's you know, if I say that, it it's you know, unless you're matching that energy, it's unless you're matching that energy, it's unless you're matching that energy, it's not going to be safe. It's not going to not going to be safe. It's not going to not going to be safe. It's not going to be good. It'll ruin our relationship. be good. It'll ruin our relationship. be good. It'll ruin our relationship. So, flirting by nature is supposed to be So, flirting by nature is supposed to be So, flirting by nature is supposed to be missed. So, this is another thing where you're So, this is another thing where you're So, this is another thing where you're saying like, yes, there's ambiguity. It saying like, yes, there's ambiguity. It saying like, yes, there's ambiguity. It could be interpreted this way and it could be interpreted this way and it could be interpreted this way and it could be interpreted this way. That's could be interpreted this way. That's could be interpreted this way. That's not bad. That's good. That's that's how not bad. That's good. That's that's how not bad. That's good. That's that's how human beings actually interact. human beings actually interact. human beings actually interact. Um so, Winnicott, you know, described Um so, Winnicott, you know, described Um so, Winnicott, you know, described this beautifully cuz flirting is a form this beautifully cuz flirting is a form this beautifully cuz flirting is a form of play. It's that's literally what it of play. It's that's literally what it of play. It's that's literally what it is. And play is about a potential space. is. And play is about a potential space. is. And play is about a potential space. When I'm playing like dolls with my When I'm playing like dolls with my When I'm playing like dolls with my daughter, it's not defined. And the daughter, it's not defined. And the daughter, it's not defined. And the whole point is for it to be not defined. whole point is for it to be not defined. whole point is for it to be not defined. So, in that absence of definition, which So, in that absence of definition, which So, in that absence of definition, which now everyone is sort of like we're now everyone is sort of like we're now everyone is sort of like we're seeing a social skills atrophy. So, you seeing a social skills atrophy. So, you seeing a social skills atrophy. So, you know, that the parts of our brain that know, that the parts of our brain that know, that the parts of our brain that interpret tone, body language, things interpret tone, body language, things interpret tone, body language, things like that. Like people are becoming like that. Like people are becoming like that. Like people are becoming like, you know, we're seeing a rise of like, you know, we're seeing a rise of like, you know, we're seeing a rise of like ADHD and everyone also feels like ADHD and everyone also feels like ADHD and everyone also feels subjectively like they're autistic. It's subjectively like they're autistic. It's subjectively like they're autistic. It's because they're losing some because they're losing some because they're losing some degree of social skills because we text degree of social skills because we text degree of social skills because we text back and forth. And our brains don't our back and forth. And our brains don't our back and forth. And our brains don't our occipital cortex is not interpreting our occipital cortex is not interpreting our occipital cortex is not interpreting visual information of people's facial visual information of people's facial visual information of people's facial expressions. So, that part of our brain expressions. So, that part of our brain expressions. So, that part of our brain like literally kind of shuts off. like literally kind of shuts off. like literally kind of shuts off. So, people are having a lot of So, people are having a lot of So, people are having a lot of difficulty with ambiguity. You know, difficulty with ambiguity. You know, difficulty with ambiguity. You know, people are saying like, oh, this person people are saying like, oh, this person people are saying like, oh, this person is sending mixed signals. Like that's is sending mixed signals. Like that's is sending mixed signals. Like that's the point. the point. the point. In a relationship, you are going to have In a relationship, you are going to have In a relationship, you are going to have mixed signals. In a friendship, you will mixed signals. In a friendship, you will mixed signals. In a friendship, you will have mixed signals. We all have mixed signals. We all have mixed signals. We all have ambivalence within us. I want to eat a ambivalence within us. I want to eat a ambivalence within us. I want to eat a healthy lean protein during lunch and I healthy lean protein during lunch and I healthy lean protein during lunch and I also want to eat a fried protein during also want to eat a fried protein during also want to eat a fried protein during lunch. Right? So ambiguity is actually lunch. Right? So ambiguity is actually lunch. Right? So ambiguity is actually not something to be avoided. The really not something to be avoided. The really not something to be avoided. The really interesting thing, another interesting thing, another interesting thing, another transdiagnostic factor, really important transdiagnostic factor, really important transdiagnostic factor, really important one, the intolerance of uncertainty. one, the intolerance of uncertainty. one, the intolerance of uncertainty. So human beings who are capable of So human beings who are capable of So human beings who are capable of tolerating uncertainty tolerating uncertainty tolerating uncertainty better mental health outcomes, um more better mental health outcomes, um more better mental health outcomes, um more resilient, improved quality of life. resilient, improved quality of life. resilient, improved quality of life. Right? So everyone needs defined Right? So everyone needs defined Right? So everyone needs defined answers. So I'll pause there for a answers. So I'll pause there for a answers. So I'll pause there for a moment just to address your quotation moment just to address your quotation moment just to address your quotation example, but you're spot-on. We can tell example, but you're spot-on. We can tell example, but you're spot-on. We can tell what the signals are what the signals are what the signals are at either end. The point of human at either end. The point of human at either end. The point of human interaction is that way we can adapt to interaction is that way we can adapt to interaction is that way we can adapt to each other. each other. each other. You know, if I put my arm around you, You know, if I put my arm around you, You know, if I put my arm around you, then how do you respond to that? Do you then how do you respond to that? Do you then how do you respond to that? Do you get up and go to the bathroom or do you get up and go to the bathroom or do you get up and go to the bathroom or do you lean in? So these are how human like lean in? So these are how human like lean in? So these are how human like these are how human interactions these are how human interactions these are how human interactions actually happen. There's a lot of back actually happen. There's a lot of back actually happen. There's a lot of back and forth. Fascinating. A lot of younger and forth. Fascinating. A lot of younger and forth. Fascinating. A lot of younger guys talk to me about their challenges guys talk to me about their challenges guys talk to me about their challenges in the dating scene. And one of the in the dating scene. And one of the in the dating scene. And one of the things that they seem very challenged things that they seem very challenged things that they seem very challenged with is the fact that they feel like with is the fact that they feel like with is the fact that they feel like whatever happens on a date is shared on whatever happens on a date is shared on whatever happens on a date is shared on the internet. Yeah. the internet. Yeah. the internet. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um and this is of course not related to, &gt;&gt; Um and this is of course not related to, &gt;&gt; Um and this is of course not related to, you know, assault or them acting you know, assault or them acting you know, assault or them acting highly inappropriate or, you know, this highly inappropriate or, you know, this highly inappropriate or, you know, this is really like they're reported as a is really like they're reported as a is really like they're reported as a good or bad kisser. They're reported as good or bad kisser. They're reported as good or bad kisser. They're reported as a they pay or they don't pay and and, you they pay or they don't pay and and, you they pay or they don't pay and and, you know, and so I think that the room to know, and so I think that the room to know, and so I think that the room to explore ambiguity explore ambiguity explore ambiguity um to them, this is what I hear, feels um to them, this is what I hear, feels um to them, this is what I hear, feels very dangerous. It feels like a slippery very dangerous. It feels like a slippery very dangerous. It feels like a slippery slope where they have to perform slope where they have to perform slope where they have to perform perfectly on every measure. And I'm sure perfectly on every measure. And I'm sure perfectly on every measure. And I'm sure women feel the same way, right? I just women feel the same way, right? I just women feel the same way, right? I just hear from more or men. hear from more or men. hear from more or men. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's very tricky. So I think &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's very tricky. So I think &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's very tricky. So I think what we're seeing in the in the dating what we're seeing in the in the dating what we're seeing in the in the dating world and I guess we're this is what world and I guess we're this is what world and I guess we're this is what we're talking about. Maybe it's top of we're talking about. Maybe it's top of we're talking about. Maybe it's top of mind for me because I just mind for me because I just mind for me because I just uh did a bunch of content on it, but um so did a bunch of content on it, but um so did a bunch of content on it, but um so what's interesting in the dating world what's interesting in the dating world what's interesting in the dating world is that now we're sort of adding the is that now we're sort of adding the is that now we're sort of adding the internet to the equation, right? Which internet to the equation, right? Which internet to the equation, right? Which you had sort of talked about. So let's you had sort of talked about. So let's you had sort of talked about. So let's just understand a couple of things about just understand a couple of things about just understand a couple of things about the internet. the internet. the internet. So the first is what the internet, in my So the first is what the internet, in my So the first is what the internet, in my opinion, this is sort of like a opinion, this is sort of like a opinion, this is sort of like a clinician's perspective having read clinician's perspective having read clinician's perspective having read about 200 papers on various aspects of about 200 papers on various aspects of about 200 papers on various aspects of how the internet affects our brains and how the internet affects our brains and how the internet affects our brains and our psychology. our psychology. our psychology. Um first thing to understand is that the Um first thing to understand is that the Um first thing to understand is that the internet selects for emotional internet selects for emotional internet selects for emotional activation. It's not even dopamine, in activation. It's not even dopamine, in activation. It's not even dopamine, in my opinion. So if you look at like my opinion. So if you look at like my opinion. So if you look at like internet, right? So it's not just fun internet, right? So it's not just fun internet, right? So it's not just fun and games. Actually, the most engaging and games. Actually, the most engaging and games. Actually, the most engaging content is emotionally engaging. content is emotionally engaging. content is emotionally engaging. Arousal. Arousal, absolutely. Arousal. Arousal, absolutely. Arousal. Arousal, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Adrenaline. &gt;&gt; Adrenaline. &gt;&gt; Adrenaline. &gt;&gt; And then the other interesting thing is &gt;&gt; And then the other interesting thing is &gt;&gt; And then the other interesting thing is that in order to maintain arousal, in order to maintain arousal, in order to maintain arousal, you need a dichotomy of emotions. you need a dichotomy of emotions. you need a dichotomy of emotions. So I need to scare you, So I need to scare you, So I need to scare you, and then I need to make you angry, and then I need to make you angry, and then I need to make you angry, and then I need to show you a cat video, and then I need to show you a cat video, and then I need to show you a cat video, and then I need to scare you again, and then I need to scare you again, and then I need to scare you again, and then I need to tell you how AI's going then I need to tell you how AI's going then I need to tell you how AI's going to steal your job, and then I want to steal your job, and then I want to steal your job, and then I want to show you this birthday party where this show you this birthday party where this show you this birthday party where this baby did the cutest thing. baby did the cutest thing. baby did the cutest thing. So this is literally how it they So this is literally how it they So this is literally how it they maintain engagement. maintain engagement. maintain engagement. And so what's really interesting about And so what's really interesting about And so what's really interesting about this is as our emotion as our limbic this is as our emotion as our limbic this is as our emotion as our limbic system is like hyperactive over and over system is like hyperactive over and over system is like hyperactive over and over and over again, that's one of the and over again, that's one of the and over again, that's one of the biggest cognitive drains that we have. biggest cognitive drains that we have. biggest cognitive drains that we have. So like I think the top three cognitive So like I think the top three cognitive So like I think the top three cognitive the things that drain our willpower the things that drain our willpower the things that drain our willpower the most suppressing emotion, repressing emotion, suppressing emotion, repressing emotion, suppressing emotion, repressing emotion, even just feeling emotion is like very even just feeling emotion is like very even just feeling emotion is like very exhausting. The internet is selecting for the most The internet is selecting for the most The internet is selecting for the most emotionally activating things. So who emotionally activating things. So who emotionally activating things. So who which tweets get engaged with? The ones which tweets get engaged with? The ones which tweets get engaged with? The ones that are the most polarizing. that are the most polarizing. that are the most polarizing. So, then what happens is people are So, then what happens is people are So, then what happens is people are dating and now you've got a problem dating and now you've got a problem dating and now you've got a problem because and here's the real tragedy is people and here's the real tragedy is people and here's the real tragedy is people will have a perception will have a perception will have a perception that if I don't say the right thing, that if I don't say the right thing, that if I don't say the right thing, this will get posted online. That is not this will get posted online. That is not this will get posted online. That is not what happens most of the time. Right? what happens most of the time. Right? what happens most of the time. Right? But this is where we as human beings But this is where we as human beings But this is where we as human beings have certain cognitive biases where the have certain cognitive biases where the have certain cognitive biases where the extreme example, like we get trained in extreme example, like we get trained in extreme example, like we get trained in this in medical school is, you know, this in medical school is, you know, this in medical school is, you know, once you miss a cancer diagnosis once, once you miss a cancer diagnosis once, once you miss a cancer diagnosis once, it doesn't mean that every patient after it doesn't mean that every patient after it doesn't mean that every patient after that has cancer. But that's what the that has cancer. But that's what the that has cancer. But that's what the brain is designed to do. Our brain is brain is designed to do. Our brain is brain is designed to do. Our brain is designed for survival, which means that designed for survival, which means that designed for survival, which means that if we get food poisoning from a if we get food poisoning from a if we get food poisoning from a restaurant even once our brain doesn't restaurant even once our brain doesn't restaurant even once our brain doesn't look at that probabilistically. It takes look at that probabilistically. It takes look at that probabilistically. It takes the worst examples the worst examples the worst examples and that's what we have to base our and that's what we have to base our and that's what we have to base our behavior on. behavior on. behavior on. Right? Like if I'm at work and I want to Right? Like if I'm at work and I want to Right? Like if I'm at work and I want to if I'm attracted to a co-worker if I'm attracted to a co-worker if I'm attracted to a co-worker even though there's a 90% chance that if even though there's a 90% chance that if even though there's a 90% chance that if I express some romantic interest in I express some romantic interest in I express some romantic interest in them, I'm going to be fine, I can't make them, I'm going to be fine, I can't make them, I'm going to be fine, I can't make a strategy based on that. I have to base a strategy based on that. I have to base a strategy based on that. I have to base my strategy on the worst possible my strategy on the worst possible my strategy on the worst possible outcome. That's what we're seeing in outcome. That's what we're seeing in outcome. That's what we're seeing in dating. You said that suppressing emotion is You said that suppressing emotion is You said that suppressing emotion is cognitively draining. cognitively draining. cognitively draining. Did I also understand correctly that Did I also understand correctly that Did I also understand correctly that being in constant arousal through being in constant arousal through being in constant arousal through different emotions is also cognitively different emotions is also cognitively different emotions is also cognitively draining? I don't know if I would use draining? I don't know if I would use draining? I don't know if I would use the word cognitive there, but it's the word cognitive there, but it's the word cognitive there, but it's absolutely draining, right? So, periods absolutely draining, right? So, periods absolutely draining, right? So, periods of extended arousal and this is where of extended arousal and this is where of extended arousal and this is where like I'm when I mean cognitive draining, like I'm when I mean cognitive draining, like I'm when I mean cognitive draining, I'm referring to a you know, paper I'm referring to a you know, paper I'm referring to a you know, paper that's looking at the anterior cingulate that's looking at the anterior cingulate that's looking at the anterior cingulate cortex. So, I and that's where when the cortex. So, I and that's where when the cortex. So, I and that's where when the anterior cingulate cortex and your anterior cingulate cortex and your anterior cingulate cortex and your frontal lobes are frontal lobes are frontal lobes are suppressing your limbic system, that's suppressing your limbic system, that's suppressing your limbic system, that's very draining. very draining. very draining. But I think high levels of arousal, But I think high levels of arousal, But I think high levels of arousal, right? Through the reticular activating right? Through the reticular activating right? Through the reticular activating formation and things like that, just formation and things like that, just formation and things like that, just being on emotionally, hyperactivation of being on emotionally, hyperactivation of being on emotionally, hyperactivation of your limbic system is absolutely your limbic system is absolutely your limbic system is absolutely exhausting is the word that I would use. exhausting is the word that I would use. exhausting is the word that I would use. You mentioned distress tolerance is a is You mentioned distress tolerance is a is You mentioned distress tolerance is a is a valuable skill to have. It feels a valuable skill to have. It feels a valuable skill to have. It feels appropriate to say, "Okay, appropriate to say, "Okay, appropriate to say, "Okay, um distress tolerance, I totally agree. um distress tolerance, I totally agree. um distress tolerance, I totally agree. Great to be able to, Great to be able to, Great to be able to, you know, tolerate distress to a point, you know, tolerate distress to a point, you know, tolerate distress to a point, but that sounds like it's very cognitively that sounds like it's very cognitively that sounds like it's very cognitively and generally draining. So, how would and generally draining. So, how would and generally draining. So, how would you encourage someone to develop healthy you encourage someone to develop healthy you encourage someone to develop healthy levels of distress tolerance, but if levels of distress tolerance, but if levels of distress tolerance, but if that involves, you know, constant that involves, you know, constant that involves, you know, constant suppression of an impulse to suppression of an impulse to suppression of an impulse to shout, to react, that sounds like it shout, to react, that sounds like it shout, to react, that sounds like it could get very unhealthy. So, I realize could get very unhealthy. So, I realize could get very unhealthy. So, I realize we're taking we're sort of staying we're taking we're sort of staying we're taking we're sort of staying on this tangent, but I feel like what on this tangent, but I feel like what on this tangent, but I feel like what defines healthy distress tolerance? If defines healthy distress tolerance? If defines healthy distress tolerance? If pushing back an emotional reaction or pushing back an emotional reaction or pushing back an emotional reaction or pushing down an emotional reaction is pushing down an emotional reaction is pushing down an emotional reaction is not good for us. So, distress tolerance not good for us. So, distress tolerance not good for us. So, distress tolerance doesn't only include emotional doesn't only include emotional doesn't only include emotional suppression. Right? So, what's really interesting Right? So, what's really interesting Right? So, what's really interesting about distress tolerance is a key a about distress tolerance is a key a about distress tolerance is a key a feature of distress tolerance is not feature of distress tolerance is not feature of distress tolerance is not even suppressing, is the opposite. Is even suppressing, is the opposite. Is even suppressing, is the opposite. Is accepting your emotions. It's actually accepting your emotions. It's actually accepting your emotions. It's actually moving in the opposite direction. moving in the opposite direction. moving in the opposite direction. Feeling your feelings. Feeling your feelings. Feeling your feelings. &gt;&gt; Feeling your feelings, right? &gt;&gt; Feeling your feelings, right? &gt;&gt; Feeling your feelings, right? Recognizing that you feel your feelings. Recognizing that you feel your feelings. Recognizing that you feel your feelings. &gt;&gt; What if um somebody feels extremely &gt;&gt; What if um somebody feels extremely &gt;&gt; What if um somebody feels extremely angry and they want to feel their feelings. and they want to feel their feelings. and they want to feel their feelings. What is a healthy way for them to do What is a healthy way for them to do What is a healthy way for them to do that? &gt;&gt; Three things. Okay, so if you want to &gt;&gt; Three things. Okay, so if you want to &gt;&gt; Three things. Okay, so if you want to learn how to learn how to learn how to control your emotions. You want to be control your emotions. You want to be control your emotions. You want to be tranquil in the face of your emotions, tranquil in the face of your emotions, tranquil in the face of your emotions, is what I would say. is what I would say. is what I would say. Three things you can do. The first thing Three things you can do. The first thing Three things you can do. The first thing is um putting words to your emotion. um putting words to your emotion. um putting words to your emotion. So, the moment that So, right now if you So, the moment that So, right now if you So, the moment that So, right now if you I don't know if this kind of makes I don't know if this kind of makes I don't know if this kind of makes sense. The more angry you are, right? sense. The more angry you are, right? sense. The more angry you are, right? The more your amygdala is like The more your amygdala is like The more your amygdala is like hyperactive. It is drowning out every other part of It is drowning out every other part of It is drowning out every other part of your brain. your brain. your brain. So, the first thing that you have to do So, the first thing that you have to do So, the first thing that you have to do is put words to it. And when you put is put words to it. And when you put is put words to it. And when you put words to it, you can't put words to words to it, you can't put words to words to it, you can't put words to ah There's no word there. So, the moment There's no word there. So, the moment There's no word there. So, the moment that you try to put words to it, it has that you try to put words to it, it has that you try to put words to it, it has to calm down. In order for your to calm down. In order for your to calm down. In order for your linguistic centers, Broca's area, and linguistic centers, Broca's area, and linguistic centers, Broca's area, and all these In order for them to like all these In order for them to like all these In order for them to like articulate it, you have to understand articulate it, you have to understand articulate it, you have to understand it. So, Freud understood this like over 100 So, Freud understood this like over 100 So, Freud understood this like over 100 years ago, and there's something years ago, and there's something years ago, and there's something powerful about processing emotions by powerful about processing emotions by powerful about processing emotions by putting them into words. In order to put putting them into words. In order to put putting them into words. In order to put words to it, we have to tone it down words to it, we have to tone it down words to it, we have to tone it down some. So, that's the first thing. some. So, that's the first thing. some. So, that's the first thing. The problem is that people often times The problem is that people often times The problem is that people often times think that is sufficient. Right? think that is sufficient. Right? think that is sufficient. Right? So, people will say journal, go see a So, people will say journal, go see a So, people will say journal, go see a therapist, and talk about your feelings. therapist, and talk about your feelings. therapist, and talk about your feelings. Man, the number of times that I've had Man, the number of times that I've had Man, the number of times that I've had like I had this patient who came in if I like I had this patient who came in if I like I had this patient who came in if I can tell a story. can tell a story. can tell a story. &gt;&gt; Please. You know, and so like I was a &gt;&gt; Please. You know, and so like I was a &gt;&gt; Please. You know, and so like I was a third-year resident. I'd done maybe like third-year resident. I'd done maybe like third-year resident. I'd done maybe like 100 hours of 200 hours of psychotherapy. 100 hours of 200 hours of psychotherapy. 100 hours of 200 hours of psychotherapy. So, I had a guy come in. He'd been So, I had a guy come in. He'd been So, I had a guy come in. He'd been in the clinic for 8 years, had in the clinic for 8 years, had in the clinic for 8 years, had depression, was a dude in his 40s. He depression, was a dude in his 40s. He depression, was a dude in his 40s. He came in and he would tell me about why came in and he would tell me about why came in and he would tell me about why he was sad every day. he was sad every day. he was sad every day. Like every week he'd come in and he's Like every week he'd come in and he's Like every week he'd come in and he's like, "I got I got written up at work. like, "I got I got written up at work. like, "I got I got written up at work. People are complaining because I snapped People are complaining because I snapped People are complaining because I snapped at them. You know, one of the patients at them. You know, one of the patients at them. You know, one of the patients is complaining because I didn't give is complaining because I didn't give is complaining because I didn't give them benzos." them benzos." them benzos." And so, he'd come in And so, he'd come in And so, he'd come in every week. He'd talk about why he every week. He'd talk about why he every week. He'd talk about why he was depressed. I'd be like, "Why are you was depressed. I'd be like, "Why are you was depressed. I'd be like, "Why are you depressed, bro?" And he'd like tell me depressed, bro?" And he'd like tell me depressed, bro?" And he'd like tell me some story about something bad that some story about something bad that some story about something bad that happened in his life. And then we did happened in his life. And then we did happened in his life. And then we did this for 6 months. And like this for 6 months. And like this for 6 months. And like I didn't know cuz I I'm like learning I didn't know cuz I I'm like learning I didn't know cuz I I'm like learning psychotherapy, right? So, I'm like I'm psychotherapy, right? So, I'm like I'm psychotherapy, right? So, I'm like I'm supposed to be supportive, and I'm supposed to be supportive, and I'm supposed to be supportive, and I'm supposed to be like, "Okay, like that supposed to be like, "Okay, like that supposed to be like, "Okay, like that must be hard for you. How does that make must be hard for you. How does that make must be hard for you. How does that make you feel? That must be so hard for you. you feel? That must be so hard for you. you feel? That must be so hard for you. How does that make you feel? That must How does that make you feel? That must How does that make you feel? That must be so hard for you." We do this dance be so hard for you." We do this dance be so hard for you." We do this dance for like 6 months. And one day he comes for like 6 months. And one day he comes for like 6 months. And one day he comes in and I'm kind of getting frustrated. in and I'm kind of getting frustrated. in and I'm kind of getting frustrated. I'm like, "Hey, is this helping?" I'm like, "Hey, is this helping?" I'm like, "Hey, is this helping?" And he's like, "What do you mean, is it And he's like, "What do you mean, is it And he's like, "What do you mean, is it helping?" I'm like, "Is it helping? Do helping?" I'm like, "Is it helping? Do helping?" I'm like, "Is it helping? Do you feel any better than when you came you feel any better than when you came you feel any better than when you came in 6 months ago?" And he's like, "I in 6 months ago?" And he's like, "I in 6 months ago?" And he's like, "I thought this is what we're supposed to thought this is what we're supposed to thought this is what we're supposed to do. I'm just supposed to come in every do. I'm just supposed to come in every do. I'm just supposed to come in every week. I tell you about how I'm sad, and week. I tell you about how I'm sad, and week. I tell you about how I'm sad, and then you tell me what's like isn't that what you tell me what's like isn't that what you tell me what's like isn't that what psychotherapy is?" And it was a huge psychotherapy is?" And it was a huge psychotherapy is?" And it was a huge light bulb moment for me because talking light bulb moment for me because talking light bulb moment for me because talking about your feelings, especially for men, about your feelings, especially for men, about your feelings, especially for men, is not enough a much of the time. is not enough a much of the time. is not enough a much of the time. Fascinating neuroscience and Fascinating neuroscience and Fascinating neuroscience and endocrinology behind that. endocrinology behind that. endocrinology behind that. Putting words to it is just step one. Putting words to it is just step one. Putting words to it is just step one. Second thing, this is a really important Second thing, this is a really important Second thing, this is a really important skill. Cultivating additional emotions. skill. Cultivating additional emotions. skill. Cultivating additional emotions. So, if you look at people who are So, if you look at people who are So, if you look at people who are resilient, if you tunnel down into the resilient, if you tunnel down into the resilient, if you tunnel down into the internal dialogue of people who are internal dialogue of people who are internal dialogue of people who are resilient, you'll notice that they do resilient, you'll notice that they do resilient, you'll notice that they do something some interesting things. something some interesting things. something some interesting things. So, my patients who are very severely So, my patients who are very severely So, my patients who are very severely ill, right? And literally what I try to ill, right? And literally what I try to ill, right? And literally what I try to do with them over the course of weeks do with them over the course of weeks do with them over the course of weeks is this thing happened is this thing happened is this thing happened and I feel overwhelming shame. and I feel overwhelming shame. and I feel overwhelming shame. The moment that you start cultivating The moment that you start cultivating The moment that you start cultivating additional emotions. So, I I've been additional emotions. So, I I've been additional emotions. So, I I've been dumped by my boyfriend or my girlfriend. dumped by my boyfriend or my girlfriend. dumped by my boyfriend or my girlfriend. I'm really, really depressed. I'm going I'm really, really depressed. I'm going I'm really, really depressed. I'm going to be alone for the rest of my life. to be alone for the rest of my life. to be alone for the rest of my life. They start to catastrophize. They have a They start to catastrophize. They have a They start to catastrophize. They have a lot of negative emotion. lot of negative emotion. lot of negative emotion. And it's really easy in that moment to And it's really easy in that moment to And it's really easy in that moment to forget that okay, I had 3 years of forget that okay, I had 3 years of forget that okay, I had 3 years of wonderful experiences with this person wonderful experiences with this person wonderful experiences with this person before things went downhill. before things went downhill. before things went downhill. It's really easy to forget all of the It's really easy to forget all of the It's really easy to forget all of the positives. It's really easy to realize positives. It's really easy to realize positives. It's really easy to realize that 3 years of experience followed by that 3 years of experience followed by that 3 years of experience followed by let's say 1 year of a toxic relationship let's say 1 year of a toxic relationship let's say 1 year of a toxic relationship is going to actually protect you from is going to actually protect you from is going to actually protect you from the next toxic relationship. the next toxic relationship. the next toxic relationship. So, cultivating additional emotions is a So, cultivating additional emotions is a So, cultivating additional emotions is a huge fundamental part of EQ. huge fundamental part of EQ. huge fundamental part of EQ. And as you don't just have to tolerate And as you don't just have to tolerate And as you don't just have to tolerate it or suppress it. These are the it or suppress it. These are the it or suppress it. These are the additional things that you can do. additional things that you can do. additional things that you can do. And this is really important. It's not And this is really important. It's not And this is really important. It's not just cultivating positive emotions when just cultivating positive emotions when just cultivating positive emotions when you're feeling negative emotions. It's you're feeling negative emotions. It's you're feeling negative emotions. It's the other way around as well. the other way around as well. the other way around as well. I've seen more relationships ruined by I've seen more relationships ruined by I've seen more relationships ruined by falling in love than anything else. And falling in love than anything else. And falling in love than anything else. And you just fall in love with the wrong you just fall in love with the wrong you just fall in love with the wrong person. You're in a relationship and you fall in You're in a relationship and you fall in You're in a relationship and you fall in love with somebody else. love with somebody else. love with somebody else. So many people I've worked with, you So many people I've worked with, you So many people I've worked with, you know, I have this great business idea and I have this great business idea and I have this great business idea and I get so excited about it and they're get so excited about it and they're get so excited about it and they're like, I'm going to start this AI like, I'm going to start this AI like, I'm going to start this AI company. That's the time that you company. That's the time that you company. That's the time that you actually want to cultivate negative actually want to cultivate negative actually want to cultivate negative emotion. Cultivate a little bit of emotion. Cultivate a little bit of emotion. Cultivate a little bit of anxiety. What could go wrong? Make sure anxiety. What could go wrong? Make sure anxiety. What could go wrong? Make sure you ask yourself that question. Like you ask yourself that question. Like you ask yourself that question. Like literally in addiction psychiatry, we literally in addiction psychiatry, we literally in addiction psychiatry, we have a cool technique that we use with have a cool technique that we use with have a cool technique that we use with people where it doesn't really work so people where it doesn't really work so people where it doesn't really work so much anymore, but much anymore, but much anymore, but we tell people to play the tape through we tell people to play the tape through we tell people to play the tape through to the end. You're really excited right to the end. You're really excited right to the end. You're really excited right now and you want to do this thing, but now and you want to do this thing, but now and you want to do this thing, but play the tape through the end. What are play the tape through the end. What are play the tape through the end. What are all of the negative things that could all of the negative things that could all of the negative things that could happen? So, that cognitive flexibility, that So, that cognitive flexibility, that So, that cognitive flexibility, that emotional flexibility is really emotional flexibility is really emotional flexibility is really important. We have to understand what emotions are. We have to understand what emotions are. We have to understand what emotions are. So, a lot of times, you know, this is So, a lot of times, you know, this is So, a lot of times, you know, this is going around on the internet where like going around on the internet where like going around on the internet where like feel your feelings, right? Like I'm just feel your feelings, right? Like I'm just feel your feelings, right? Like I'm just going to authentically I'm going to be going to authentically I'm going to be going to authentically I'm going to be authentic with my feelings today, which authentic with my feelings today, which authentic with my feelings today, which means that means that means that you're an Andrew, and I'm just you're an Andrew, and I'm just you're an Andrew, and I'm just this is my truth, right? So, we've this is my truth, right? So, we've this is my truth, right? So, we've started like speaking our truths started like speaking our truths started like speaking our truths as excuses to being Like as excuses to being Like as excuses to being Like that's what's happening on the internet. that's what's happening on the internet. that's what's happening on the internet. It's what's happening in real It's what's happening in real It's what's happening in real relationships because people are relationships because people are relationships because people are watching social media and they're like, watching social media and they're like, watching social media and they're like, I should speak my truth, right? I should speak my truth, right? I should speak my truth, right? So, the other thing that's really So, the other thing that's really So, the other thing that's really important is to understand that an important is to understand that an important is to understand that an emotion is not a behavior. emotion is not a behavior. emotion is not a behavior. An emotion is literally from an An emotion is literally from an An emotion is literally from an evolutionary perspective, and you may evolutionary perspective, and you may evolutionary perspective, and you may know this better than I do, know this better than I do, know this better than I do, is it information is it information is it information and is motivation. That's what emotions and is motivation. That's what emotions and is motivation. That's what emotions are for. are for. are for. So, when you feel fear, when you're So, when you feel fear, when you're So, when you feel fear, when you're walking outside, walking outside, walking outside, go into the walk into the outhouse in go into the walk into the outhouse in go into the walk into the outhouse in the middle of the night, and you feel the middle of the night, and you feel the middle of the night, and you feel fear, that is all this all this sensory fear, that is all this all this sensory fear, that is all this all this sensory input is being processed in parts of input is being processed in parts of input is being processed in parts of your brain that you have no conscious your brain that you have no conscious your brain that you have no conscious awareness of. The first thing that awareness of. The first thing that awareness of. The first thing that happens is that you feel emotion before happens is that you feel emotion before happens is that you feel emotion before you have any logical idea of what are you have any logical idea of what are you have any logical idea of what are you even scared of. That is your brain you even scared of. That is your brain you even scared of. That is your brain telling you something. telling you something. telling you something. The other thing is it's motivation, The other thing is it's motivation, The other thing is it's motivation, right? I feel like running away. And right? I feel like running away. And right? I feel like running away. And this is where unfortunately our brain this is where unfortunately our brain this is where unfortunately our brain evolved for a world that we don't live evolved for a world that we don't live evolved for a world that we don't live in anymore. in anymore. in anymore. So, you know, back when I used to feel So, you know, back when I used to feel So, you know, back when I used to feel fear because I was being hunted by a fear because I was being hunted by a fear because I was being hunted by a tiger, the natural impulses that our tiger, the natural impulses that our tiger, the natural impulses that our fear encourage us to do don't work when fear encourage us to do don't work when fear encourage us to do don't work when you've got to pay rent at the end of the you've got to pay rent at the end of the you've got to pay rent at the end of the month, or you've got to pay your month, or you've got to pay your month, or you've got to pay your mortgage, or you've got to do well on mortgage, or you've got to do well on mortgage, or you've got to do well on your performance review. So, often times your performance review. So, often times your performance review. So, often times what we do is we think that feeling what we do is we think that feeling what we do is we think that feeling authentically means letting our emotion authentically means letting our emotion authentically means letting our emotion run the show. We don't want to do that. run the show. We don't want to do that. run the show. We don't want to do that. We want to ask ourselves, what is this We want to ask ourselves, what is this We want to ask ourselves, what is this emotion telling me? Why do I feel fear? emotion telling me? Why do I feel fear? emotion telling me? Why do I feel fear? What am I you know, what am I afraid of? What am I you know, what am I afraid of? What am I you know, what am I afraid of? And I don't even think what am I afraid And I don't even think what am I afraid And I don't even think what am I afraid of is the right question. It's way too of is the right question. It's way too of is the right question. It's way too like self-help. Mhm. It's way too self-help. Mhm. It's way too self-help. Mhm. It's way too psychotherapy for me. It's what is my psychotherapy for me. It's what is my psychotherapy for me. It's what is my fear telling me? What is the information fear telling me? What is the information fear telling me? What is the information and motivation that it signals? and motivation that it signals? and motivation that it signals? &gt;&gt; Yeah, and then what is it what is it &gt;&gt; Yeah, and then what is it what is it &gt;&gt; Yeah, and then what is it what is it telling me to do? Like your client who telling me to do? Like your client who telling me to do? Like your client who is feeling very anxious all the time, um is feeling very anxious all the time, um is feeling very anxious all the time, um by exploring that emotion, eventually it by exploring that emotion, eventually it by exploring that emotion, eventually it sounds like him to the understanding sounds like him to the understanding sounds like him to the understanding that it wasn't the job for him. Perfect, that it wasn't the job for him. Perfect, that it wasn't the job for him. Perfect, right? That this is not there And so right? That this is not there And so right? That this is not there And so he's trying so hard, right? So the he's trying so hard, right? So the he's trying so hard, right? So the anxiety is like clinging onto his job, anxiety is like clinging onto his job, anxiety is like clinging onto his job, but actually once you understand the but actually once you understand the but actually once you understand the emotion, it's actually walking away. it's actually walking away. it's actually walking away. And so once you have mastery over your And so once you have mastery over your And so once you have mastery over your emotions in this way, and I think emotions in this way, and I think emotions in this way, and I think mastery is maybe a better word, it makes mastery is maybe a better word, it makes mastery is maybe a better word, it makes life like so much better. life like so much better. life like so much better. Right? That That's what we talk about Right? That That's what we talk about Right? That That's what we talk about distress tolerance, like that's what I'm distress tolerance, like that's what I'm distress tolerance, like that's what I'm talking about. It's not just talking about. It's not just talking about. It's not just suppression. Wonderful. I so suppression. Wonderful. I so suppression. Wonderful. I so appreciate your answer, the thoroughness appreciate your answer, the thoroughness appreciate your answer, the thoroughness of it, the clarity of it. Distress of it, the clarity of it. Distress of it, the clarity of it. Distress tolerance is putting words to emotion, tolerance is putting words to emotion, tolerance is putting words to emotion, adding additional language to it, and adding additional language to it, and adding additional language to it, and exploring the reverse context that exploring the reverse context that exploring the reverse context that as well, the negative aspects of as well, the negative aspects of as well, the negative aspects of positive emotions, the positive aspects. positive emotions, the positive aspects. positive emotions, the positive aspects. So sounds like it's broadening the So sounds like it's broadening the So sounds like it's broadening the time domain, like thinking about the time domain, like thinking about the time domain, like thinking about this in going forward, what does this in going forward, what does this in going forward, what does this represent in the past, present, and represent in the past, present, and represent in the past, present, and future, and then really thinking about future, and then really thinking about future, and then really thinking about what the emotion is signaling. What a what the emotion is signaling. What a what the emotion is signaling. What a beautiful description of distress beautiful description of distress beautiful description of distress tolerance, because it's also um tolerance, because it's also um tolerance, because it's also um operational. People can put this to operational. People can put this to operational. People can put this to work. Thank you. That's fantastic. work. Thank you. That's fantastic. work. Thank you. That's fantastic. If you're a regular listener of the If you're a regular listener of the If you're a regular listener of the Huberman Lab Podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab Podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab Podcast, you've no doubt heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been on the fence about it, now's an awesome on the fence about it, now's an awesome on the fence about it, now's an awesome time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full supplement package with your first supplement package with your first supplement package with your first subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away a free bottle of vitamin D3K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3K2, a bottle of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a sample pack of the new sleep formula sample pack of the new sleep formula sample pack of the new sleep formula AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It tastes great. And like I said, it has me tastes great. And like I said, it has me tastes great. And like I said, it has me sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love it. Again, this is a limited-time offer, it. Again, this is a limited-time offer, it. Again, this is a limited-time offer, so make sure to go to drink so make sure to go to drink so make sure to go to drink AG1.com/huberman to get started today. The road map. to get started today. The road map. to get started today. The road map. If we could go back to the road map, If we could go back to the road map, If we could go back to the road map, Yeah. if you could spell out for us, Yeah. if you could spell out for us, Yeah. if you could spell out for us, what do you think of as the road map to what do you think of as the road map to what do you think of as the road map to navigate this very complex landscape to navigate this very complex landscape to navigate this very complex landscape that we exist in now? Okay. And this that we exist in now? Okay. And this that we exist in now? Okay. And this could be relationship with this person. could be relationship with this person. could be relationship with this person. It could be um be a doctor go to an Ivy It could be um be a doctor go to an Ivy It could be um be a doctor go to an Ivy League school versus be an artist or, League school versus be an artist or, League school versus be an artist or, you know, um you know, um you know, um any number of different examples where any number of different examples where any number of different examples where we have to make the distinction of we have to make the distinction of we have to make the distinction of what's wished for us and expected of us versus wished for us and expected of us versus wished for us and expected of us versus what is true to us on the inside. what is true to us on the inside. what is true to us on the inside. Okay. &gt;&gt; That seems to be where to me where the &gt;&gt; That seems to be where to me where the &gt;&gt; That seems to be where to me where the where the friction of life exists. where the friction of life exists. where the friction of life exists. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. That to me is the most &gt;&gt; Absolutely. That to me is the most &gt;&gt; Absolutely. That to me is the most interesting question in life, frankly, interesting question in life, frankly, interesting question in life, frankly, you know? Let me just make sure I you know? Let me just make sure I you know? Let me just make sure I understand your question. understand your question. understand your question. The friction and joy of life is the rest The friction and joy of life is the rest The friction and joy of life is the rest of the world of the world of the world wants me to do all of these things. wants me to do all of these things. wants me to do all of these things. And sometimes this doesn't want to do those things. doesn't want to do those things. doesn't want to do those things. Sometimes it does want to do those Sometimes it does want to do those Sometimes it does want to do those things. When do I listen to this and things. When do I listen to this and things. When do I listen to this and when do I listen to everything that? when do I listen to everything that? when do I listen to everything that? Yes. Right? Okay, beautiful question. Yes. Right? Okay, beautiful question. Yes. Right? Okay, beautiful question. So, this is where I'm going to lean into the this is where I'm going to lean into the this is where I'm going to lean into the Eastern stuff for a second. So, I spent Eastern stuff for a second. So, I spent Eastern stuff for a second. So, I spent 7 years studying to become a monk. 7 years studying to become a monk. 7 years studying to become a monk. And uh then I went to medical school And uh then I went to medical school And uh then I went to medical school and I became a psychiatrist. And the and I became a psychiatrist. And the and I became a psychiatrist. And the really interesting I had a really weird really interesting I had a really weird really interesting I had a really weird experience of training in psychiatry. experience of training in psychiatry. experience of training in psychiatry. Because everyone was teaching me how the Because everyone was teaching me how the Because everyone was teaching me how the mind works, okay? And this is like good mind works, okay? And this is like good mind works, okay? And this is like good teachers at like the Harvard Medical teachers at like the Harvard Medical teachers at like the Harvard Medical School. And they're like, here's how the School. And they're like, here's how the School. And they're like, here's how the mind works and this is what the mind works and this is what the mind works and this is what the subconscious is and like there's subconscious is and like there's subconscious is and like there's cognitive behavioral therapy, right? So cognitive behavioral therapy, right? So cognitive behavioral therapy, right? So they're like Aaron Beck taught us that they're like Aaron Beck taught us that they're like Aaron Beck taught us that there's like thoughts, emotions, and there's like thoughts, emotions, and there's like thoughts, emotions, and behaviors and all these things these behaviors and all these things these behaviors and all these things these things connect. And the really things connect. And the really things connect. And the really fascinating thing, my most instinctive fascinating thing, my most instinctive fascinating thing, my most instinctive response when people would tell me how it is is, when people would tell me how it is is, when people would tell me how it is is, no it's not. no it's not. no it's not. So in the East, they have a completely So in the East, they have a completely So in the East, they have a completely different conception of mind. different conception of mind. different conception of mind. And here's the big problem with the And here's the big problem with the And here's the big problem with the Western conception of mind. Western conception of mind. Western conception of mind. You're scientists, right? How do you You're scientists, right? How do you You're scientists, right? How do you learn about something, Andrew? learn about something, Andrew? learn about something, Andrew? You have a question. Okay, good. have a question. Okay, good. have a question. Okay, good. &gt;&gt; You pose a hypothesis. &gt;&gt; You pose a hypothesis. &gt;&gt; You pose a hypothesis. &gt;&gt; Excellent. You design an experiment. &gt;&gt; Excellent. You design an experiment. &gt;&gt; Excellent. You design an experiment. &gt;&gt; Good. &gt;&gt; Good. &gt;&gt; Good. &gt;&gt; Where you isolate variables. Okay. &gt;&gt; Where you isolate variables. Okay. &gt;&gt; Where you isolate variables. Okay. &gt;&gt; And you either &gt;&gt; And you either &gt;&gt; And you either um refute or you refute or you refute or you in some in some in some sense support your hypothesis. sense support your hypothesis. sense support your hypothesis. &gt;&gt; Okay. And then you design another &gt;&gt; Okay. And then you design another &gt;&gt; Okay. And then you design another experiment. &gt;&gt; Great. And then you improve, right? And &gt;&gt; Great. And then you improve, right? And &gt;&gt; Great. And then you improve, right? And ask another question. You just you just ask another question. You just you just ask another question. You just you just keep going. keep going. keep going. &gt;&gt; Andrew, you get tenure and then you &gt;&gt; Andrew, you get tenure and then you &gt;&gt; Andrew, you get tenure and then you start a podcast. start a podcast. start a podcast. &gt;&gt; Beautiful, right? So so yeah. Just &gt;&gt; Beautiful, right? So so yeah. Just &gt;&gt; Beautiful, right? So so yeah. Just kidding. No, no. So so let me ask you kidding. No, no. So so let me ask you kidding. No, no. So so let me ask you this. How do you study the mind? this. How do you study the mind? this. How do you study the mind? Yeah. &gt;&gt; Here's what's really interesting, right? &gt;&gt; Here's what's really interesting, right? &gt;&gt; Here's what's really interesting, right? So so here's what's really fascinating. So so here's what's really fascinating. So so here's what's really fascinating. Like do we have any scientific evidence Like do we have any scientific evidence Like do we have any scientific evidence of the existence of thought? We could of the existence of thought? We could of the existence of thought? We could define thoughts as some pattern of define thoughts as some pattern of define thoughts as some pattern of network activity. network activity. network activity. &gt;&gt; What I mean is like if we literally look &gt;&gt; What I mean is like if we literally look &gt;&gt; What I mean is like if we literally look at it, we have no instrument that can at it, we have no instrument that can at it, we have no instrument that can detect a thought. detect a thought. detect a thought. That's right. Right? So we have we have That's right. Right? So we have we have That's right. Right? So we have we have no proof. no proof. no proof. We cannot measure a thought. Like it is We cannot measure a thought. Like it is We cannot measure a thought. Like it is like literally impossible. We can like literally impossible. We can like literally impossible. We can measure blood flow to the brain. We can measure blood flow to the brain. We can measure blood flow to the brain. We can measure electrical activity in the measure electrical activity in the measure electrical activity in the brain. We can induce thoughts. Mhm. brain. We can induce thoughts. Mhm. brain. We can induce thoughts. Mhm. Right? We can we can do that. Right? We can we can do that. Right? We can we can do that. But we have we have no idea that a But we have we have no idea that a But we have we have no idea that a thought exists. So like psychiatry is thought exists. So like psychiatry is thought exists. So like psychiatry is weird because weird because weird because every other part of medicine and every other part of medicine and every other part of medicine and science, we can measure what we are science, we can measure what we are science, we can measure what we are studying. Mhm. studying. Mhm. studying. Mhm. In psychiatry, we can't do that. In psychiatry, we can't do that. In psychiatry, we can't do that. So, along came Freud and he made a So, along came Freud and he made a So, along came Freud and he made a fascinating discovery, which is when a fascinating discovery, which is when a fascinating discovery, which is when a human being speaks, human being speaks, human being speaks, we understand something about what's in we understand something about what's in we understand something about what's in their mind. their mind. their mind. And the whole reason we get trained and And the whole reason we get trained and And the whole reason we get trained and the reason that we can measure mental the reason that we can measure mental the reason that we can measure mental we can ment measure your mind, right? we can ment measure your mind, right? we can ment measure your mind, right? So, we have validated scientific So, we have validated scientific So, we have validated scientific instruments using things like factor instruments using things like factor instruments using things like factor analysis and stuff like that where we analysis and stuff like that where we analysis and stuff like that where we can use the back depression inventory, can use the back depression inventory, can use the back depression inventory, which will tell you how depressed you which will tell you how depressed you which will tell you how depressed you are. We have good ways to measure stuff. are. We have good ways to measure stuff. are. We have good ways to measure stuff. So, there's a lot of science in So, there's a lot of science in So, there's a lot of science in psychiatry. The basic problem though is psychiatry. The basic problem though is psychiatry. The basic problem though is that we have a fundamental problem. We that we have a fundamental problem. We that we have a fundamental problem. We cannot We have no insight into what is cannot We have no insight into what is cannot We have no insight into what is in someone's We have insight into in someone's We have insight into in someone's We have insight into someone's mind, but we can't detect the someone's mind, but we can't detect the someone's mind, but we can't detect the mind. That is a fundamental problem with mind. That is a fundamental problem with mind. That is a fundamental problem with science, okay? science, okay? science, okay? Here's the cool thing. Here's the cool thing. Here's the cool thing. We have no scientific measurement of We have no scientific measurement of We have no scientific measurement of thought. But, we as human beings have measurement But, we as human beings have measurement But, we as human beings have measurement of thoughts. Can I ever know what you of thoughts. Can I ever know what you of thoughts. Can I ever know what you are thinking using any instrument of are thinking using any instrument of are thinking using any instrument of science? You're the psychiatrist, so I'm science? You're the psychiatrist, so I'm science? You're the psychiatrist, so I'm tempted to say yes, but no. No. Right? tempted to say yes, but no. No. Right? tempted to say yes, but no. No. Right? Can you know what you're thinking? I Can you know what you're thinking? I Can you know what you're thinking? I would like to think so, but I'm guessing would like to think so, but I'm guessing would like to think so, but I'm guessing I'm guessing I mean I can ask myself I'm guessing I mean I can ask myself I'm guessing I mean I can ask myself what's going on in there, but I don't what's going on in there, but I don't what's going on in there, but I don't necessa- necessarily have the ability to necessa- necessarily have the ability to necessa- necessarily have the ability to put language to it in a way that put language to it in a way that put language to it in a way that captures what I'm thinking. captures what I'm thinking. captures what I'm thinking. &gt;&gt; capable of observing your thoughts. Mhm. &gt;&gt; capable of observing your thoughts. Mhm. &gt;&gt; capable of observing your thoughts. Mhm. You are capable of I'm not capable of You are capable of I'm not capable of You are capable of I'm not capable of observing your thoughts. But, you can observing your thoughts. But, you can observing your thoughts. But, you can whether you detect all of them, whether you detect all of them, whether you detect all of them, whether they're right or wrong, that's question they're right or wrong, that's question they're right or wrong, that's question is separate. Just the fundamental idea is separate. Just the fundamental idea is separate. Just the fundamental idea of like you can measure an axon. You can of like you can measure an axon. You can of like you can measure an axon. You can You can detect your thought, right? We You can detect your thought, right? We You can detect your thought, right? We all live in this way, right? So, that we all live in this way, right? So, that we all live in this way, right? So, that we can get to the edge cases later. can get to the edge cases later. can get to the edge cases later. So, here's the cool thing. So, when I So, here's the cool thing. So, when I So, here's the cool thing. So, when I went to India, and I studied for 7 went to India, and I studied for 7 went to India, and I studied for 7 years, the difference between the psychology the difference between the psychology the difference between the psychology that was developed from the that was developed from the that was developed from the contemplative traditions is it's contemplative traditions is it's contemplative traditions is it's foundation is internal observation. foundation is internal observation. foundation is internal observation. So, yogis are capable We're all It's not So, yogis are capable We're all It's not So, yogis are capable We're all It's not like some special ability, but they like some special ability, but they like some special ability, but they based their theory of mind on what they based their theory of mind on what they based their theory of mind on what they could observe. could observe. could observe. Whereas in the West, that is not Whereas in the West, that is not Whereas in the West, that is not something we have access to. something we have access to. something we have access to. So, their theory of mind is very So, their theory of mind is very So, their theory of mind is very different. So, when I was training to different. So, when I was training to different. So, when I was training to become a psychiatrist, people were like, become a psychiatrist, people were like, become a psychiatrist, people were like, "This is how the mind works." And I'm "This is how the mind works." And I'm "This is how the mind works." And I'm like, "No, that's not true." Right? like, "No, that's not true." Right? like, "No, that's not true." Right? There is a different way. So, here's one There is a different way. So, here's one There is a different way. So, here's one example getting to the road map. So, the example getting to the road map. So, the example getting to the road map. So, the biggest thing that I think is different biggest thing that I think is different biggest thing that I think is different is the ego. is the ego. is the ego. So, in the East, they have the concept So, in the East, they have the concept So, in the East, they have the concept of a part of our mind that is the ego. of a part of our mind that is the ego. of a part of our mind that is the ego. And in the West, we use the word ego. And in the West, we use the word ego. And in the West, we use the word ego. Freud defined it in some way. We all Freud defined it in some way. We all Freud defined it in some way. We all have this intuitive sense of identity, have this intuitive sense of identity, have this intuitive sense of identity, but in the same way that but in the same way that but in the same way that logic and emotions interact in a very logic and emotions interact in a very logic and emotions interact in a very mechanistic and defined way, in the mechanistic and defined way, in the mechanistic and defined way, in the West, our model does not include this West, our model does not include this West, our model does not include this piece. And the road map that you're piece. And the road map that you're piece. And the road map that you're talking about has to do with that piece. talking about has to do with that piece. talking about has to do with that piece. So, if the rest of the world cuz things So, if the rest of the world cuz things So, if the rest of the world cuz things get complicated, right? That's why it's get complicated, right? That's why it's get complicated, right? That's why it's so exciting for you and so challenging. so exciting for you and so challenging. so exciting for you and so challenging. Things get complicated as everyone wants Things get complicated as everyone wants Things get complicated as everyone wants you to be something. And then we make a you to be something. And then we make a you to be something. And then we make a big mistake because we do this thing big mistake because we do this thing big mistake because we do this thing called internalize. called internalize. called internalize. And the moment that you internalize, now And the moment that you internalize, now And the moment that you internalize, now is it coming from the outside or is it is it coming from the outside or is it is it coming from the outside or is it coming from you? coming from you? coming from you? Is this something that I have been Is this something that I have been Is this something that I have been conditioned to want or is it something conditioned to want or is it something conditioned to want or is it something that I truly want? Which then begs the that I truly want? Which then begs the that I truly want? Which then begs the question, what the hell is truly want? question, what the hell is truly want? question, what the hell is truly want? Is there a difference between want from Is there a difference between want from Is there a difference between want from over here and want from over there? And over here and want from over there? And over here and want from over there? And the yogis will say that the answer is the yogis will say that the answer is the yogis will say that the answer is yes. So, once you understand the ego, yes. So, once you understand the ego, yes. So, once you understand the ego, and the ego functions in a couple of and the ego functions in a couple of and the ego functions in a couple of ways. If I ask you, Andrew, who are you? ways. If I ask you, Andrew, who are you? ways. If I ask you, Andrew, who are you? What would you say? What would you say? What would you say? Andrew. Okay. Andrew. Okay. Andrew. Okay. Is that it? Is that it? Is that it? I mean, I have a list of roles that I mean, I have a list of roles that I mean, I have a list of roles that I occupy in life. occupy in life. occupy in life. &gt;&gt; Very good. I mean, &gt;&gt; Very good. I mean, &gt;&gt; Very good. I mean, &gt;&gt; Are those you? &gt;&gt; Are those you? &gt;&gt; Are those you? They're facets of me. Okay. Right? So, They're facets of me. Okay. Right? So, They're facets of me. Okay. Right? So, anything that you can use to describe anything that you can use to describe anything that you can use to describe tenured professor at Stanford. Right. I tenured professor at Stanford. Right. I tenured professor at Stanford. Right. I wouldn't put that first, but that wouldn't put that first, but that wouldn't put that first, but that happens to be true. I'm a brother. happens to be true. I'm a brother. happens to be true. I'm a brother. Brother. I'm a boyfriend. Skater. Once a Brother. I'm a boyfriend. Skater. Once a Brother. I'm a boyfriend. Skater. Once a skater, always a skater, but yes. I'm a skater, always a skater, but yes. I'm a skater, always a skater, but yes. I'm a public educator. Great. I'm a son. A public educator. Great. I'm a son. A public educator. Great. I'm a son. A friend. All of that stuff is ego. friend. All of that stuff is ego. friend. All of that stuff is ego. Mhm. Okay. So, ego is anything when you Mhm. Okay. So, ego is anything when you Mhm. Okay. So, ego is anything when you say I am {dot} say I am {dot} say I am {dot} anything that defines you after that is anything that defines you after that is anything that defines you after that is actually part of your ego. Mhm. actually part of your ego. Mhm. actually part of your ego. Mhm. And the interesting thing is that And the interesting thing is that And the interesting thing is that it's not that the ego is bad. This is a it's not that the ego is bad. This is a it's not that the ego is bad. This is a common misconception, but like ego, we common misconception, but like ego, we common misconception, but like ego, we all need ego to function in the all need ego to function in the all need ego to function in the world. Um if you are okay not world. Um if you are okay not world. Um if you are okay not functioning in the world and you're functioning in the world and you're functioning in the world and you're moving towards enlightenment, then you moving towards enlightenment, then you moving towards enlightenment, then you no longer need ego. no longer need ego. no longer need ego. But generally speaking, we need ego. But generally speaking, we need ego. But generally speaking, we need ego. So, you know, if you're looking for a So, you know, if you're looking for a So, you know, if you're looking for a road map of what you truly want in life road map of what you truly want in life road map of what you truly want in life and what is healthy for you and not and what is healthy for you and not and what is healthy for you and not healthy for you, when you say you're healthy for you, when you say you're healthy for you, when you say you're Andrew, right? There's a lot of other Andrew, right? There's a lot of other Andrew, right? There's a lot of other people who can claim to be Andrew, but people who can claim to be Andrew, but people who can claim to be Andrew, but they're not you. You're talking about a they're not you. You're talking about a they're not you. You're talking about a fundamental internal experience of the a fundamental internal experience of the a fundamental internal experience of the self. And you were Andrew before you self. And you were Andrew before you self. And you were Andrew before you were a boyfriend. You were Andrew were a boyfriend. You were Andrew were a boyfriend. You were Andrew You've always been a son. Um but you You've always been a son. Um but you You've always been a son. Um but you actually you were Andrew before you even actually you were Andrew before you even actually you were Andrew before you even knew you were a son. Mhm. Right? You knew you were a son. Mhm. Right? You knew you were a son. Mhm. Right? You were still Andrew. So, there's a were still Andrew. So, there's a were still Andrew. So, there's a fundamental like bundle of experience. fundamental like bundle of experience. fundamental like bundle of experience. That's really what you are. And I think That's really what you are. And I think That's really what you are. And I think that the best road map, if you're trying that the best road map, if you're trying that the best road map, if you're trying to figure out what to do in life, to figure out what to do in life, to figure out what to do in life, try to peel away the layers of your ego. try to peel away the layers of your ego. try to peel away the layers of your ego. And I know that's getting complicated. And I know that's getting complicated. And I know that's getting complicated. But if we sort of think about like, you But if we sort of think about like, you But if we sort of think about like, you know, what is it that like practically know, what is it that like practically know, what is it that like practically gets us jammed up in life, is when I try gets us jammed up in life, is when I try gets us jammed up in life, is when I try to be something. Mhm. I know this is to be something. Mhm. I know this is to be something. Mhm. I know this is going to sound weird. I'm sure you have going to sound weird. I'm sure you have going to sound weird. I'm sure you have ambition. But I don't think you are ambition. But I don't think you are ambition. But I don't think you are where you are because of your ambition. where you are because of your ambition. where you are because of your ambition. I think you are where you are because I think you are where you are because I think you are where you are because you listen to this internal voice, not you listen to this internal voice, not you listen to this internal voice, not try to live up to external expectations. try to live up to external expectations. try to live up to external expectations. &gt;&gt; 100%. I can truly say that every &gt;&gt; 100%. I can truly say that every &gt;&gt; 100%. I can truly say that every choice I've made to get into, you know, choice I've made to get into, you know, choice I've made to get into, you know, fish and animals when I was a kid, fish and animals when I was a kid, fish and animals when I was a kid, obsessed with birds and fish, and then obsessed with birds and fish, and then obsessed with birds and fish, and then skateboarding, and then biology and skateboarding, and then biology and skateboarding, and then biology and science, and where I'm at now, has science, and where I'm at now, has science, and where I'm at now, has been some sense of an internal has been some sense of an internal has been some sense of an internal passion, and something pulling me from passion, and something pulling me from passion, and something pulling me from the outside, and it's just a the outside, and it's just a the outside, and it's just a I just go. Right. I just go. Right. I just go. Right. &gt;&gt; Those choices were always made because I &gt;&gt; Those choices were always made because I &gt;&gt; Those choices were always made because I knew in my heart's heart there was no knew in my heart's heart there was no knew in my heart's heart there was no other option in the positive sense. other option in the positive sense. other option in the positive sense. Yes. &gt;&gt; I'm going. Like I'm pulled toward it &gt;&gt; I'm going. Like I'm pulled toward it &gt;&gt; I'm going. Like I'm pulled toward it and I'm driven and I'm driven toward it. and I'm driven and I'm driven toward it. and I'm driven and I'm driven toward it. &gt;&gt; Right. So so you are listening to a part &gt;&gt; Right. So so you are listening to a part &gt;&gt; Right. So so you are listening to a part of you, of you, of you, right? So it is an internal thing that right? So it is an internal thing that right? So it is an internal thing that the world then meets you halfway, so it the world then meets you halfway, so it the world then meets you halfway, so it makes it possible or there's a whole it makes it possible or there's a whole it makes it possible or there's a whole thing about that. For me, it's a thing about that. For me, it's a thing about that. For me, it's a physical energy. Fine. If I feel physical energy. Fine. If I feel physical energy. Fine. If I feel physical energy coming up in my body and physical energy coming up in my body and physical energy coming up in my body and I want to move toward something, and for I want to move toward something, and for I want to move toward something, and for some reason I feel it more in my left some reason I feel it more in my left some reason I feel it more in my left arm than anywhere else, as has always arm than anywhere else, as has always arm than anywhere else, as has always been true, I I'll have a thought, and I been true, I I'll have a thought, and I been true, I I'll have a thought, and I know and that's when I go, "Oh my know and that's when I go, "Oh my know and that's when I go, "Oh my goodness, I'm going to do this thing. goodness, I'm going to do this thing. goodness, I'm going to do this thing. I know I'm going to do it, and there's I know I'm going to do it, and there's I know I'm going to do it, and there's no backing out because it has to no backing out because it has to no backing out because it has to happen. That's that's how it feels. happen. That's that's how it feels. happen. That's that's how it feels. Yeah. Right. So so any desire Yeah. Right. So so any desire Yeah. Right. So so any desire that you have that comes from the sense that you have that comes from the sense that you have that comes from the sense organs is probably not this thing. is probably not this thing. is probably not this thing. So the sense organs can trigger So the sense organs can trigger So the sense organs can trigger something within you, but if we look at something within you, but if we look at something within you, but if we look at like, you know, social media, like, you know, social media, like, you know, social media, half the problem is that uh half the problem is that uh half the problem is that uh the hardest problem I have as a the hardest problem I have as a the hardest problem I have as a psychiatrist is convincing people that psychiatrist is convincing people that psychiatrist is convincing people that they don't really want the things that they don't really want the things that they don't really want the things that they say they want. they say they want. they say they want. It's like so crazy, right? Like we're It's like so crazy, right? Like we're It's like so crazy, right? Like we're being programmed. We're being programmed. We're being programmed. We're being conditioned. And and I realized this the other day And and I realized this the other day And and I realized this the other day when like I was like, "Man, like I wish when like I was like, "Man, like I wish when like I was like, "Man, like I wish I talked to my agent about like I talked to my agent about like I talked to my agent about like doing more talks. Like I want to go doing more talks. Like I want to go doing more talks. Like I want to go someplace and like get like paid someplace and like get like paid someplace and like get like paid speaking engagements." And I realized I speaking engagements." And I realized I speaking engagements." And I realized I actually hate that. I actually hate that. I actually hate that. I don't like that. It's just what I don't like that. It's just what I don't like that. It's just what I thought people like us do. And I've done thought people like us do. And I've done thought people like us do. And I've done a couple of them, which have been really a couple of them, which have been really a couple of them, which have been really fantastic and I really enjoy that, but I fantastic and I really enjoy that, but I fantastic and I really enjoy that, but I like sitting with people, right? So, like sitting with people, right? So, like sitting with people, right? So, we're trained and just think about we're trained and just think about we're trained and just think about it. Like anyone who's listening to this, it. Like anyone who's listening to this, it. Like anyone who's listening to this, think about all the that you've think about all the that you've think about all the that you've seen that you think you want. seen that you think you want. seen that you think you want. But you don't really want. You just like But you don't really want. You just like But you don't really want. You just like look at other people and you're like, look at other people and you're like, look at other people and you're like, "Yeah, I want that thing." "Yeah, I want that thing." "Yeah, I want that thing." It can be a particular kind of It can be a particular kind of It can be a particular kind of relationship. It can be a particular relationship. It can be a particular relationship. It can be a particular job. Like, you know, we all want like job. Like, you know, we all want like job. Like, you know, we all want like all this random stuff. It's all coming all this random stuff. It's all coming all this random stuff. It's all coming from our sense organs, right? This is from our sense organs, right? This is from our sense organs, right? This is why advertising is a thing. why advertising is a thing. why advertising is a thing. So, stepping away from sense organs is stepping away from sense organs is stepping away from sense organs is really important for that roadmap. really important for that roadmap. really important for that roadmap. Second thing is anything that you want Second thing is anything that you want Second thing is anything that you want that is a comparison. That is born of the ego. The ego is what That is born of the ego. The ego is what That is born of the ego. The ego is what defines you, right? So, we can say defines you, right? So, we can say defines you, right? So, we can say a tenured professor. tenured professor. tenured professor. We can say associate part-time We can say associate part-time We can say associate part-time instructor. And so, any comparison requires a And so, any comparison requires a And so, any comparison requires a definition. Does that kind of make definition. Does that kind of make definition. Does that kind of make sense? Like, so all of the gold sense? Like, so all of the gold sense? Like, so all of the gold medalist, silver medalist, bronze medalist, silver medalist, bronze medalist, silver medalist, bronze medalist, that's a comparative thing. If medalist, that's a comparative thing. If medalist, that's a comparative thing. If I say I'm a silver medalist, then my I say I'm a silver medalist, then my I say I'm a silver medalist, then my desire for the gold medal can come out desire for the gold medal can come out desire for the gold medal can come out of the ego. Does that kind of make of the ego. Does that kind of make of the ego. Does that kind of make sense? &gt;&gt; Yes, it makes The reason I'm sort of &gt;&gt; Yes, it makes The reason I'm sort of &gt;&gt; Yes, it makes The reason I'm sort of uh with my hand below my lip is because uh with my hand below my lip is because uh with my hand below my lip is because I I'm so struck by this because I've had I I'm so struck by this because I've had I I'm so struck by this because I've had this feeling for a while now this feeling for a while now this feeling for a while now that most of the danger in life that most of the danger in life that most of the danger in life um comes from the need the feeling that we comes from the need the feeling that we comes from the need the feeling that we need to prove something to others or to need to prove something to others or to need to prove something to others or to ourselves. Yep. And yet, I know it's ourselves. Yep. And yet, I know it's ourselves. Yep. And yet, I know it's healthy to prove things to myself. Like, healthy to prove things to myself. Like, healthy to prove things to myself. Like, it's felt good to be able to accomplish it's felt good to be able to accomplish it's felt good to be able to accomplish certain things. You know, I did that. certain things. You know, I did that. certain things. You know, I did that. Like, I could do other difficult things. Like, I could do other difficult things. Like, I could do other difficult things. But the origin of all of that work But the origin of all of that work But the origin of all of that work it for in my mind, it's only healthy, at it for in my mind, it's only healthy, at it for in my mind, it's only healthy, at least for me, if it's not by virtue of least for me, if it's not by virtue of least for me, if it's not by virtue of trying to prove something. It's like trying to prove something. It's like trying to prove something. It's like there's a difference between a genuine there's a difference between a genuine there's a difference between a genuine heart's desire, for lack of a better way heart's desire, for lack of a better way heart's desire, for lack of a better way to put it, and what you're calling a to put it, and what you're calling a to put it, and what you're calling a pursuit of trying to win at some game pursuit of trying to win at some game pursuit of trying to win at some game in one's head. It's like a video game in one's head. It's like a video game in one's head. It's like a video game that isn't real. Yeah. that isn't real. Yeah. that isn't real. Yeah. It's it's not that it's not real, right? It's it's not that it's not real, right? It's it's not that it's not real, right? So so I agree with you 100% and I So so I agree with you 100% and I So so I agree with you 100% and I think there's a couple of important think there's a couple of important think there's a couple of important things. So you know, proving yourself is things. So you know, proving yourself is things. So you know, proving yourself is not wholly wrong. wholly wrong. wholly wrong. But understand that it is the ego. But understand that it is the ego. But understand that it is the ego. That's what it's going to gratify. That's what it's going to gratify. That's what it's going to gratify. Right? So if you have an ego of I am a Right? So if you have an ego of I am a Right? So if you have an ego of I am a loser by all means, so this is part of loser by all means, so this is part of loser by all means, so this is part of the process. I have people in my the process. I have people in my the process. I have people in my office who are losers for lack of a office who are losers for lack of a office who are losers for lack of a better term. 29 years old, living at better term. 29 years old, living at better term. 29 years old, living at home, playing video games all day, home, playing video games all day, home, playing video games all day, watching pornography, no job, watching pornography, no job, watching pornography, no job, dropped out of college. And and so what dropped out of college. And and so what dropped out of college. And and so what they want more than anything else is to they want more than anything else is to they want more than anything else is to be a winner. be a winner. be a winner. And so my work involves two steps. What And so my work involves two steps. What And so my work involves two steps. What First, let's help you be go from loser First, let's help you be go from loser First, let's help you be go from loser to winner, and then let's abandon the to winner, and then let's abandon the to winner, and then let's abandon the whole paradigm. whole paradigm. whole paradigm. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; Because I've also had people in my &gt;&gt; Because I've also had people in my &gt;&gt; Because I've also had people in my office who are billionaires. And finally office who are billionaires. And finally office who are billionaires. And finally get to retire at the age of 52 after get to retire at the age of 52 after get to retire at the age of 52 after having sold their amazing third company. having sold their amazing third company. having sold their amazing third company. And then after retirement, it's not And then after retirement, it's not And then after retirement, it's not enough. They want to make another enough. They want to make another enough. They want to make another billion. They want to do something else. billion. They want to do something else. billion. They want to do something else. So like, you know, that loser to So like, you know, that loser to So like, you know, that loser to winner, like your mind will continually winner, like your mind will continually winner, like your mind will continually move the goal posts. If you were move the goal posts. If you were move the goal posts. If you were hungry before you got it, hungry before you got it, hungry before you got it, the thing won't fulfill your hunger. It the thing won't fulfill your hunger. It the thing won't fulfill your hunger. It may for a little while, and then you may for a little while, and then you may for a little while, and then you have to take another step of like, okay, have to take another step of like, okay, have to take another step of like, okay, losing and winning is now done, right? losing and winning is now done, right? losing and winning is now done, right? And I think you've gone through And I think you've gone through And I think you've gone through that. I can hear it in your words, and that. I can hear it in your words, and that. I can hear it in your words, and people can probably hear it, too. Like, people can probably hear it, too. Like, people can probably hear it, too. Like, the way that probably at some point in the way that probably at some point in the way that probably at some point in your life your life your life being a tenure prof I don't know why I'm being a tenure prof I don't know why I'm being a tenure prof I don't know why I'm That's just the thing that That is the That's just the thing that That is the That's just the thing that That is the thing that people are the lustiest for, thing that people are the lustiest for, thing that people are the lustiest for, right? In the world that I think we come right? In the world that I think we come right? In the world that I think we come from. It felt good to get. from. It felt good to get. from. It felt good to get. &gt;&gt; Right. And I won't lie, it felt good to &gt;&gt; Right. And I won't lie, it felt good to &gt;&gt; Right. And I won't lie, it felt good to get out of place like Stanford, even get out of place like Stanford, even get out of place like Stanford, even though there are many fantastic Yep. and though there are many fantastic Yep. and though there are many fantastic Yep. and extremely challenging places to extremely challenging places to extremely challenging places to achieve that. It felt like the um achieve that. It felt like the um achieve that. It felt like the um culmination of, you know, 20 years of culmination of, you know, 20 years of culmination of, you know, 20 years of very hard work that I enjoyed, but that very hard work that I enjoyed, but that very hard work that I enjoyed, but that you know, it represented an important you know, it represented an important you know, it represented an important milestone for me. But I knew, I'll just milestone for me. But I knew, I'll just milestone for me. But I knew, I'll just say, and of course we're just we're say, and of course we're just we're say, and of course we're just we're talking about this example, but talking about this example, but talking about this example, but hopefully people are thinking about hopefully people are thinking about hopefully people are thinking about examples in their own lives, examples in their own lives, examples in their own lives, but I knew, for instance, I never want but I knew, for instance, I never want but I knew, for instance, I never want to be a department chair. Yeah. Tons of to be a department chair. Yeah. Tons of to be a department chair. Yeah. Tons of work doing administrative stuff. I work doing administrative stuff. I work doing administrative stuff. I remember when they told me you'll be remember when they told me you'll be remember when they told me you'll be vice chair and then I was like, "Oh my vice chair and then I was like, "Oh my vice chair and then I was like, "Oh my gosh, what do I have to do to avoid gosh, what do I have to do to avoid gosh, what do I have to do to avoid that?" &gt;&gt; Yeah. I also knew that I didn't care &gt;&gt; Yeah. I also knew that I didn't care &gt;&gt; Yeah. I also knew that I didn't care about being about being about being a member of the National Academy. A a member of the National Academy. A a member of the National Academy. A close childhood friend of mine was just close childhood friend of mine was just close childhood friend of mine was just elected to the National Academy of elected to the National Academy of elected to the National Academy of Sciences. We've been friends since we Sciences. We've been friends since we Sciences. We've been friends since we were seven and I was I'm so happy for were seven and I was I'm so happy for were seven and I was I'm so happy for him because he's doing exactly what he because he's doing exactly what he because he's doing exactly what he loves, but I never aspired to be a loves, but I never aspired to be a loves, but I never aspired to be a member of the National Academy. Ever. member of the National Academy. Ever. member of the National Academy. Ever. Why? Because Why? Because Why? Because what came after what came after what came after tenure in order to go there was a tenure in order to go there was a tenure in order to go there was a divergence from what I really wanted to divergence from what I really wanted to divergence from what I really wanted to do. Yeah, so I think this is the key do. Yeah, so I think this is the key do. Yeah, so I think this is the key thing about the road map, right? So like thing about the road map, right? So like thing about the road map, right? So like we get conditioned by our sense organs. we get conditioned by our sense organs. we get conditioned by our sense organs. So like just to keep it super practical, So like just to keep it super practical, So like just to keep it super practical, if you're trying to figure out what you if you're trying to figure out what you if you're trying to figure out what you should do, should do, should do, is this coming from my sense organs? If is this coming from my sense organs? If is this coming from my sense organs? If your sense organ triggers something your sense organ triggers something your sense organ triggers something that's always been within you, that's always been within you, that's always been within you, right? So if you see like a frog and right? So if you see like a frog and right? So if you see like a frog and like you really want to be like you really want to be like you really want to be interested, like you want to figure out interested, like you want to figure out interested, like you want to figure out how the frog works. But the interesting how the frog works. But the interesting how the frog works. But the interesting thing about the difference between the thing about the difference between the thing about the difference between the sense organ thing and an internal drive sense organ thing and an internal drive sense organ thing and an internal drive is your internal drive will find is your internal drive will find is your internal drive will find multiple objects in the outside world. multiple objects in the outside world. multiple objects in the outside world. Right? So first it was biology, then it Right? So first it was biology, then it Right? So first it was biology, then it was frogs, now it's neuro-ophthalmology, was frogs, now it's neuro-ophthalmology, was frogs, now it's neuro-ophthalmology, now it's this. So I don't know if that now it's this. So I don't know if that now it's this. So I don't know if that this kind of makes sense. The drive is this kind of makes sense. The drive is this kind of makes sense. The drive is always the same and then it'll encounter always the same and then it'll encounter always the same and then it'll encounter different things in the world. different things in the world. different things in the world. &gt;&gt; Yes. What is that drive? We'll get to &gt;&gt; Yes. What is that drive? We'll get to &gt;&gt; Yes. What is that drive? We'll get to that in a second, okay? So first thing that in a second, okay? So first thing that in a second, okay? So first thing for practically is like if you're trying for practically is like if you're trying for practically is like if you're trying to figure out what should I do, to figure out what should I do, to figure out what should I do, first ask yourself how have you been first ask yourself how have you been first ask yourself how have you been conditioned by social media, move away conditioned by social media, move away conditioned by social media, move away from that. Second thing is be careful from that. Second thing is be careful from that. Second thing is be careful about any comparisons you make. Any about any comparisons you make. Any about any comparisons you make. Any motivation that you have to because of a motivation that you have to because of a motivation that you have to because of a comparison, it can lead to success. You comparison, it can lead to success. You comparison, it can lead to success. You can be successful, but you won't be can be successful, but you won't be can be successful, but you won't be happy. Because this is what it's so annoying, Because this is what it's so annoying, Because this is what it's so annoying, right? So when I want like I work right? So when I want like I work right? So when I want like I work with a lot of influencers and with a lot of influencers and with a lot of influencers and YouTubers and stuff. And so it's like, YouTubers and stuff. And so it's like, YouTubers and stuff. And so it's like, "Oh, we want our first million." And if "Oh, we want our first million." And if "Oh, we want our first million." And if you're not careful, the moment that you you're not careful, the moment that you you're not careful, the moment that you get your first million, like you want a get your first million, like you want a get your first million, like you want a second million. And then you want a second million. And then you want a second million. And then you want a third million. And then it's even third million. And then it's even third million. And then it's even scarier, right? So like, "Oh, I got 3 scarier, right? So like, "Oh, I got 3 scarier, right? So like, "Oh, I got 3 million subscribers. Awesome." But then million subscribers. Awesome." But then million subscribers. Awesome." But then you know what's really terrifying, you know what's really terrifying, you know what's really terrifying, Andrew? It's a guy who started after me Andrew? It's a guy who started after me Andrew? It's a guy who started after me is getting followers faster than I'm is getting followers faster than I'm is getting followers faster than I'm getting them. getting them. getting them. Right? And so the ego is never going to Right? And so the ego is never going to Right? And so the ego is never going to be satisfied. The ego by its nature is be satisfied. The ego by its nature is be satisfied. The ego by its nature is comparative. And even if you're number comparative. And even if you're number comparative. And even if you're number one, people think the most anxious one, people think the most anxious one, people think the most anxious people I've ever worked with not people I've ever worked with not people I've ever worked with not actually true, but Among them. Yeah. actually true, but Among them. Yeah. actually true, but Among them. Yeah. It's people who get to the top and you It's people who get to the top and you It's people who get to the top and you think that you're done. You're not done. think that you're done. You're not done. think that you're done. You're not done. Then you're looking behind you at all of Then you're looking behind you at all of Then you're looking behind you at all of the people who are younger, harder the people who are younger, harder the people who are younger, harder working, have the benefit of AI tools, working, have the benefit of AI tools, working, have the benefit of AI tools, have the benefit of the path that have the benefit of the path that have the benefit of the path that you have carved, who are catching up on you have carved, who are catching up on you have carved, who are catching up on you and will overtake you soon you and will overtake you soon you and will overtake you soon enough. So one good example of why we enough. So one good example of why we enough. So one good example of why we get why we compare get why we compare get why we compare is the more you are judged, the more is the more you are judged, the more is the more you are judged, the more your ego grows and the more you will your ego grows and the more you will your ego grows and the more you will compare. Right? So this is almost like we're Right? So this is almost like we're Right? So this is almost like we're taught how to When people judge us, we taught how to When people judge us, we taught how to When people judge us, we judge ourselves and we get judged based judge ourselves and we get judged based judge ourselves and we get judged based on ranking. on ranking. on ranking. And and so, you know, this is what we And and so, you know, this is what we And and so, you know, this is what we see on the internet as social media as see on the internet as social media as see on the internet as social media as we start to get judged more and more and we start to get judged more and more and we start to get judged more and more and more, we become more and more more, we become more and more more, we become more and more narcissistic. This is the narcissistic narcissistic. This is the narcissistic narcissistic. This is the narcissistic defense that tries to protect us from defense that tries to protect us from defense that tries to protect us from judgment. Um and so it's happening to everybody Um and so it's happening to everybody Um and so it's happening to everybody and it's escalating. The rate at which and it's escalating. The rate at which and it's escalating. The rate at which it's happening, people are more it's happening, people are more it's happening, people are more egotistical than they've ever been. Do egotistical than they've ever been. Do egotistical than they've ever been. Do you think that's you think that's you think that's um especially true for people who have um especially true for people who have um especially true for people who have large followings on social media. large followings on social media. large followings on social media. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I mean so I work with &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I mean so I work with &gt;&gt; Absolutely. I mean so I work with um with um with um influencers and was so curious about the influencers and was so curious about the influencers and was so curious about the work that I was doing that I tried to work that I was doing that I tried to work that I was doing that I tried to develop a program. So we now have like a develop a program. So we now have like a develop a program. So we now have like a creator coaching program where we're creator coaching program where we're creator coaching program where we're like collecting data about whether it's like collecting data about whether it's like collecting data about whether it's effective or not. effective or not. effective or not. Um and so the really interesting Um and so the really interesting Um and so the really interesting thing is I think it's a unique thing is I think it's a unique thing is I think it's a unique like a factor on our psychology. The like a factor on our psychology. The like a factor on our psychology. The closest thing is like you know a lot of closest thing is like you know a lot of closest thing is like you know a lot of celebrities are like really messed up. celebrities are like really messed up. celebrities are like really messed up. And and that's because they have so many And and that's because they have so many And and that's because they have so many eyes on them. And people don't realize eyes on them. And people don't realize eyes on them. And people don't realize just as a simple example just as a simple example just as a simple example the brain just doesn't think the brain just doesn't think the brain just doesn't think probabilistically. So you can have a thousand people love So you can have a thousand people love So you can have a thousand people love the work that you do. But all it takes the work that you do. But all it takes the work that you do. But all it takes is one person who's really nasty. That is one person who's really nasty. That is one person who's really nasty. That is what your brain is going to focus on. is what your brain is going to focus on. is what your brain is going to focus on. It's going to highlight it's amazing. I It's going to highlight it's amazing. I It's going to highlight it's amazing. I can be looking at like chat that is can be looking at like chat that is can be looking at like chat that is scrolling during live streaming. There scrolling during live streaming. There scrolling during live streaming. There are messages that are faster than I can are messages that are faster than I can are messages that are faster than I can read. But if someone says something that read. But if someone says something that read. But if someone says something that is dangerous, my mind will flag it. Wow. is dangerous, my mind will flag it. Wow. is dangerous, my mind will flag it. Wow. It's like a predator on the horizon. It's like a predator on the horizon. It's like a predator on the horizon. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So so we have these circuits &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So so we have these circuits &gt;&gt; Absolutely. So so we have these circuits with which with which with which were designed to look at a jungle and were designed to look at a jungle and were designed to look at a jungle and see a single pairs of tigers' eyes. And see a single pairs of tigers' eyes. And see a single pairs of tigers' eyes. And so the danger scanning mechanism makes so the danger scanning mechanism makes so the danger scanning mechanism makes it so that the bigger that you get and it so that the bigger that you get and it so that the bigger that you get and the more eyes that are on you the more the more eyes that are on you the more the more eyes that are on you the more paranoid you have to be. The more paranoid you have to be. The more paranoid you have to be. The more narcissistic you will have to become. narcissistic you will have to become. narcissistic you will have to become. Because when someone turns to you and Because when someone turns to you and Because when someone turns to you and says you are ugly, you are stupid says you are ugly, you are stupid says you are ugly, you are stupid in order to defend against that you have in order to defend against that you have in order to defend against that you have to say no, I'm not. I am beautiful. I am to say no, I'm not. I am beautiful. I am to say no, I'm not. I am beautiful. I am intelligent. And the more times that you intelligent. And the more times that you intelligent. And the more times that you say that to yourself say that to yourself say that to yourself it's this is where things get it's this is where things get it's this is where things get complicated, but you don't that doesn't complicated, but you don't that doesn't complicated, but you don't that doesn't result in confidence. result in confidence. result in confidence. So I don't know if this makes sense, So I don't know if this makes sense, So I don't know if this makes sense, but if you are confident you don't need to if you are confident you don't need to if you are confident you don't need to say that I'm smart say that I'm smart say that I'm smart or that I'm beautiful. Does that kind of or that I'm beautiful. Does that kind of or that I'm beautiful. Does that kind of make sense? What about the uh you know, make sense? What about the uh you know, make sense? What about the uh you know, to each their own mindset? Like some to each their own mindset? Like some to each their own mindset? Like some people will like the content I tell people will like the content I tell people will like the content I tell myself this, you know, some people will myself this, you know, some people will myself this, you know, some people will like the content and the way I frame it like the content and the way I frame it like the content and the way I frame it and um will look at it on the whole and um will look at it on the whole and um will look at it on the whole that, you know, some episodes more than that, you know, some episodes more than that, you know, some episodes more than others, etc. you know, certain things and others etc. you know, certain things and others etc. you know, certain things and others won't. They'll they'll hate it for won't. They'll they'll hate it for won't. They'll they'll hate it for whatever reason or hate me for whatever reason or hate me for whatever reason or hate me for whatever reason and reason and reason and I'm okay with that. Yeah, so I think I'm okay with that. Yeah, so I think I'm okay with that. Yeah, so I think you're doing a really important thing you're doing a really important thing you're doing a really important thing which is like a key takeaway. So, when which is like a key takeaway. So, when which is like a key takeaway. So, when someone dislikes what you do, you think someone dislikes what you do, you think someone dislikes what you do, you think about them and not you. about them and not you. about them and not you. That's the opposite of ego. That's the opposite of ego. That's the opposite of ego. Right? So, if we take someone who's very Right? So, if we take someone who's very Right? So, if we take someone who's very narcissistic and they receive a narcissistic and they receive a narcissistic and they receive a criticism, they say, "No, no, I'm great." they say, "No, no, I'm great." they say, "No, no, I'm great." Right? So, so this is where like Right? So, so this is where like Right? So, so this is where like literally I don't know if this is too literally I don't know if this is too literally I don't know if this is too abstract, but I'll give kind of like abstract, but I'll give kind of like abstract, but I'll give kind of like maybe a simpler example of this. So, maybe a simpler example of this. So, maybe a simpler example of this. So, um I you know, I trained in Boston and um I you know, I trained in Boston and um I you know, I trained in Boston and there was a lot of K2 use. So, K2 is there was a lot of K2 use. So, K2 is there was a lot of K2 use. So, K2 is like synthetic marijuana. like synthetic marijuana. like synthetic marijuana. And um so, like sometimes like you walk And um so, like sometimes like you walk And um so, like sometimes like you walk into the emergency room, there's into the emergency room, there's into the emergency room, there's a dude who's like high on meth or like a dude who's like high on meth or like a dude who's like high on meth or like high on K2. Like, you know, he's just high on K2. Like, you know, he's just high on K2. Like, you know, he's just saying all kinds of terrible things. saying all kinds of terrible things. saying all kinds of terrible things. That has nothing to do with me. Mhm. That has nothing to do with me. Mhm. That has nothing to do with me. Mhm. Right? And the way that you framed Right? And the way that you framed Right? And the way that you framed some people are going to like what you some people are going to like what you some people are going to like what you do and some people are not going to like do and some people are not going to like do and some people are not going to like what you do. what you do. what you do. That's on them. That's on them. That's on them. So, if we want to step away from the So, if we want to step away from the So, if we want to step away from the ego, we have to understand that don't ego, we have to understand that don't ego, we have to understand that don't take it personally. Like literally, take it personally. Like literally, take it personally. Like literally, that's the colloquial phrase, right? But that's the colloquial phrase, right? But that's the colloquial phrase, right? But it's hard to do. So, if you're it's hard to do. So, if you're it's hard to do. So, if you're someone at home trying to figure out, someone at home trying to figure out, someone at home trying to figure out, "Okay, how do I connect with my true "Okay, how do I connect with my true "Okay, how do I connect with my true self? How do I How do I How do I step away from my ego?" Notice your step away from my ego?" Notice your step away from my ego?" Notice your reaction to criticism. reaction to criticism. reaction to criticism. Is your reaction of criticism, are you Is your reaction of criticism, are you Is your reaction of criticism, are you considering are you actually being considering are you actually being considering are you actually being empathic? Right? So, what empathic really means is Right? So, what empathic really means is Right? So, what empathic really means is are you putting yourself in someone are you putting yourself in someone are you putting yourself in someone else's shoes? And the other person, hey, else's shoes? And the other person, hey, else's shoes? And the other person, hey, maybe not everybody likes pineapple on maybe not everybody likes pineapple on maybe not everybody likes pineapple on pizza. Or are you taking it personally? Do Or are you taking it personally? Do Or are you taking it personally? Do their insults determine your value as a their insults determine your value as a their insults determine your value as a human being? human being? human being? And the moment that starts to And the moment that starts to And the moment that starts to happen, the friction that you're talking happen, the friction that you're talking happen, the friction that you're talking about, which can be so fun, becomes about, which can be so fun, becomes about, which can be so fun, becomes torture. Because now you have to make them happy Because now you have to make them happy Because now you have to make them happy in order to feel good about yourself. in order to feel good about yourself. in order to feel good about yourself. You have to make the people around you You have to make the people around you You have to make the people around you happy. So interesting. I So interesting. I So interesting. I think some of us grew up or somehow I think some of us grew up or somehow I think some of us grew up or somehow internalized the idea that if somebody internalized the idea that if somebody internalized the idea that if somebody is angry is angry is angry or is criticizing us or is criticizing us or is criticizing us and it's being delivered in a certain and it's being delivered in a certain and it's being delivered in a certain way that it must be true. that it must be true. that it must be true. Versus the ability to just really step Versus the ability to just really step Versus the ability to just really step back and assess, you know, no, it could back and assess, you know, no, it could back and assess, you know, no, it could very well be they're in a bad mood, they very well be they're in a bad mood, they very well be they're in a bad mood, they didn't sleep well. Um, didn't sleep well. Um, didn't sleep well. Um, you know, I grew up in a community of you know, I grew up in a community of you know, I grew up in a community of academics, some athletes, mostly academics, some athletes, mostly academics, some athletes, mostly academics. So everyone around me wasn't academics. So everyone around me wasn't academics. So everyone around me wasn't necessarily hyper verbal, but you know necessarily hyper verbal, but you know necessarily hyper verbal, but you know this from training in Boston. There was this from training in Boston. There was this from training in Boston. There was a way of delivering a criticism a way of delivering a criticism a way of delivering a criticism that felt like a poisoned dart. Yeah. that felt like a poisoned dart. Yeah. that felt like a poisoned dart. Yeah. That would get right to the to the heart That would get right to the to the heart That would get right to the to the heart of it without calling somebody a name. of it without calling somebody a name. of it without calling somebody a name. This is actually a very prized skill in This is actually a very prized skill in This is actually a very prized skill in academia and medicine. academia and medicine. academia and medicine. &gt;&gt; I think it's one of the more sinister &gt;&gt; I think it's one of the more sinister &gt;&gt; I think it's one of the more sinister aspects of higher education and aspects of higher education and aspects of higher education and medicine. Um, but it exists in every field. But Um, but it exists in every field. But Um, but it exists in every field. But people aren't going to say, people aren't going to say, people aren't going to say, "Oh, dude, you know, like that was "Oh, dude, you know, like that was "Oh, dude, you know, like that was stupid." They're going to find a way to stupid." They're going to find a way to stupid." They're going to find a way to kind of thread that heat-seeking to kind of thread that heat-seeking to kind of thread that heat-seeking missile, right? And I think that missile, right? And I think that missile, right? And I think that sometimes get into this thing about sometimes get into this thing about sometimes get into this thing about emotion versus language. emotion versus language. emotion versus language. The more primitive the expression, the The more primitive the expression, the The more primitive the expression, the "I hate you, eff you" like "I hate you, eff you" like "I hate you, eff you" like it's easier, like you said in the with it's easier, like you said in the with it's easier, like you said in the with the with the person in the clinic on K2, the with the person in the clinic on K2, the with the person in the clinic on K2, it's easier to say like, "They're crazy. it's easier to say like, "They're crazy. it's easier to say like, "They're crazy. They're on drugs. They are ill." They're on drugs. They are ill." They're on drugs. They are ill." But when something is delivered in a way But when something is delivered in a way But when something is delivered in a way that's um very articulate or calm that's um very articulate or calm that's um very articulate or calm we tend to give it more credit as likely we tend to give it more credit as likely we tend to give it more credit as likely to be true. So on the internet I see to be true. So on the internet I see to be true. So on the internet I see most of what comes at me that's negative most of what comes at me that's negative most of what comes at me that's negative as I like to think there's also as I like to think there's also as I like to think there's also learning there, but if the way it's learning there, but if the way it's learning there, but if the way it's delivered, the way I've noticed them is delivered, the way I've noticed them is delivered, the way I've noticed them is get past my force field get past my force field get past my force field is I go, "Oh, wait, wait." Like I go, "Oh, wait, wait." Like I go, "Oh, wait, wait." Like they'll say like a PubMed ID. You don't they'll say like a PubMed ID. You don't they'll say like a PubMed ID. You don't know what you're talking about. Give me know what you're talking about. Give me know what you're talking about. Give me a PubMed. Then I'll go to the paper. I'm a PubMed. Then I'll go to the paper. I'm a PubMed. Then I'll go to the paper. I'm like, "That actually doesn't say that." like, "That actually doesn't say that." like, "That actually doesn't say that." But but in my mind I thought, "Oh my But but in my mind I thought, "Oh my But but in my mind I thought, "Oh my goodness, I must have screwed up, right? goodness, I must have screwed up, right? goodness, I must have screwed up, right? They're not just telling me I'm wrong. They're not just telling me I'm wrong. They're not just telling me I'm wrong. They're telling me um that I'm wrong They're telling me um that I'm wrong They're telling me um that I'm wrong because of something on the Library of because of something on the Library of because of something on the Library of Congress PubMed." So, do you see what Congress PubMed." So, do you see what Congress PubMed." So, do you see what I'm saying? So, I think that knowing I'm saying? So, I think that knowing I'm saying? So, I think that knowing what our what our what our what our fences are good at filtering what our fences are good at filtering what our fences are good at filtering and not good at filtering is hard. It and not good at filtering is hard. It and not good at filtering is hard. It takes time. It takes years to cultivate. takes time. It takes years to cultivate. takes time. It takes years to cultivate. No, I would hope [laughter] that it No, I would hope [laughter] that it No, I would hope [laughter] that it could be quicker, but it took me Excuse could be quicker, but it took me Excuse could be quicker, but it took me Excuse me. Uh it took me many years to me. Uh it took me many years to me. Uh it took me many years to cultivate. &gt;&gt; Yeah, let's just understand. So, it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, let's just understand. So, it's &gt;&gt; Yeah, let's just understand. So, it's hard to cultivate. It took years it's hard to cultivate. It took years it's hard to cultivate. It took years for you to cultivate because you didn't for you to cultivate because you didn't for you to cultivate because you didn't have a teacher. have a teacher. have a teacher. Right. Right? So, let's be let's be a Right. Right? So, let's be let's be a Right. Right? So, let's be let's be a bit precise here. So, like bit precise here. So, like bit precise here. So, like And this is the key thing. So, I And this is the key thing. So, I And this is the key thing. So, I think I hope people are following this think I hope people are following this think I hope people are following this because this is how you develop Like so, because this is how you develop Like so, because this is how you develop Like so, one of my uh you know, colleagues in one of my uh you know, colleagues in one of my uh you know, colleagues in residency talked about this concept of a Teflon talked about this concept of a Teflon talked about this concept of a Teflon Buddha. Right? Like you know, like this idea of Right? Like you know, like this idea of Right? Like you know, like this idea of like being like impervious. So, how do like being like impervious. So, how do like being like impervious. So, how do you become like psychologically you become like psychologically you become like psychologically impervious? And what you're talking impervious? And what you're talking impervious? And what you're talking about when you say a heat-seeking about when you say a heat-seeking about when you say a heat-seeking missile I is your linguistic cortex is missile I is your linguistic cortex is missile I is your linguistic cortex is doing wonders. doing wonders. doing wonders. Because it What a poison dart, right? Because it What a poison dart, right? Because it What a poison dart, right? What they're doing, the reason it's so What they're doing, the reason it's so What they're doing, the reason it's so effective, Andrew, it is not just effective, Andrew, it is not just effective, Andrew, it is not just because of the anger. We'll get to the because of the anger. We'll get to the because of the anger. We'll get to the anger in a second. But they are figuring anger in a second. But they are figuring anger in a second. But they are figuring out where your weak point is. out where your weak point is. out where your weak point is. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And they're attacking that &gt;&gt; Mhm. And they're attacking that &gt;&gt; Mhm. And they're attacking that weak point. It's not about the size of weak point. It's not about the size of weak point. It's not about the size of the missile. It's about the precision. the missile. It's about the precision. the missile. It's about the precision. Even in your language, you were talking Even in your language, you were talking Even in your language, you were talking about a precise attack. So, that about a precise attack. So, that about a precise attack. So, that precision is In academia, people are precision is In academia, people are precision is In academia, people are really good at detecting other people's really good at detecting other people's really good at detecting other people's vulnerabilities. And they go for the vulnerabilities. And they go for the vulnerabilities. And they go for the nuts, right? That's what they do. Like nuts, right? That's what they do. Like nuts, right? That's what they do. Like psychologically, they go for the nuts. psychologically, they go for the nuts. psychologically, they go for the nuts. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And there's all kinds of And there's all kinds of And there's all kinds of other things going on here, but let's other things going on here, but let's other things going on here, but let's be simple. So, it is let's be simple. So, it is let's be simple. So, it is when someone has a high anger attack, when someone has a high anger attack, when someone has a high anger attack, okay? This means their amygdala is through the This means their amygdala is through the This means their amygdala is through the roof. So, they are thinking in black and So, they are thinking in black and So, they are thinking in black and white. Their attack is in black and white. Their attack is in black and white. Their attack is in black and white. A black and white attack is white. A black and white attack is white. A black and white attack is easier to repel because it's not easier to repel because it's not easier to repel because it's not nuanced. Mhm. Okay? So, like when nuanced. Mhm. Okay? So, like when nuanced. Mhm. Okay? So, like when someone is angry, you're right. It is someone is angry, you're right. It is someone is angry, you're right. It is easier to dismiss their anger. And easier to dismiss their anger. And easier to dismiss their anger. And you're also correct that but it it's you're also correct that but it it's you're also correct that but it it's almost like a not a almost like a not a almost like a not a Everything you said is correct, but I'd Everything you said is correct, but I'd Everything you said is correct, but I'd say that the model that you're assuming say that the model that you're assuming say that the model that you're assuming is that these are two opposite things. is that these are two opposite things. is that these are two opposite things. They're not. The other thing is so So, They're not. The other thing is so So, They're not. The other thing is so So, when someone is not angry, when someone is not angry, when someone is not angry, they're not black and white. If they're not black and white. If they're not black and white. If they're not black and white, it is not easy to not black and white, it is not easy to not black and white, it is not easy to dismiss. Mhm. Just because it's not dismiss. Mhm. Just because it's not dismiss. Mhm. Just because it's not black and white, that doesn't activate black and white, that doesn't activate black and white, that doesn't activate your anger. It doesn't activate your anger. It doesn't activate your anger. It doesn't activate your black and white thinking, right? So, black and white thinking, right? So, black and white thinking, right? So, when someone is coming at me angry, my when someone is coming at me angry, my when someone is coming at me angry, my empathic circuits are going to activate empathic circuits are going to activate empathic circuits are going to activate my own amygdala. I'm going to get angry my own amygdala. I'm going to get angry my own amygdala. I'm going to get angry back. You did this. No, I didn't. back. You did this. No, I didn't. back. You did this. No, I didn't. Right? So, the most psychotic denial, psychotic or psychotic denial, psychotic or psychotic denial, psychotic or delusional denial, that's a better word. delusional denial, that's a better word. delusional denial, that's a better word. The most delusional denial that you'll The most delusional denial that you'll The most delusional denial that you'll ever hear is when someone's angry. ever hear is when someone's angry. ever hear is when someone's angry. No, I didn't do that. I never did that. No, I didn't do that. I never did that. No, I didn't do that. I never did that. I never did that. I never did that. I never did that. I never did that. I never did that. I never did that. I never And they can believe it because never And they can believe it because never And they can believe it because that's what happens. The amygdala makes that's what happens. The amygdala makes that's what happens. The amygdala makes your thinking black and white. your thinking black and white. your thinking black and white. You know, when we have adrenaline You know, when we have adrenaline You know, when we have adrenaline collapsing or running through our collapsing or running through our collapsing or running through our system, it collapses peripheral vision system, it collapses peripheral vision system, it collapses peripheral vision down to a 30-degree cone. down to a 30-degree cone. down to a 30-degree cone. So, we can only see this thing. So, this So, we can only see this thing. So, this So, we can only see this thing. So, this is the first element of why heat-seeking is the first element of why heat-seeking is the first element of why heat-seeking missiles work. When they come at you missiles work. When they come at you missiles work. When they come at you angry, you're going to get angry. If angry, you're going to get angry. If angry, you're going to get angry. If you're going to get angry, it doesn't you're going to get angry, it doesn't you're going to get angry, it doesn't matter if they're right, doesn't matter if they're right, doesn't matter if they're right, doesn't matter if they're wrong, you're going to say, if they're wrong, you're going to say, if they're wrong, you're going to say, "No, it's incorrect." Doesn't "No, it's incorrect." Doesn't "No, it's incorrect." Doesn't matter the truth of it. So, this is the matter the truth of it. So, this is the matter the truth of it. So, this is the first element of it, right? So, is that first element of it, right? So, is that first element of it, right? So, is that they don't approach you. They that they don't approach you. They that they don't approach you. They approach you in an articulate way. When approach you in an articulate way. When approach you in an articulate way. When they approach you in an articulate way, they approach you in an articulate way, they approach you in an articulate way, it doesn't activate your amygdala. It it doesn't activate your amygdala. It it doesn't activate your amygdala. It does in a different way, but then does in a different way, but then does in a different way, but then the issue is their finesse. the issue is their finesse. the issue is their finesse. And you said a poison dart. Really And you said a poison dart. Really And you said a poison dart. Really interesting imagery. It's something that interesting imagery. It's something that interesting imagery. It's something that hurts a little bit and then flows hurts a little bit and then flows hurts a little bit and then flows through your veins. So, I can even through your veins. So, I can even through your veins. So, I can even imagine when they said that PubMed ID, imagine when they said that PubMed ID, imagine when they said that PubMed ID, your first thought was your first thought was your first thought was not a big deal. I know my And then not a big deal. I know my And then not a big deal. I know my And then the poison goes into your mind, well, the poison goes into your mind, well, the poison goes into your mind, well, maybe I don't know my stuff. Oh my god, maybe I don't know my stuff. Oh my god, maybe I don't know my stuff. Oh my god, what if there is a paper that I missed? what if there is a paper that I missed? what if there is a paper that I missed? What if there is something that I And What if there is something that I And What if there is something that I And then that injury will grow in And then that injury will grow in And then that injury will grow in your mind. your mind. your mind. And so, all of your And this is the And so, all of your And this is the And so, all of your And this is the stuff, right? Like, the stuff that hurts stuff, right? Like, the stuff that hurts stuff, right? Like, the stuff that hurts us when people insult us, what hurts are us when people insult us, what hurts are us when people insult us, what hurts are the things we believe about ourself. You the things we believe about ourself. You the things we believe about ourself. You know, we all have these doubts because know, we all have these doubts because know, we all have these doubts because we're not perfect human beings, because we're not perfect human beings, because we're not perfect human beings, because we make mistakes. we make mistakes. we make mistakes. And when someone figures out, oh my god, And when someone figures out, oh my god, And when someone figures out, oh my god, this is this is this person's weak this is this is this person's weak this is this is this person's weak point. And the really scary thing is point. And the really scary thing is point. And the really scary thing is that humans have evolved to do this. that humans have evolved to do this. that humans have evolved to do this. All you have to do is go to any All you have to do is go to any All you have to do is go to any recess in the fifth grade, recess in the fifth grade, recess in the fifth grade, and kids will figure out what hurts, and kids will figure out what hurts, and kids will figure out what hurts, and then they will say it to you again and then they will say it to you again and then they will say it to you again and again and again and again. again and again and again. again and again and again. But I think it's really important to But I think it's really important to But I think it's really important to remember, you know, if something hurts, that's you know, if something hurts, that's you know, if something hurts, that's your own insecurity. And insecurity, your own insecurity. And insecurity, your own insecurity. And insecurity, remember, if you say, I am a loser, I am remember, if you say, I am a loser, I am remember, if you say, I am a loser, I am fat, I am ugly, those are all part of fat, I am ugly, those are all part of fat, I am ugly, those are all part of your ego. So, there are certain things your ego. So, there are certain things your ego. So, there are certain things that you can do, and this goes back to that you can do, and this goes back to that you can do, and this goes back to the what is that voice on the inside. the what is that voice on the inside. the what is that voice on the inside. So, the this is where, you know, in So, the this is where, you know, in So, the this is where, you know, in the Eastern system, there is a self the Eastern system, there is a self the Eastern system, there is a self beyond the mind. beyond the mind. beyond the mind. So, the mind is not what you are. The So, the mind is not what you are. The So, the mind is not what you are. The mind is an organ that you can observe in mind is an organ that you can observe in mind is an organ that you can observe in the same way that you can observe your the same way that you can observe your the same way that you can observe your hand. In the same way that your hand can hand. In the same way that your hand can hand. In the same way that your hand can change, your mind can change. Your mind change, your mind can change. Your mind change, your mind can change. Your mind changes every day. What's the best way changes every day. What's the best way changes every day. What's the best way to learn to observe one's mind? Is it to learn to observe one's mind? Is it to learn to observe one's mind? Is it meditation? Probably the best way to meditation? Probably the best way to meditation? Probably the best way to observe your mind is actually observe your mind is actually observe your mind is actually psychotherapy. You'll get better insight psychotherapy. You'll get better insight psychotherapy. You'll get better insight into your mind there. But if you want to into your mind there. But if you want to into your mind there. But if you want to move beyond mind, and I don't mean that move beyond mind, and I don't mean that move beyond mind, and I don't mean that in like a Let's move beyond mind. What I in like a Let's move beyond mind. What I in like a Let's move beyond mind. What I mean is that if you look at your mean is that if you look at your mean is that if you look at your experience of existence, experience of existence, experience of existence, there is more to you than thoughts, there is more to you than thoughts, there is more to you than thoughts, emotions, and ego. emotions, and ego. emotions, and ego. And so, if you want to get to that and And so, if you want to get to that and And so, if you want to get to that and step outside of your ego, meditation is step outside of your ego, meditation is step outside of your ego, meditation is the best thing for that. the best thing for that. the best thing for that. And there are lots of studies that And there are lots of studies that And there are lots of studies that suggest that meditation shuts off the suggest that meditation shuts off the suggest that meditation shuts off the default mode network. Default mode default mode network. Default mode default mode network. Default mode network is our sense of like self. Um network is our sense of like self. Um network is our sense of like self. Um there are also many studies that show there are also many studies that show there are also many studies that show that you can predict the therapeutic that you can predict the therapeutic that you can predict the therapeutic benefit of a psychedelic trip based on benefit of a psychedelic trip based on benefit of a psychedelic trip based on an ego death experience. So, if someone an ego death experience. So, if someone an ego death experience. So, if someone has an ego death experience when they're has an ego death experience when they're has an ego death experience when they're using psychedelics, there is a greater using psychedelics, there is a greater using psychedelics, there is a greater likelihood that they heal from it. Which likelihood that they heal from it. Which likelihood that they heal from it. Which has to do with deactivation of the has to do with deactivation of the has to do with deactivation of the default mode network. default mode network. default mode network. &gt;&gt; When you say psychedelics, are there &gt;&gt; When you say psychedelics, are there &gt;&gt; When you say psychedelics, are there particular psychedelics that tend to particular psychedelics that tend to particular psychedelics that tend to promote ego death more than others? I promote ego death more than others? I promote ego death more than others? I don't know the answer to that question, don't know the answer to that question, don't know the answer to that question, but I would say that most of the studies but I would say that most of the studies but I would say that most of the studies that I've seen are in psilocybin. But that I've seen are in psilocybin. But that I've seen are in psilocybin. But there that that's just because there are there that that's just because there are there that that's just because there are more studies on psilocybin, I think. more studies on psilocybin, I think. more studies on psilocybin, I think. Um arguably, you know, MDMA will do it, Um arguably, you know, MDMA will do it, Um arguably, you know, MDMA will do it, too, because MDMA is an empathogen and too, because MDMA is an empathogen and too, because MDMA is an empathogen and will help people form bonds and will help people form bonds and will help people form bonds and kind of changes their perception of the kind of changes their perception of the kind of changes their perception of the self, right? self, right? self, right? Um so, meditation is the best way to Um so, meditation is the best way to Um so, meditation is the best way to dissolve your ego, like that I believe. dissolve your ego, like that I believe. dissolve your ego, like that I believe. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year I became a Function member Last year I became a Function member Last year I became a Function member after searching for the most after searching for the most after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics, and tests for PFAS or harmful plastics, and tests for PFAS or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my levels, which included limiting my levels, which included limiting my levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna, while also making an effort to of tuna, while also making an effort to of tuna, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing eat more leafy greens and supplementing eat more leafy greens and supplementing with NAC, N-acetylcysteine, both of with NAC, N-acetylcysteine, both of with NAC, N-acetylcysteine, both of which can support glutathione production which can support glutathione production which can support glutathione production and detoxification. Now, I should say, and detoxification. Now, I should say, and detoxification. Now, I should say, by taking a second function test, that by taking a second function test, that by taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function I've been super impressed by Function I've been super impressed by Function simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're [snorts] offering early access to [snorts] offering early access to [snorts] offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, Huberman podcast listeners. Again, Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman that's functionhealth.com/huberman that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. to get early access to Function. Meditation potentially in a potentially in a potentially in a safe clinical setting, maybe exploring safe clinical setting, maybe exploring safe clinical setting, maybe exploring ego dissolution through psychedelics, ego dissolution through psychedelics, ego dissolution through psychedelics, although they're still schedule one although they're still schedule one although they're still schedule one drugs, so we have to have to be drugs, so we have to have to be drugs, so we have to have to be thoughtful in how I communicate this, thoughtful in how I communicate this, thoughtful in how I communicate this, not just to protect myself, but No, no, not just to protect myself, but No, no, not just to protect myself, but No, no, yeah, I no, yeah, I no, yeah, I always just raise it just to be clear I always just raise it just to be clear I always just raise it just to be clear what we're talking about. I what we're talking about. I what we're talking about. I understood your position on that. understood your position on that. understood your position on that. The thing inside that we know as our The thing inside that we know as our The thing inside that we know as our true heart's desire that allows us to true heart's desire that allows us to true heart's desire that allows us to navigate the external pressures and the navigate the external pressures and the navigate the external pressures and the roles these ego labels that the roles these ego labels that the roles these ego labels that we've given ourselves and that others we've given ourselves and that others we've given ourselves and that others have given us. Um have given us. Um have given us. Um do you know any practices to help do you know any practices to help do you know any practices to help cultivate being in touch with that? being in touch with that? being in touch with that? &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. So, the meditation &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. So, the meditation &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. So, the meditation that I like the most for this kind of that I like the most for this kind of that I like the most for this kind of thing is meditations around something thing is meditations around something thing is meditations around something called shunya. Shunya means void. called shunya. Shunya means void. called shunya. Shunya means void. So, if you really look at like all of So, if you really look at like all of So, if you really look at like all of the attributes of you, the attributes of you, the attributes of you, right? So, I'm a man, I'm a husband, I'm right? So, I'm a man, I'm a husband, I'm right? So, I'm a man, I'm a husband, I'm a son, whatever. a son, whatever. a son, whatever. Boyfriend. All of those things are like qualities. All of those things are like qualities. All of those things are like qualities. Even a loser is like the presence of Even a loser is like the presence of Even a loser is like the presence of something, right? I'm a loser, I'm something, right? I'm a loser, I'm something, right? I'm a loser, I'm pathetic. That is pathetic. That is pathetic. That is the existence of a negative thing, a the existence of a negative thing, a the existence of a negative thing, a negative valence thing. negative valence thing. negative valence thing. So, if you really look at what you are, So, if you really look at what you are, So, if you really look at what you are, imagine Andrew for a moment, this is imagine Andrew for a moment, this is imagine Andrew for a moment, this is going to be hard, but imagine that you going to be hard, but imagine that you going to be hard, but imagine that you only existed only existed only existed for 10 seconds. for 10 seconds. for 10 seconds. What would you be? What would you be? What would you be? Like, you'd be almost nothing, right? Like, you'd be almost nothing, right? Like, you'd be almost nothing, right? You just get this flash of experience, You just get this flash of experience, You just get this flash of experience, but you have no narrative identity, you but you have no narrative identity, you but you have no narrative identity, you have no sense of self. All you are is have no sense of self. All you are is have no sense of self. All you are is just a raw receiver of an experience. just a raw receiver of an experience. just a raw receiver of an experience. And like I sometimes empathize with a And like I sometimes empathize with a And like I sometimes empathize with a child when they're first being born, child when they're first being born, child when they're first being born, that first shock of awareness, and you that first shock of awareness, and you that first shock of awareness, and you don't know what the hell is going on, don't know what the hell is going on, don't know what the hell is going on, and you start crying, right? You have no and you start crying, right? You have no and you start crying, right? You have no idea who you are, what you are, you're idea who you are, what you are, you're idea who you are, what you are, you're just a chunk of receiving. just a chunk of receiving. just a chunk of receiving. So, there are shunya practices which So, there are shunya practices which So, there are shunya practices which allow you to connect with the void allow you to connect with the void allow you to connect with the void within you. And the void within us is within you. And the void within us is within you. And the void within us is actually the most basic part of what we actually the most basic part of what we actually the most basic part of what we are. It's actually what's at the bottom. are. It's actually what's at the bottom. are. It's actually what's at the bottom. And and so I there are some ways to And and so I there are some ways to And and so I there are some ways to sort of understand what this is. Like, sort of understand what this is. Like, sort of understand what this is. Like, so if you think about, so if you think about, so if you think about, you know, watching a beautiful sunset, you know, watching a beautiful sunset, you know, watching a beautiful sunset, and you cease to exist. You're just soaking you cease to exist. You're just soaking you cease to exist. You're just soaking in the sunset. You don't have any in the sunset. You don't have any in the sunset. You don't have any thoughts, you don't have any worries. It thoughts, you don't have any worries. It thoughts, you don't have any worries. It feels incredibly peaceful, feels incredibly peaceful, feels incredibly peaceful, right? And you are there, you're not right? And you are there, you're not right? And you are there, you're not comatose, but you don't have a personhood in that but you don't have a personhood in that but you don't have a personhood in that moment. Another really great example of this is Another really great example of this is Another really great example of this is like if you really need to pee, if you really need to pee, if you really need to pee, and you're like waiting you're to use and you're like waiting you're to use and you're like waiting you're to use the bathroom, and then finally you get the bathroom, and then finally you get the bathroom, and then finally you get your turn, the moment you start peeing, your turn, the moment you start peeing, your turn, the moment you start peeing, you cease to exist, whether you've got you cease to exist, whether you've got you cease to exist, whether you've got mortgages, or you need to get a mortgages, or you need to get a mortgages, or you need to get a Valentine's Day present, or you have to Valentine's Day present, or you have to Valentine's Day present, or you have to do this, you have all those thoughts. do this, you have all those thoughts. do this, you have all those thoughts. You just you were just there as an as a You just you were just there as an as a You just you were just there as an as a nothing. So, these shunya practices are nothing. So, these shunya practices are nothing. So, these shunya practices are a little bit you have to do them with a little bit you have to do them with a little bit you have to do them with a little bit more caution. There's some little bit more caution. There's some little bit more caution. There's some like introductory practices. like introductory practices. like introductory practices. One example is One example is One example is if you close your eyes for a moment, this is going to sound kind of weird, this is going to sound kind of weird, this is going to sound kind of weird, but like where do you feel your body? but like where do you feel your body? but like where do you feel your body? Like so, think about proprioception, Like so, think about proprioception, Like so, think about proprioception, right? So, like pay attention to your right? So, like pay attention to your right? So, like pay attention to your arms, Mhm. your head, arms, Mhm. your head, arms, Mhm. your head, your nose. So, what I want you to do is your nose. So, what I want you to do is your nose. So, what I want you to do is focus on the area of the solar plexus. focus on the area of the solar plexus. focus on the area of the solar plexus. &gt;&gt; us. &gt;&gt; us. &gt;&gt; us. And look for like an absence of feeling And look for like an absence of feeling And look for like an absence of feeling there. Like as you breathe in and out, like you Like as you breathe in and out, like you Like as you breathe in and out, like you can feel your rib cage expands. Maybe can feel your rib cage expands. Maybe can feel your rib cage expands. Maybe you can feel your heartbeat. But if you can feel your heartbeat. But if you can feel your heartbeat. But if you really pay attention to just the you really pay attention to just the you really pay attention to just the area of solar plexus, there's going to area of solar plexus, there's going to area of solar plexus, there's going to be a feeling of emptiness. a feeling of emptiness. a feeling of emptiness. And so, as you meditate upon that, And so, as you meditate upon that, And so, as you meditate upon that, you'll get closer to shunya. you'll get closer to shunya. you'll get closer to shunya. The other really interesting easy way to The other really interesting easy way to The other really interesting easy way to get taste of shunya is close your eyes. taste of shunya is close your eyes. taste of shunya is close your eyes. I want you to I want you to I want you to breathe in, and then breathe out. and then breathe out. and then breathe out. And then when you're ready, breathe in And then when you're ready, breathe in And then when you're ready, breathe in again. And when you're ready, breathe out. Just And when you're ready, breathe out. Just And when you're ready, breathe out. Just just breathe nice and slow. just breathe nice and slow. just breathe nice and slow. And now what I want you to do And now what I want you to do And now what I want you to do is pay attention is pay attention is pay attention to the time between breaths. Between your breaths, you will have Between your breaths, you will have Between your breaths, you will have stillness. Not during the breathing. During the Not during the breathing. During the Not during the breathing. During the breathing, you exist. breathing, you exist. breathing, you exist. Inhalation, exhalation. Inhalation, exhalation. Inhalation, exhalation. But in between But in between But in between exhalation and inhalation, there's a exhalation and inhalation, there's a exhalation and inhalation, there's a very beautiful stillness. very beautiful stillness. very beautiful stillness. For people who are having trouble For people who are having trouble For people who are having trouble feeling that, I love this cuz there's feeling that, I love this cuz there's feeling that, I love this cuz there's a interesting cognitive technique. a interesting cognitive technique. a interesting cognitive technique. Catch the moment where inhalation Catch the moment where inhalation Catch the moment where inhalation becomes exhalation. Mhm. In your normal becomes exhalation. Mhm. In your normal becomes exhalation. Mhm. In your normal breathing, not absence of breathing, cuz you're not absence of breathing, cuz you're not absence of breathing, cuz you're normally breathing in and out, in and normally breathing in and out, in and normally breathing in and out, in and out, in and out. Catch the moment where out, in and out. Catch the moment where out, in and out. Catch the moment where one becomes the other. one becomes the other. one becomes the other. That'll help you find shunya. And shunya That'll help you find shunya. And shunya That'll help you find shunya. And shunya is defined as the void. Void. It's also is defined as the void. Void. It's also is defined as the void. Void. It's also zero. Emptiness. Yeah, there's no thought of roles or Yeah, there's no thought of roles or Yeah, there's no thought of roles or anything else. anything else. anything else. When that And here's the beautiful When that And here's the beautiful When that And here's the beautiful thing, like thing, like thing, like once you find shunya, you can go into once you find shunya, you can go into once you find shunya, you can go into it. Mhm. it. Mhm. it. Mhm. So, it's like as you practice this, So, it's like as you practice this, So, it's like as you practice this, right? So, I'm sure that there's some right? So, I'm sure that there's some right? So, I'm sure that there's some neuroplasticity going on where your neuroplasticity going on where your neuroplasticity going on where your brain is wiring. And then like when bad brain is wiring. And then like when bad brain is wiring. And then like when bad things happen to you, it's a flowing things happen to you, it's a flowing things happen to you, it's a flowing happening to my body, it's happening to happening to my body, it's happening to happening to my body, it's happening to my mind. In here, my mind. In here, my mind. In here, there's nothing. there's nothing. there's nothing. So, I tested this when my dad So, I tested this when my dad So, I tested this when my dad passed away. passed away. passed away. So, I remember like going to the So, I remember like going to the So, I remember like going to the funeral and seeing his body. I remember funeral and seeing his body. I remember funeral and seeing his body. I remember touching his skin, like his face, touching his skin, like his face, touching his skin, like his face, and shocked at how cold he was. Like it and shocked at how cold he was. Like it and shocked at how cold he was. Like it was like my dad, but he's like he's like was like my dad, but he's like he's like was like my dad, but he's like he's like ice. And so, I was grieving and I was sad and And so, I was grieving and I was sad and And so, I was grieving and I was sad and I was crying, but I was like, is that I was crying, but I was like, is that I was crying, but I was like, is that thing still there? And I found that thing still there? And I found that thing still there? And I found that thing was there and thing was there and thing was there and I felt at peace. I felt at peace. I felt at peace. Like it is the mind that is sad, Like it is the mind that is sad, Like it is the mind that is sad, but I'm not sad. but I'm not sad. but I'm not sad. You know, the body is grieving, but I'm You know, the body is grieving, but I'm You know, the body is grieving, but I'm not grieving. not grieving. not grieving. That's really what I am. It's just That's really what I am. It's just That's really what I am. It's just that's just emotion. It's not really me. that's just emotion. It's not really me. that's just emotion. It's not really me. When we become identified with our When we become identified with our When we become identified with our emotion, right? When when we were going through a right? When when we were going through a right? When when we were going through a breakup and we're like, "Oh my god, I breakup and we're like, "Oh my god, I breakup and we're like, "Oh my god, I become sadness. I become sadness become sadness. I become sadness become sadness. I become sadness incarnate." But then when you step away incarnate." But then when you step away incarnate." But then when you step away from sadness, when you are watching from sadness, when you are watching from sadness, when you are watching sadness from the outside, it can sadness from the outside, it can sadness from the outside, it can actually be wonderful. actually be wonderful. actually be wonderful. And that's why we like sad movies. We And that's why we like sad movies. We And that's why we like sad movies. We feel sad, but we feel great. feel sad, but we feel great. feel sad, but we feel great. The differences are you the sadness The differences are you the sadness The differences are you the sadness or are you watching the sadness? or are you watching the sadness? or are you watching the sadness? And what is doing the watching? Because And what is doing the watching? Because And what is doing the watching? Because the sadness is in the mind, there's the sadness is in the mind, there's the sadness is in the mind, there's something outside of the mind observing something outside of the mind observing something outside of the mind observing it. That shunya will help you find that That shunya will help you find that That shunya will help you find that thing. And that's how you become I mean that's And that's how you become I mean that's And that's how you become I mean that's the core of resilience. the core of resilience. the core of resilience. So when I work with these influencers So when I work with these influencers So when I work with these influencers who are being who are being who are being stalked and you know just no matter what and you know just no matter what and you know just no matter what they do, someone is there unhappy with they do, someone is there unhappy with they do, someone is there unhappy with it, right? Cuz you're talking about the it, right? Cuz you're talking about the it, right? Cuz you're talking about the internet where they're literally internet where they're literally internet where they're literally people out there who are delusional, who people out there who are delusional, who people out there who are delusional, who are projecting all kinds stuff on the are projecting all kinds stuff on the are projecting all kinds stuff on the you. They've never met you, Andrew. They've never met you, Andrew. They've never met you, Andrew. And then they say that you're the And then they say that you're the And then they say that you're the incarnate of evil. incarnate of evil. incarnate of evil. And like how are they making that like And like how are they making that like And like how are they making that like they're living in a in a corner of the they're living in a in a corner of the they're living in a in a corner of the internet. And so in order to withstand that, And so in order to withstand that, And so in order to withstand that, in order to withstand the judgment, in order to withstand the judgment, in order to withstand the judgment, in order to withstand the poison darts, order to withstand the poison darts, order to withstand the poison darts, right? The interesting thing if you want right? The interesting thing if you want right? The interesting thing if you want to be impervious to the poison dart is to be impervious to the poison dart is to be impervious to the poison dart is you are inside. you are inside. you are inside. The poison dart hits your ego. It hits The poison dart hits your ego. It hits The poison dart hits your ego. It hits your body. And the poison flows through your body. And the poison flows through your body. And the poison flows through you and it hurts, but you are actually you and it hurts, but you are actually you and it hurts, but you are actually even beyond that. even beyond that. even beyond that. He seems to come up almost every He seems to come up almost every He seems to come up almost every episode, but my good friend Rick Rubin episode, but my good friend Rick Rubin episode, but my good friend Rick Rubin who you would absolutely enjoy spending who you would absolutely enjoy spending who you would absolutely enjoy spending time with and he with you. I I'm certain time with and he with you. I I'm certain time with and he with you. I I'm certain of that just of that just of that just talking with you today and knowing him talking with you today and knowing him talking with you today and knowing him very well. very well. very well. Um has talked a lot and written a lot about has talked a lot and written a lot about has talked a lot and written a lot about how this um how this um how this um getting beyond or outside or separate getting beyond or outside or separate getting beyond or outside or separate from the ego is the essence of from the ego is the essence of from the ego is the essence of really the work he does with creative really the work he does with creative really the work he does with creative artists. It's really getting them artists. It's really getting them artists. It's really getting them outside of the perceptions of others. outside of the perceptions of others. outside of the perceptions of others. It's what one of the reasons why um It's what one of the reasons why um It's what one of the reasons why um when he's worked with artists when he's worked with artists when he's worked with artists when they're not yet famous, they're in their they're not yet famous, they're in their they're not yet famous, they're in their Yeah. &gt;&gt; They might be ambitious, they might want &gt;&gt; They might be ambitious, they might want &gt;&gt; They might be ambitious, they might want some of that, but they're just some of that, but they're just some of that, but they're just doing their art. They're not filtering doing their art. They're not filtering doing their art. They're not filtering it through feedback. And there's it through feedback. And there's it through feedback. And there's something so beautiful about that. Then something so beautiful about that. Then something so beautiful about that. Then it gets contaminated. And then the work it gets contaminated. And then the work it gets contaminated. And then the work over time is to ask whether or not over time is to ask whether or not over time is to ask whether or not people can get beyond that, but you're people can get beyond that, but you're people can get beyond that, but you're talking about shunya, is that how you talking about shunya, is that how you talking about shunya, is that how you pronounce it? Accessing this void uh pronounce it? Accessing this void uh pronounce it? Accessing this void uh getting away from the ego as a practice getting away from the ego as a practice getting away from the ego as a practice for everyone everyday life, not just for everyone everyday life, not just for everyone everyday life, not just people not just influencers and on the people not just influencers and on the people not just influencers and on the internet. You're talking about the kid internet. You're talking about the kid internet. You're talking about the kid on the on the playground, the person on the on the playground, the person on the on the playground, the person on social media going with comparison or on social media going with comparison or on social media going with comparison or at the game looking at what the at the game looking at what the at the game looking at what the other kids' moms or dads have or are other kids' moms or dads have or are other kids' moms or dads have or are doing, wearing, et cetera. Yeah, I'm doing, wearing, et cetera. Yeah, I'm doing, wearing, et cetera. Yeah, I'm talking about the older sister whose talking about the older sister whose talking about the older sister whose younger sister is getting married first. younger sister is getting married first. younger sister is getting married first. I'm talking about I'm talking about I'm talking about the sibling whose older sibling got it the sibling whose older sibling got it the sibling whose older sibling got it admitted to an Ivy League university and admitted to an Ivy League university and admitted to an Ivy League university and they didn't. they didn't. they didn't. I'm talking about the two of y'all that I'm talking about the two of y'all that I'm talking about the two of y'all that started the job at the same time and started the job at the same time and started the job at the same time and your friend gets promoted and you don't. your friend gets promoted and you don't. your friend gets promoted and you don't. And all that stuff hurts. And all that stuff hurts. And all that stuff hurts. Right? And the real tragedy here, I Right? And the real tragedy here, I Right? And the real tragedy here, I worked with so many people who are worked with so many people who are worked with so many people who are incredibly successful is sometimes when incredibly successful is sometimes when incredibly successful is sometimes when we get that hurt, we adapt. We become we get that hurt, we adapt. We become we get that hurt, we adapt. We become ambitious. We say, "I'm going to be that ambitious. We say, "I'm going to be that ambitious. We say, "I'm going to be that thing." And it leads us to success, but we pay And it leads us to success, but we pay And it leads us to success, but we pay the price of happiness. the price of happiness. the price of happiness. And the real tragedy is that some people And the real tragedy is that some people And the real tragedy is that some people believe that you get one or the other. believe that you get one or the other. believe that you get one or the other. You can be ambitious or you can be You can be ambitious or you can be You can be ambitious or you can be happy. But I think you are a great living But I think you are a great living But I think you are a great living breathing walking example of when you breathing walking example of when you breathing walking example of when you tap into what really drives you, tap into what really drives you, tap into what really drives you, then you can be successful. I don't know then you can be successful. I don't know then you can be successful. I don't know if you're happy. I actually am very if you're happy. I actually am very if you're happy. I actually am very happy and very peaceful at this stage of happy and very peaceful at this stage of happy and very peaceful at this stage of my life. I am. I mean, I struggle like my life. I am. I mean, I struggle like my life. I am. I mean, I struggle like everyone else with having to do work to everyone else with having to do work to everyone else with having to do work to clear the contaminants in my own and clear the contaminants in my own and clear the contaminants in my own and you know, working on myself certainly. you know, working on myself certainly. you know, working on myself certainly. One thing that I've done that I wonder One thing that I've done that I wonder One thing that I've done that I wonder I'd love your thoughts on if because I'd love your thoughts on if because I'd love your thoughts on if because perhaps it offers a perhaps it offers a perhaps it offers a useful tool for people is whenever I a useful tool for people is whenever I a useful tool for people is whenever I feel I'm not as in touch with that part feel I'm not as in touch with that part feel I'm not as in touch with that part of myself as I would like, I feel like of myself as I would like, I feel like of myself as I would like, I feel like I've drifted from it or I'm just kind of I've drifted from it or I'm just kind of I've drifted from it or I'm just kind of caught in the current of whatever it is caught in the current of whatever it is caught in the current of whatever it is I've signed up for in life, which I I've signed up for in life, which I I've signed up for in life, which I enjoy, but now it's contaminated and enjoy, but now it's contaminated and enjoy, but now it's contaminated and there's sewage floating next to me so to there's sewage floating next to me so to there's sewage floating next to me so to speak. I find some way to bring things into my I find some way to bring things into my I find some way to bring things into my home environment that remind me of that home environment that remind me of that home environment that remind me of that feeling when I was a kid. So recently feeling when I was a kid. So recently feeling when I was a kid. So recently for instance I converted a art gallery for instance I converted a art gallery for instance I converted a art gallery into a living space. This is something I into a living space. This is something I into a living space. This is something I can now do in my life that I certainly can now do in my life that I certainly can now do in my life that I certainly couldn't do some years ago and I love couldn't do some years ago and I love couldn't do some years ago and I love fish tanks so I fish tanks so I fish tanks so I brought in aquaria and I've got my fish brought in aquaria and I've got my fish brought in aquaria and I've got my fish tanks and I've got a pet octopus and my tanks and I've got a pet octopus and my tanks and I've got a pet octopus and my girlfriend brought for Valentine's Day I girlfriend brought for Valentine's Day I girlfriend brought for Valentine's Day I got her flowers. got her flowers. got her flowers. I said oh there are the flowers we got I said oh there are the flowers we got I said oh there are the flowers we got back from dinner they were there and she back from dinner they were there and she back from dinner they were there and she goes I got you some plants and I turned goes I got you some plants and I turned goes I got you some plants and I turned around and the place was like filled around and the place was like filled around and the place was like filled with plants and I love animals and with plants and I love animals and with plants and I love animals and plants. I was like oh my god. So she plants. I was like oh my god. So she plants. I was like oh my god. So she clearly gets me and I was like oh my clearly gets me and I was like oh my clearly gets me and I was like oh my goodness. And now when I wake up in the goodness. And now when I wake up in the goodness. And now when I wake up in the morning like I love those plants. I need morning like I love those plants. I need morning like I love those plants. I need her to take care of them because I walk her to take care of them because I walk her to take care of them because I walk near a plant and it dies. Fish and near a plant and it dies. Fish and near a plant and it dies. Fish and animals I'm good. animals I'm good. animals I'm good. Um but when I'm surrounded by things that just when I'm surrounded by things that just when I'm surrounded by things that just feel really good and wholesome and just feel really good and wholesome and just feel really good and wholesome and just kind of basic to who I know myself to be kind of basic to who I know myself to be kind of basic to who I know myself to be at a certain level at a certain level at a certain level then I feel like I can take that energy then I feel like I can take that energy then I feel like I can take that energy into everything I do and it serves as into everything I do and it serves as into everything I do and it serves as a filter. a filter. a filter. Like shows up as at Like shows up as at Like shows up as at that point. People's issues show up as that point. People's issues show up as that point. People's issues show up as their issues. their issues. their issues. Real criticism that I need to Real criticism that I need to Real criticism that I need to internalize I like to think still gets internalize I like to think still gets internalize I like to think still gets signal above the noise. signal above the noise. signal above the noise. So I tend to put things outside me to I tend to put things outside me to I tend to put things outside me to reawaken that but I love reawaken that but I love reawaken that but I love that you're offering love that you're offering love that you're offering tools that have nothing to do with tools that have nothing to do with tools that have nothing to do with building something buying something building something buying something building something buying something because those things are still external because those things are still external because those things are still external to me. This meditation is really about to me. This meditation is really about to me. This meditation is really about accessing it from within accessing it from within accessing it from within first and I um first and I um first and I um so anyway that's just a reflection. so anyway that's just a reflection. so anyway that's just a reflection. Yeah so I want to point out Yeah so I want to point out Yeah so I want to point out I think that this is it's such a I think that this is it's such a I think that this is it's such a masculine thing. So so I can masculine thing. So so I can masculine thing. So so I can So you know, men are really interesting. So you know, men are really interesting. So you know, men are really interesting. So, we're trained to not manage our So, we're trained to not manage our So, we're trained to not manage our internal environment internally. internal environment internally. internal environment internally. So, I had a patient who was um So, I had a patient who was um So, I had a patient who was um I saw in a jail. He was 19. I saw in a jail. He was 19. I saw in a jail. He was 19. And he'd been in he'd been jail like And he'd been in he'd been jail like And he'd been in he'd been jail like three or four times. three or four times. three or four times. And so, I was talking to him about, you And so, I was talking to him about, you And so, I was talking to him about, you know, how he like wound up here cuz he's know, how he like wound up here cuz he's know, how he like wound up here cuz he's like 19. And so, he was, you know, like 19. And so, he was, you know, like 19. And so, he was, you know, telling me that when he was 12, um his telling me that when he was 12, um his telling me that when he was 12, um his dad passed away. He's got three sisters, dad passed away. He's got three sisters, dad passed away. He's got three sisters, all older, and a mom. And um all older, and a mom. And um all older, and a mom. And um what they told him is like, "You're the what they told him is like, "You're the what they told him is like, "You're the man of the house and you have to man of the house and you have to man of the house and you have to provide." Heavy. And so, he was like, "Okay, Heavy. And so, he was like, "Okay, Heavy. And so, he was like, "Okay, this is what I have to do." Like so So, this is what I have to do." Like so So, this is what I have to do." Like so So, men do this thing, it's really men do this thing, it's really men do this thing, it's really interesting. We do emotional regulation interesting. We do emotional regulation interesting. We do emotional regulation through our environment. So, if my through our environment. So, if my through our environment. So, if my environment makes me feel a certain way, environment makes me feel a certain way, environment makes me feel a certain way, if my mom, dad, brother, sister, boss if my mom, dad, brother, sister, boss if my mom, dad, brother, sister, boss make is upset with me and makes me feel make is upset with me and makes me feel make is upset with me and makes me feel bad, if I make them happy, they will no bad, if I make them happy, they will no bad, if I make them happy, they will no longer be upset with me. And if they're longer be upset with me. And if they're longer be upset with me. And if they're no longer upset with me, I will be no longer upset with me, I will be no longer upset with me, I will be content. We shape our internal emotional We shape our internal emotional We shape our internal emotional environment through our external environment through our external environment through our external environment. And the scariest place I environment. And the scariest place I environment. And the scariest place I see this is when men I work with, see this is when men I work with, see this is when men I work with, and it's not that women this doesn't and it's not that women this doesn't and it's not that women this doesn't happen to women as well. This is more of happen to women as well. This is more of happen to women as well. This is more of the way we're socialized, and there's an the way we're socialized, and there's an the way we're socialized, and there's an effect of testosterone and estrogen here effect of testosterone and estrogen here effect of testosterone and estrogen here as well. as well. as well. Um there's a biological element to this. Um there's a biological element to this. Um there's a biological element to this. But then they fall into this trap But then they fall into this trap But then they fall into this trap of like their emotions are of like their emotions are of like their emotions are determined by the environment. determined by the environment. determined by the environment. &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, men are just the way that &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, men are just the way that &gt;&gt; Mhm. So, men are just the way that they solve their internal emotional they solve their internal emotional they solve their internal emotional problems is by interacting with their problems is by interacting with their problems is by interacting with their environment. That's just very common. environment. That's just very common. environment. That's just very common. So, it doesn't mean that we shouldn't So, it doesn't mean that we shouldn't So, it doesn't mean that we shouldn't utilize the outside space. utilize the outside space. utilize the outside space. Right? So, I'm not suggesting I mean, if Right? So, I'm not suggesting I mean, if Right? So, I'm not suggesting I mean, if you really want to be if you're pursuing you really want to be if you're pursuing you really want to be if you're pursuing enlightenment, then don't get aquaria. enlightenment, then don't get aquaria. enlightenment, then don't get aquaria. But like, most of us aren't doing that. But like, most of us aren't doing that. But like, most of us aren't doing that. So, I think we should utilize shape our So, I think we should utilize shape our So, I think we should utilize shape our external environment. There's tons of external environment. There's tons of external environment. There's tons of evidence that changing your environment evidence that changing your environment evidence that changing your environment is critical from recovering from is critical from recovering from is critical from recovering from addiction, right? If you're still If addiction, right? If you're still If addiction, right? If you're still If you're still hanging out at a bar, it's you're still hanging out at a bar, it's you're still hanging out at a bar, it's going to be really hard to be sober. going to be really hard to be sober. going to be really hard to be sober. So, we want to utilize those things, but So, we want to utilize those things, but So, we want to utilize those things, but we don't want to become dependent on we don't want to become dependent on we don't want to become dependent on them. So, shape your environment for your So, shape your environment for your So, shape your environment for your benefit, but also benefit, but also benefit, but also be stable enough internally to where you be stable enough internally to where you be stable enough internally to where you don't need your aquaria to feel stable, don't need your aquaria to feel stable, don't need your aquaria to feel stable, which I'm I doubt you need Yeah. which I'm I doubt you need Yeah. which I'm I doubt you need Yeah. &gt;&gt; I raised that example. I see exactly &gt;&gt; I raised that example. I see exactly &gt;&gt; I raised that example. I see exactly what you're saying, and no, I use that what you're saying, and no, I use that what you're saying, and no, I use that example because it's like the ability to example because it's like the ability to example because it's like the ability to get in touch with a piece of oneself get in touch with a piece of oneself get in touch with a piece of oneself that feels very true, very um wholesome, that feels very true, very um wholesome, that feels very true, very um wholesome, and um and not and um and not and um and not for lack of a better word, contaminated for lack of a better word, contaminated for lack of a better word, contaminated by anything external. Yeah. Feels good, by anything external. Yeah. Feels good, by anything external. Yeah. Feels good, and I think it's the energy that one and I think it's the energy that one and I think it's the energy that one takes away from that I take takes away from that I take takes away from that I take away from that excites me. Yeah, so away from that excites me. Yeah, so away from that excites me. Yeah, so I think it's a great point, so I think it's a great point, so I think it's a great point, right? So, I think we sometimes forget. right? So, I think we sometimes forget. right? So, I think we sometimes forget. So, I was giving a talk for executives So, I was giving a talk for executives So, I was giving a talk for executives about work-life balance, and I was like, about work-life balance, and I was like, about work-life balance, and I was like, "There's no such thing." "There's no such thing." "There's no such thing." So, I think we So, I think we So, I think we try to work is over here, and balance we try to work is over here, and balance we try to work is over here, and balance like, you know, home is over Sorry, like, you know, home is over Sorry, like, you know, home is over Sorry, yeah, life is over here. That's not how yeah, life is over here. That's not how yeah, life is over here. That's not how it works. You as a human being carry it works. You as a human being carry it works. You as a human being carry yourself between both situations. yourself between both situations. yourself between both situations. When things are bad at work is when When things are bad at work is when When things are bad at work is when people have affairs. people have affairs. people have affairs. If things are bad at home, you're not If things are bad at home, you're not If things are bad at home, you're not going to be at your best at work. going to be at your best at work. going to be at your best at work. So, I think you're So, I think you're So, I think you're really tunneling down into I think the really tunneling down into I think the really tunneling down into I think the most important part of it, which is that most important part of it, which is that most important part of it, which is that look at how you get shaped, and look at look at how you get shaped, and look at look at how you get shaped, and look at the person that you carry the person that you carry the person that you carry into your next thing. into your next thing. into your next thing. There's a whole science behind that, uh There's a whole science behind that, uh There's a whole science behind that, uh which I think we probably don't have which I think we probably don't have which I think we probably don't have time for, but like this idea of time for, but like this idea of time for, but like this idea of samskaras, which is like almost like samskaras, which is like almost like samskaras, which is like almost like learning. So, if you sort of look at learning. So, if you sort of look at learning. So, if you sort of look at every experience that you have, you every experience that you have, you every experience that you have, you learn something, and you carry yourself learn something, and you carry yourself learn something, and you carry yourself forward, right? Into the next forward, right? Into the next forward, right? Into the next experience, into the next experience. experience, into the next experience. experience, into the next experience. That's what we call learning. Well, That's what we call learning. Well, That's what we call learning. Well, let's talk about samskaras, because um let's talk about samskaras, because um let's talk about samskaras, because um years ago, 2017, I was exposed to Yoga years ago, 2017, I was exposed to Yoga years ago, 2017, I was exposed to Yoga Nidra. Okay. The guy that taught me Nidra. Okay. The guy that taught me Nidra. Okay. The guy that taught me Nidra said, "The whole purpose of Nidra said, "The whole purpose of Nidra said, "The whole purpose of Nidra is yes, to learn how to relax the body is yes, to learn how to relax the body is yes, to learn how to relax the body with an active mind, etc. to make up with an active mind, etc. to make up with an active mind, etc. to make up sleep that perhaps you didn't get the sleep that perhaps you didn't get the sleep that perhaps you didn't get the night before, become a better sleeper, night before, become a better sleeper, night before, become a better sleeper, all that stuff." But he said, "The all that stuff." But he said, "The all that stuff." But he said, "The purpose is to burn the samskaras down to purpose is to burn the samskaras down to purpose is to burn the samskaras down to the roots. You're supposed to um, these the roots. You're supposed to um, these the roots. You're supposed to um, these are like weeds that come up in your life are like weeds that come up in your life are like weeds that come up in your life and you're supposed to burn them down and you're supposed to burn them down and you're supposed to burn them down and Nidra is one way that you and Nidra is one way that you and Nidra is one way that you rid yourself of these things." Is you rid yourself of these things." Is you rid yourself of these things." Is he totally off base? No, so we have he totally off base? No, so we have he totally off base? No, so we have to be careful because you love aquaria to be careful because you love aquaria to be careful because you love aquaria and you love frogs. Now we're getting to and you love frogs. Now we're getting to and you love frogs. Now we're getting to what I want. Great. Okay. Great. I what I want. Great. Okay. Great. I what I want. Great. Okay. Great. I prefer that. prefer that. prefer that. &gt;&gt; Let's understand what Yoga Nidra is and &gt;&gt; Let's understand what Yoga Nidra is and &gt;&gt; Let's understand what Yoga Nidra is and what a samskara is. So, one of the what a samskara is. So, one of the what a samskara is. So, one of the biggest challenges that I have as a biggest challenges that I have as a biggest challenges that I have as a psychiatrist, my job is not in teaching psychiatrist, my job is not in teaching psychiatrist, my job is not in teaching people things. It is in helping them people things. It is in helping them people things. It is in helping them unlearn. So, if you look at what trauma is, if So, if you look at what trauma is, if So, if you look at what trauma is, if you look at ambition, if you look at you look at ambition, if you look at you look at ambition, if you look at ego, you know, you kind of said, "You try you know, you kind of said, "You try you know, you kind of said, "You try to connect to this childlike energy." I to connect to this childlike energy." I to connect to this childlike energy." I forget if it was like Leonardo or forget if it was like Leonardo or forget if it was like Leonardo or Michelangelo or someone who was like, Michelangelo or someone who was like, Michelangelo or someone who was like, "You know, it took me my whole life to "You know, it took me my whole life to "You know, it took me my whole life to learn how to paint like a child." learn how to paint like a child." learn how to paint like a child." So, if you look at literally what So, if you look at literally what So, if you look at literally what happens with the human psychology is we happens with the human psychology is we happens with the human psychology is we accrue these micro traumas as we go accrue these micro traumas as we go accrue these micro traumas as we go through life. We accrue associations. through life. We accrue associations. through life. We accrue associations. I had a patient who was absolutely I had a patient who was absolutely I had a patient who was absolutely traumatized. So, traumatized. So, traumatized. So, was dating someone, engaged to a dude, was dating someone, engaged to a dude, was dating someone, engaged to a dude, okay? Discovered that her fiance had been Discovered that her fiance had been Discovered that her fiance had been lying. So, he was in med school, failed out. So, he was in med school, failed out. So, he was in med school, failed out. Uh, for 2 years he pretended to go to Uh, for 2 years he pretended to go to Uh, for 2 years he pretended to go to class every day. class every day. class every day. And then when he graduated, he got And then when he graduated, he got And then when he graduated, he got a job. But he didn't really graduate. a job. But he didn't really graduate. a job. But he didn't really graduate. &gt;&gt; He didn't really graduate. Here's the &gt;&gt; He didn't really graduate. Here's the &gt;&gt; He didn't really graduate. Here's the scary thing. So, he would leave scary thing. So, he would leave scary thing. So, he would leave in the morning, drive to his parents' in the morning, drive to his parents' in the morning, drive to his parents' house, spend the day there. Parents house, spend the day there. Parents house, spend the day there. Parents would deposit money in their account. would deposit money in their account. would deposit money in their account. And so, for years, like then so, one day And so, for years, like then so, one day And so, for years, like then so, one day I think I think what happened is she I think I think what happened is she I think I think what happened is she went to his parents' house and she saw went to his parents' house and she saw went to his parents' house and she saw him there cuz she like, you know, went him there cuz she like, you know, went him there cuz she like, you know, went &gt;&gt; in on the Yeah, they were in on the lie. &gt;&gt; in on the Yeah, they were in on the lie. &gt;&gt; in on the Yeah, they were in on the lie. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Right? So they were in Yeah, yeah, yeah. Right? So they were in Yeah, yeah, yeah. Right? So they were in on the lie. And so she is just like on the lie. And so she is just like on the lie. And so she is just like like, "What are you doing here?" And like, "What are you doing here?" And like, "What are you doing here?" And then she discovers not only him, then she discovers not only him, then she discovers not only him, but her parents have been depositing but her parents have been depositing but her parents have been depositing money into their account every month. money into their account every month. money into their account every month. And so she discovers this betrayal. I'm And so she discovers this betrayal. I'm And so she discovers this betrayal. I'm shocked. It's insane. It's absolutely shocked. It's insane. It's absolutely shocked. It's insane. It's absolutely insane. The the lengths that people insane. The the lengths that people insane. The the lengths that people will go to deceive you. Oh, will go to deceive you. Oh, will go to deceive you. Oh, believe me. I've experienced somebody believe me. I've experienced somebody believe me. I've experienced somebody creating a world that was a complete creating a world that was a complete creating a world that was a complete fabrication. And eventually it all came fabrication. And eventually it all came fabrication. And eventually it all came tumbling down for them. But I remember tumbling down for them. But I remember tumbling down for them. But I remember being like, being like, being like, "Oh my "Oh my "Oh my god." &gt;&gt; Yeah, right? So when you're about to &gt;&gt; Yeah, right? So when you're about to &gt;&gt; Yeah, right? So when you're about to marry this person, marry this person, marry this person, it leaves scars. it leaves scars. it leaves scars. So then what happens is she goes into So then what happens is she goes into So then what happens is she goes into her next relationship and she has an her next relationship and she has an her next relationship and she has an immense amount of distrust. Is paranoid immense amount of distrust. Is paranoid immense amount of distrust. Is paranoid about her next partner. Next partner about her next partner. Next partner about her next partner. Next partner didn't do didn't do didn't do And this guy is getting like And this guy is getting like And this guy is getting like there's so much paranoia, right? there's so much paranoia, right? there's so much paranoia, right? So if you look at life, life is a series So if you look at life, life is a series So if you look at life, life is a series of like bad stuff that happens to us and of like bad stuff that happens to us and of like bad stuff that happens to us and then we adapt. then we adapt. then we adapt. But the way that the human mind adapts But the way that the human mind adapts But the way that the human mind adapts is the same way that the human body is the same way that the human body is the same way that the human body adapts. Which is if something is in if adapts. Which is if something is in if adapts. Which is if something is in if we get really damaged, we get a callus. we get really damaged, we get a callus. we get really damaged, we get a callus. We get scar tissue. Scar tissue is not We get scar tissue. Scar tissue is not We get scar tissue. Scar tissue is not functional. It's protective, but it's functional. It's protective, but it's functional. It's protective, but it's not functional. So most of our not functional. So most of our not functional. So most of our adaptations become maladaptations later adaptations become maladaptations later adaptations become maladaptations later on. Okay? So this is what a samskara is. So it's So this is what a samskara is. So it's So this is what a samskara is. So it's like this emotional energy that lingers like this emotional energy that lingers like this emotional energy that lingers with you and shapes the way that you see with you and shapes the way that you see with you and shapes the way that you see the world. the world. the world. So it's really fascinating because we So it's really fascinating because we So it's really fascinating because we have all this like trauma processing and have all this like trauma processing and have all this like trauma processing and the yogis were talking about it for the yogis were talking about it for the yogis were talking about it for thousands of years as samskaras. And now thousands of years as samskaras. And now thousands of years as samskaras. And now you were talking about, you know, this you were talking about, you know, this you were talking about, you know, this thing down there that needs to be thing down there that needs to be thing down there that needs to be burned. So let's understand that for a burned. So let's understand that for a burned. So let's understand that for a second. If you look at your mind, If you look at your mind, If you look at your mind, stuff pops up, right? stuff pops up, right? stuff pops up, right? Have you ever wondered why certain Have you ever wondered why certain Have you ever wondered why certain things pop up? No. Right? Have you ever things pop up? No. Right? Have you ever things pop up? No. Right? Have you ever thought like, why aren't you interested thought like, why aren't you interested thought like, why aren't you interested in the scent of a rose? the scent of a rose? the scent of a rose? Like, a certain like it's so weird. Like Like, a certain like it's so weird. Like Like, a certain like it's so weird. Like our mind just generates thoughts. our mind just generates thoughts. our mind just generates thoughts. And everyone is trying to learn And everyone is trying to learn And everyone is trying to learn discipline and willpower. I think it's discipline and willpower. I think it's discipline and willpower. I think it's terrible. Willpower is so bad. Willpower is so bad. Willpower is so bad. Because why not just shape yourself to Because why not just shape yourself to Because why not just shape yourself to have the right desires? Then you don't have the right desires? Then you don't have the right desires? Then you don't need willpower. need willpower. need willpower. This is what the process of yoga is This is what the process of yoga is This is what the process of yoga is really about. This is what samskara really about. This is what samskara really about. This is what samskara generation is about. Did you learn a generation is about. Did you learn a generation is about. Did you learn a sankalpa when you did yoga nidra? Well, sankalpa when you did yoga nidra? Well, sankalpa when you did yoga nidra? Well, they talk about it. I confess that they talk about it. I confess that they talk about it. I confess that um I maintained a very regular yoga nidra I maintained a very regular yoga nidra I maintained a very regular yoga nidra practice, but I've not explored the practice, but I've not explored the practice, but I've not explored the these aspects of it. these aspects of it. these aspects of it. &gt;&gt; I'll explain to you the mechanism of a &gt;&gt; I'll explain to you the mechanism of a &gt;&gt; I'll explain to you the mechanism of a sankalpa and like literally it's sankalpa and like literally it's sankalpa and like literally it's wild. This is reprogramming your wild. This is reprogramming your wild. This is reprogramming your subconscious mind so that the things subconscious mind so that the things subconscious mind so that the things that your subconscious mind puts into that your subconscious mind puts into that your subconscious mind puts into your conscious mind you can control. your conscious mind you can control. your conscious mind you can control. Okay? So, in the case of trauma, all Okay? So, in the case of trauma, all Okay? So, in the case of trauma, all kinds of weird stuff gets put into our kinds of weird stuff gets put into our kinds of weird stuff gets put into our subconscious mind. Like, I can't trust subconscious mind. Like, I can't trust subconscious mind. Like, I can't trust people. Then what happens is that floats people. Then what happens is that floats people. Then what happens is that floats to the surface. In my patient's case, to the surface. In my patient's case, to the surface. In my patient's case, every time her second fiance, every time her second fiance, every time her second fiance, she doesn't know where he is, she doesn't know where he is, she doesn't know where he is, she's like, maybe he's scamming me, she's like, maybe he's scamming me, she's like, maybe he's scamming me, right? Like that's what she thinks. So, right? Like that's what she thinks. So, right? Like that's what she thinks. So, I don't know if that makes sense. That's I don't know if that makes sense. That's I don't know if that makes sense. That's a thought in her conscious, which is a thought in her conscious, which is a thought in her conscious, which is being born out of something in her being born out of something in her being born out of something in her unconscious. We in neuroscience call unconscious. We in neuroscience call unconscious. We in neuroscience call this learning, right? So, we're learning this learning, right? So, we're learning this learning, right? So, we're learning certain things. certain things. certain things. So, in psychotherapy we try to get rid of in psychotherapy we try to get rid of in psychotherapy we try to get rid of that bad stuff. But let's understand how that bad stuff. But let's understand how that bad stuff. But let's understand how stuff goes in. Because if we can stuff goes in. Because if we can stuff goes in. Because if we can understand how the mind is programmed, understand how the mind is programmed, understand how the mind is programmed, and this is it's so simple, so and this is it's so simple, so and this is it's so simple, so neuroscientific, okay? Or maybe you can neuroscientific, okay? Or maybe you can neuroscientific, okay? Or maybe you can tell me it's not neuroscientific, but tell me it's not neuroscientific, but tell me it's not neuroscientific, but I'm pretty sure it is. I'm pretty sure it is. I'm pretty sure it is. Okay. The first thing is the one-pointedness The first thing is the one-pointedness The first thing is the one-pointedness of the mind of the mind of the mind allows things to sink in. So, if I'm allows things to sink in. So, if I'm allows things to sink in. So, if I'm trying to study optic nerve anatomy trying to study optic nerve anatomy trying to study optic nerve anatomy and I'm in a burning building with and I'm in a burning building with and I'm in a burning building with people yelling at me, I can have my eyes people yelling at me, I can have my eyes people yelling at me, I can have my eyes look at the paper, but I'm not going to look at the paper, but I'm not going to look at the paper, but I'm not going to learn anything. learn anything. learn anything. This is the really crazy thing. This is the really crazy thing. This is the really crazy thing. Is a lot of people study repetitively, Is a lot of people study repetitively, Is a lot of people study repetitively, right? So, I read the paper again and right? So, I read the paper again and right? So, I read the paper again and again and again and again, but it's not again and again and again, but it's not again and again and again, but it's not like each time I read the paper, I get like each time I read the paper, I get like each time I read the paper, I get 10% of the knowledge. If you really pay 10% of the knowledge. If you really pay 10% of the knowledge. If you really pay attention to your mind, when you are attention to your mind, when you are attention to your mind, when you are focused, when your mind is one-pointed, focused, when your mind is one-pointed, focused, when your mind is one-pointed, you just need to read it once. What you just need to read it once. What you just need to read it once. What we're basically doing is we're rolling we're basically doing is we're rolling we're basically doing is we're rolling the dice. Am I focused this time I read the dice. Am I focused this time I read the dice. Am I focused this time I read the page? Am I focused this time I read the page? Am I focused this time I read the page? Am I focused this time I read the page? Am I focused this time I read the page? Am I focused this time I read the page? Am I focused this time I read the page? the page? the page? This also I we have studies on things This also I we have studies on things This also I we have studies on things like writing. So, when you write, it like writing. So, when you write, it like writing. So, when you write, it improves your capacity to focus. So, improves your capacity to focus. So, improves your capacity to focus. So, that's when things enter your memory a that's when things enter your memory a that's when things enter your memory a little bit more. little bit more. little bit more. So, one-pointedness of the mind So, one-pointedness of the mind So, one-pointedness of the mind is what leads to things being learned. is what leads to things being learned. is what leads to things being learned. Now, this is how trauma works. So, when Now, this is how trauma works. So, when Now, this is how trauma works. So, when we when you are intensely emotional, it we when you are intensely emotional, it we when you are intensely emotional, it actually focuses your mind. Yeah, and as actually focuses your mind. Yeah, and as actually focuses your mind. Yeah, and as you mentioned before, and I'm so glad you mentioned before, and I'm so glad you mentioned before, and I'm so glad you did, as a visual system you did, as a visual system you did, as a visual system neuroscientist, when adrenaline levels neuroscientist, when adrenaline levels neuroscientist, when adrenaline levels are high, are high, are high, the visual field narrows, our depth the visual field narrows, our depth the visual field narrows, our depth perception change everything becomes a perception change everything becomes a perception change everything becomes a microscope view of the thing in front of microscope view of the thing in front of microscope view of the thing in front of you. &gt;&gt; Absolutely, right? And and when &gt;&gt; Absolutely, right? And and when &gt;&gt; Absolutely, right? And and when we're having an argument because you we're having an argument because you we're having an argument because you didn't get me what I asked for didn't get me what I asked for didn't get me what I asked for Valentine's Day, and then I tell you, Valentine's Day, and then I tell you, Valentine's Day, and then I tell you, "Andrew, you've never gotten me "Andrew, you've never gotten me "Andrew, you've never gotten me what I want for Valentine's Day." That what I want for Valentine's Day." That what I want for Valentine's Day." That laser focus, that one statement that I laser focus, that one statement that I laser focus, that one statement that I make, even though I tell told you right make, even though I tell told you right make, even though I tell told you right before that I love you, and right after before that I love you, and right after before that I love you, and right after I'm sorry, that thing sinks in. It's I'm sorry, that thing sinks in. It's I'm sorry, that thing sinks in. It's that poison dart, right? It sinks in and that poison dart, right? It sinks in and that poison dart, right? It sinks in and that's what you remember. Because you that's what you remember. Because you that's what you remember. Because you are focused on it. are focused on it. are focused on it. So, when we are emotional, we are So, when we are emotional, we are So, when we are emotional, we are focused. So, the way that I want you to focused. So, the way that I want you to focused. So, the way that I want you to think about your mind is like a pool of think about your mind is like a pool of think about your mind is like a pool of water that has a lot of waves. And when water that has a lot of waves. And when water that has a lot of waves. And when the water is still, something can sink the water is still, something can sink the water is still, something can sink down to the bottom. But when the down to the bottom. But when the down to the bottom. But when the water is really active, nothing sinks water is really active, nothing sinks water is really active, nothing sinks in. So now we get to Yoga Nidra. So now we get to Yoga Nidra. So now we get to Yoga Nidra. So in Yoga Nidra, what we are doing is So in Yoga Nidra, what we are doing is So in Yoga Nidra, what we are doing is attaining a state of consciousness attaining a state of consciousness attaining a state of consciousness that is that is that is what's called in the yogic what's called in the yogic what's called in the yogic scientific literature, a hypno-yogic scientific literature, a hypno-yogic scientific literature, a hypno-yogic state. So it's not hypnosis, So it's not hypnosis, So it's not hypnosis, but it's not pure active consciousness. but it's not pure active consciousness. but it's not pure active consciousness. It is a very dormant awakeness, if that It is a very dormant awakeness, if that It is a very dormant awakeness, if that kind of makes sense. Right? You're in kind of makes sense. Right? You're in kind of makes sense. Right? You're in this trance. this trance. this trance. And so in that trance, And so in that trance, And so in that trance, you you're in the edit mode for your you you're in the edit mode for your you you're in the edit mode for your unconscious mind. So this is where a unconscious mind. So this is where a unconscious mind. So this is where a sankalpa comes in. So a sankalpa is a sankalpa comes in. So a sankalpa is a sankalpa comes in. So a sankalpa is a resolve that you put in there. resolve that you put in there. resolve that you put in there. And then I don't know how to explain And then I don't know how to explain And then I don't know how to explain this except in this way. So when I work this except in this way. So when I work this except in this way. So when I work with a patient who has anxiety, with a patient who has anxiety, with a patient who has anxiety, and they have this subconscious and they have this subconscious and they have this subconscious programming, we when we have a programming, we when we have a programming, we when we have a therapeutic breakthrough, which there's therapeutic breakthrough, which there's therapeutic breakthrough, which there's tons of evidence for, right? So even tons of evidence for, right? So even tons of evidence for, right? So even Freud noticed this that you have to Freud noticed this that you have to Freud noticed this that you have to activate the emotion in psychotherapy. activate the emotion in psychotherapy. activate the emotion in psychotherapy. Like my patient that I talked about a Like my patient that I talked about a Like my patient that I talked about a while ago who was like comes and he while ago who was like comes and he while ago who was like comes and he talks about how he's depressed, talks about how he's depressed, talks about how he's depressed, didn't do for him. didn't do for him. didn't do for him. What we have to talk about is why he's What we have to talk about is why he's What we have to talk about is why he's angry. How he's been screwed in life, all the How he's been screwed in life, all the How he's been screwed in life, all the people that he's ang- So then once people that he's ang- So then once people that he's ang- So then once that emotional energy activates, we that emotional energy activates, we that emotional energy activates, we become one-pointed, we activate that become one-pointed, we activate that become one-pointed, we activate that energy in the in the unconscious, and energy in the in the unconscious, and energy in the in the unconscious, and then if we vent it out, it disappears. then if we vent it out, it disappears. then if we vent it out, it disappears. That's how you burn away the things by That's how you burn away the things by That's how you burn away the things by letting them out. And in Nidra, um letting them out. And in Nidra, um letting them out. And in Nidra, um is there an opportunity for emotion? is there an opportunity for emotion? is there an opportunity for emotion? Um you're very it's a deeply relaxed but Um you're very it's a deeply relaxed but Um you're very it's a deeply relaxed but mind active state, right? mind active state, right? mind active state, right? &gt;&gt; no yeah. So you don't want emotion in &gt;&gt; no yeah. So you don't want emotion in &gt;&gt; no yeah. So you don't want emotion in Nidra. You are actually so emotion Nidra. You are actually so emotion Nidra. You are actually so emotion collapses a scattered mind to one point. collapses a scattered mind to one point. collapses a scattered mind to one point. But there is a state of consciousness But there is a state of consciousness But there is a state of consciousness even beyond one-pointedness that would even beyond one-pointedness that would even beyond one-pointedness that would we use in studying, where if you talk we use in studying, where if you talk we use in studying, where if you talk to people who like engage in not even to people who like engage in not even to people who like engage in not even the flow state, but beyond the flow the flow state, but beyond the flow the flow state, but beyond the flow state. So there are people who like the best So there are people who like the best So there are people who like the best term I know it's going to sound hokey, term I know it's going to sound hokey, term I know it's going to sound hokey, but people who like channel divinity. but people who like channel divinity. but people who like channel divinity. That I think divine is the best That I think divine is the best That I think divine is the best scientific term. scientific term. scientific term. So, there is there are some human beings So, there is there are some human beings So, there is there are some human beings and everyone has experienced this where and everyone has experienced this where and everyone has experienced this where like you're not you. You're like you're not you. You're like you're not you. You're like something else. Tell me more. I think something else. Tell me more. I think something else. Tell me more. I think the Greeks thought of genius is not a the Greeks thought of genius is not a the Greeks thought of genius is not a person is like something you channel. person is like something you channel. person is like something you channel. Something coming through somebody. Something coming through somebody. Something coming through somebody. &gt;&gt; Some some something coming through. &gt;&gt; Some some something coming through. &gt;&gt; Some some something coming through. &gt;&gt; I think uh most readily in musicians. &gt;&gt; I think uh most readily in musicians. &gt;&gt; I think uh most readily in musicians. Musicians, athletes. Mhm. Right? So, Musicians, athletes. Mhm. Right? So, Musicians, athletes. Mhm. Right? So, there are sometimes like I work with there are sometimes like I work with there are sometimes like I work with like e-sports athletes and some of them like e-sports athletes and some of them like e-sports athletes and some of them know that they're going to win. They see know that they're going to win. They see know that they're going to win. They see the game that they're going to play in the game that they're going to play in the game that they're going to play in their they know exactly what's their they know exactly what's their they know exactly what's going to happen. And the crazy thing going to happen. And the crazy thing going to happen. And the crazy thing it's not a calculation. It's an it's not a calculation. It's an it's not a calculation. It's an intuition. I'm sure that on some level intuition. I'm sure that on some level intuition. I'm sure that on some level they're calculating. So, we call this they're calculating. So, we call this they're calculating. So, we call this stuff divine. I'm not saying it's stuff divine. I'm not saying it's stuff divine. I'm not saying it's divine. I'm not saying it comes from divine. I'm not saying it comes from divine. I'm not saying it comes from God. I'm saying that the subjective God. I'm saying that the subjective God. I'm saying that the subjective experience is qualitatively fundamental experience is qualitatively fundamental experience is qualitatively fundamental different from like a regular logical different from like a regular logical different from like a regular logical experience. So, this is a state of mind experience. So, this is a state of mind experience. So, this is a state of mind that is even beyond emotion. It's in the that is even beyond emotion. It's in the that is even beyond emotion. It's in the edit mode. In scattered mind emotion edit mode. In scattered mind emotion edit mode. In scattered mind emotion brings us down to some amount of focus, brings us down to some amount of focus, brings us down to some amount of focus, but then there's even a level of focus but then there's even a level of focus but then there's even a level of focus that's deeper. And that's where the that's deeper. And that's where the that's deeper. And that's where the rewriting comes in. rewriting comes in. rewriting comes in. &gt;&gt; That's where the rewriting comes in. &gt;&gt; That's where the rewriting comes in. &gt;&gt; That's where the rewriting comes in. That that's when that and then when you That that's when that and then when you That that's when that and then when you implant something there, that's what a implant something there, that's what a implant something there, that's what a sankalpa is. So, when you do yoga nidra sankalpa is. So, when you do yoga nidra sankalpa is. So, when you do yoga nidra the physiological elements of this is the physiological elements of this is the physiological elements of this is what's like what's like what's like not bad, but is a necessary step with not bad, but is a necessary step with not bad, but is a necessary step with where we are with science. where we are with science. where we are with science. All the weird mystical stuff I think is All the weird mystical stuff I think is All the weird mystical stuff I think is real. But we have to start with the basic science, we have to start with the basic science, we have to start with the basic science, right? So, the way that science works is right? So, the way that science works is right? So, the way that science works is like we start with okay, like let's look like we start with okay, like let's look like we start with okay, like let's look at cortisol production. at cortisol production. at cortisol production. And then let's look at what happens next And then let's look at what happens next And then let's look at what happens next and let's look at what happens next and let's look at what happens next and let's look at what happens next and let's look at what happens next. So, let's look at what happens next. So, let's look at what happens next. So, yoga nidra, whether you're talking about yoga nidra, whether you're talking about yoga nidra, whether you're talking about cardiac coherence breathing, so there's cardiac coherence breathing, so there's cardiac coherence breathing, so there's the first stage of what we call Nadi the first stage of what we call Nadi the first stage of what we call Nadi Shodhana Pranayama, which is alternate Shodhana Pranayama, which is alternate Shodhana Pranayama, which is alternate nostril breathing. But, then there's a nostril breathing. But, then there's a nostril breathing. But, then there's a text called um text called um text called um Vashishtha Samhita, which talks about a Vashishtha Samhita, which talks about a Vashishtha Samhita, which talks about a particular kind of cardiac coherence particular kind of cardiac coherence particular kind of cardiac coherence breathing with a uh ratio of 1:4:8. breathing with a uh ratio of 1:4:8. breathing with a uh ratio of 1:4:8. So, you breathe in for 8 seconds. So, you breathe in for 8 seconds. So, you breathe in for 8 seconds. Actually, you breathe in for 16 seconds. Actually, you breathe in for 16 seconds. Actually, you breathe in for 16 seconds. You hold for 64 seconds, and then you You hold for 64 seconds, and then you You hold for 64 seconds, and then you exhale for 32 seconds. exhale for 32 seconds. exhale for 32 seconds. If you do the Vashishtha Samhita version If you do the Vashishtha Samhita version If you do the Vashishtha Samhita version of cardiac coherence breathing, the of cardiac coherence breathing, the of cardiac coherence breathing, the subjective experience is completely subjective experience is completely subjective experience is completely different. You will feel prana. You will feel chi. You will feel prana. You will feel chi. You will feel prana. You will feel chi. With that pattern of breathing? With that pattern of breathing? With that pattern of breathing? &gt;&gt; that pattern of breathing. Those are &gt;&gt; that pattern of breathing. Those are &gt;&gt; that pattern of breathing. Those are long inhales, holds, and exhales. long inhales, holds, and exhales. long inhales, holds, and exhales. &gt;&gt; yeah. So, it's hard to get to. But, &gt;&gt; yeah. So, it's hard to get to. But, &gt;&gt; yeah. So, it's hard to get to. But, like literally the subjective experience like literally the subjective experience like literally the subjective experience that you will have is like a sense of that you will have is like a sense of that you will have is like a sense of vibration on like at the periphery of your body. on like at the periphery of your body. on like at the periphery of your body. That's what it feels like to me. That's what it feels like to me. That's what it feels like to me. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep to ensure you get a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall And that's because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for nearly 5 years now, and it has cover for nearly 5 years now, and it has cover for nearly 5 years now, and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight quality of my sleep. The latest Eight Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what Sleep model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping on, and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on, and I absolutely I'm now sleeping on, and I absolutely love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible love it. It has so many incredible features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called autopilot, which is an AI feature called autopilot, which is an AI feature called autopilot, which is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns engine that learns your sleep patterns and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your and then adjusts the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your sleep stages. It'll even elevate your head if you're snoring, and it makes head if you're snoring, and it makes head if you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If other shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries Eight Sleep ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save up to $350. to save up to $350. to save up to $350. If I may, just a brief editorial about If I may, just a brief editorial about If I may, just a brief editorial about why I also why I also why I also believe that science needs to go down believe that science needs to go down believe that science needs to go down through the physiological first. My lab through the physiological first. My lab through the physiological first. My lab has done some clinical studies on has done some clinical studies on has done some clinical studies on breathwork. We called it respiration breathwork. We called it respiration breathwork. We called it respiration physiology for a reason. It's important physiology for a reason. It's important physiology for a reason. It's important to be able to fund studies and also to be able to fund studies and also to be able to fund studies and also to be able to communicate be able to communicate be able to communicate the that information to colleagues who, the that information to colleagues who, the that information to colleagues who, if they just hear breathwork or if they just hear breathwork or if they just hear breathwork or meditation or that the it's a meditation or that the it's a meditation or that the it's a separator, right? The the field of separator, right? The the field of separator, right? The the field of science can't go into the mystical right science can't go into the mystical right science can't go into the mystical right away. But what's so interesting is away. But what's so interesting is away. But what's so interesting is nowadays there are discussions about uh nowadays there are discussions about uh nowadays there are discussions about uh meditation that are starting to get into meditation that are starting to get into meditation that are starting to get into the deeper layers, but it took 20 years the deeper layers, but it took 20 years the deeper layers, but it took 20 years or more of formal science to do. I'm or more of formal science to do. I'm or more of formal science to do. I'm not arguing with you. I just I think not arguing with you. I just I think not arguing with you. I just I think some people will say, "Why not just cut some people will say, "Why not just cut some people will say, "Why not just cut to the chase?" to the chase?" to the chase?" &gt;&gt; No, no, no. I mean, I You know, &gt;&gt; No, no, no. I mean, I You know, &gt;&gt; No, no, no. I mean, I You know, I completely agree with everything I completely agree with everything I completely agree with everything you're saying. I think there are ways of you're saying. I think there are ways of you're saying. I think there are ways of editing the nervous system that are editing the nervous system that are editing the nervous system that are non-pharmacologic, that are behavioral. non-pharmacologic, that are behavioral. non-pharmacologic, that are behavioral. You're describing some of the You're describing some of the You're describing some of the more ancient ones. I do believe that the more ancient ones. I do believe that the more ancient ones. I do believe that yogis were and are neuroscientists. They yogis were and are neuroscientists. They yogis were and are neuroscientists. They come in through a different avenue. come in through a different avenue. come in through a different avenue. My recollection from Nidra is that um My recollection from Nidra is that um My recollection from Nidra is that um there are some There's an encouragement there are some There's an encouragement there are some There's an encouragement to uh two things that I would love your to uh two things that I would love your to uh two things that I would love your comments on. One is there's an your comments on. One is there's an your comments on. One is there's an instruction in the Nidras that I've done instruction in the Nidras that I've done instruction in the Nidras that I've done to move away from thinking and doing to move away from thinking and doing to move away from thinking and doing to being and feeling. You're trying to being and feeling. You're trying to being and feeling. You're trying to get out of the state of planning, out of get out of the state of planning, out of get out of the state of planning, out of that Is there some shift that's that Is there some shift that's that Is there some shift that's critical? And then the other one is I am critical? And then the other one is I am critical? And then the other one is I am statements. There There's this statements. There There's this statements. There There's this instruction to give uh instruction to give uh instruction to give uh like talk about one's deepest heart's like talk about one's deepest heart's like talk about one's deepest heart's desire as if it's already happened. Is desire as if it's already happened. Is desire as if it's already happened. Is that BS or is that or is that real? that BS or is that or is that real? that BS or is that or is that real? &gt;&gt; but we have to understand mechanisms. &gt;&gt; but we have to understand mechanisms. &gt;&gt; but we have to understand mechanisms. So, let me talk about the science bit So, let me talk about the science bit So, let me talk about the science bit for a minute. I have a far I not for a minute. I have a far I not for a minute. I have a far I not simpler. I'm a clinician. I think simpler. I'm a clinician. I think simpler. I'm a clinician. I think there's a reason we have to start with there's a reason we have to start with there's a reason we have to start with physiology because when a patient comes physiology because when a patient comes physiology because when a patient comes into my office, if I tell them do yoga into my office, if I tell them do yoga into my office, if I tell them do yoga nidra, what is the effect size of the nidra, what is the effect size of the nidra, what is the effect size of the intervention? We need to know that. intervention? We need to know that. intervention? We need to know that. Right? So, here's the problem with Right? So, here's the problem with Right? So, here's the problem with studying meditation and the benefit of studying meditation and the benefit of studying meditation and the benefit of studying with meditation this way. studying with meditation this way. studying with meditation this way. The problem is that we're teaching The problem is that we're teaching The problem is that we're teaching people to swim for 8 weeks. That does people to swim for 8 weeks. That does people to swim for 8 weeks. That does not show us what an Olympic athlete is. not show us what an Olympic athlete is. not show us what an Olympic athlete is. So, our science of meditation is in its So, our science of meditation is in its So, our science of meditation is in its infancy. The reason why this is really infancy. The reason why this is really infancy. The reason why this is really important is because not everybody is a important is because not everybody is a important is because not everybody is a Buddha. So, the reason we have to start with So, the reason we have to start with So, the reason we have to start with physiology is because we need we're physiology is because we need we're physiology is because we need we're doing scientific studies to make we're doing scientific studies to make we're doing scientific studies to make predictions. Why are we making predictions. Why are we making predictions. Why are we making predictions? At least for me, it's to predictions? At least for me, it's to predictions? At least for me, it's to help a human being. So, it I don't care help a human being. So, it I don't care help a human being. So, it I don't care that you know, there's some Yogi who's that you know, there's some Yogi who's that you know, there's some Yogi who's been in the cave in the Himalayas for 60 been in the cave in the Himalayas for 60 been in the cave in the Himalayas for 60 years and attains some weird channeling years and attains some weird channeling years and attains some weird channeling of divinity. What I want to know is like of divinity. What I want to know is like of divinity. What I want to know is like when a human being comes into my office when a human being comes into my office when a human being comes into my office and I tell them to meditate, and I tell them to meditate, and I tell them to meditate, how much can I pull back on their SSRI how much can I pull back on their SSRI how much can I pull back on their SSRI if they've been sticking with the if they've been sticking with the if they've been sticking with the practice? Right? So, you have to start practice? Right? So, you have to start practice? Right? So, you have to start Science is about reliability, not about Science is about reliability, not about Science is about reliability, not about possible That sounds so new age, but possible That sounds so new age, but possible That sounds so new age, but it's about what we can reliably it's about what we can reliably it's about what we can reliably predict. And that's a really important predict. And that's a really important predict. And that's a really important place to start. place to start. place to start. Going back to the nidra thing, Going back to the nidra thing, Going back to the nidra thing, this is the thing to understand. So, if this is the thing to understand. So, if this is the thing to understand. So, if you think about planning, planning is a you think about planning, planning is a you think about planning, planning is a higher order cognitive function higher order cognitive function higher order cognitive function that depends upon other baser cognitive that depends upon other baser cognitive that depends upon other baser cognitive functions. And I'll just give you a functions. And I'll just give you a functions. And I'll just give you a simple example. If I care about parties, simple example. If I care about parties, simple example. If I care about parties, my mind will automatically plan parties. my mind will automatically plan parties. my mind will automatically plan parties. If I care about avoiding other people, I If I care about avoiding other people, I If I care about avoiding other people, I will automatically plan how to avoid will automatically plan how to avoid will automatically plan how to avoid other people. So, the planning that you other people. So, the planning that you other people. So, the planning that you do is whatever, but which things are you do is whatever, but which things are you do is whatever, but which things are you planning? That comes from the deeper planning? That comes from the deeper planning? That comes from the deeper stuff, for lack of a better term. That's stuff, for lack of a better term. That's stuff, for lack of a better term. That's why So, these people, they're not doing why So, these people, they're not doing why So, these people, they're not doing the sankalpa in the most classic the sankalpa in the most classic the sankalpa in the most classic form, but they're getting there. Because form, but they're getting there. Because form, but they're getting there. Because a being statement is the pluripotent a being statement is the pluripotent a being statement is the pluripotent stem cell stem cell stem cell of where you want to go. Okay? So, what of where you want to go. Okay? So, what of where you want to go. Okay? So, what do I mean by that? It's like So, what do I mean by that? It's like So, what do I mean by that? It's like So, like let's be precise. And I'm I like let's be precise. And I'm I like let's be precise. And I'm I know it sounds new age-y, but there's know it sounds new age-y, but there's know it sounds new age-y, but there's like science here, okay? So, let's look like science here, okay? So, let's look like science here, okay? So, let's look about look at something like about look at something like about look at something like self-esteem. So, self-esteem is an assessment of So, self-esteem is an assessment of So, self-esteem is an assessment of yourself. And think about all of the yourself. And think about all of the yourself. And think about all of the ways if I have high self-esteem or low ways if I have high self-esteem or low ways if I have high self-esteem or low self-esteem, that will result in so many self-esteem, that will result in so many self-esteem, that will result in so many different like manifestation different like manifestation different like manifestation not It's the word, right? That will not It's the word, right? That will not It's the word, right? That will manifest in your life in so many ways. manifest in your life in so many ways. manifest in your life in so many ways. How do you respond to feedback? If How do you respond to feedback? If How do you respond to feedback? If someone asks too much of you, can you someone asks too much of you, can you someone asks too much of you, can you set a boundary? And this is the problem. set a boundary? And this is the problem. set a boundary? And this is the problem. The core of the work that I try to do is The core of the work that I try to do is The core of the work that I try to do is I try to help people get to their I try to help people get to their I try to help people get to their fundamentals. Everyone's focused on changing behavior. Everyone's focused on changing behavior. Everyone's focused on changing behavior. Everyone's focused on increasing Everyone's focused on increasing Everyone's focused on increasing willpower to overcome this tendency. willpower to overcome this tendency. willpower to overcome this tendency. And it's like why not just change the And it's like why not just change the And it's like why not just change the tendency? And that sounds so simple, but that's And that sounds so simple, but that's And that sounds so simple, but that's literally what we do in psychotherapy literally what we do in psychotherapy literally what we do in psychotherapy every day when we come in and someone every day when we come in and someone every day when we come in and someone has a narcissistic personality disorder. has a narcissistic personality disorder. has a narcissistic personality disorder. Andrew, this is personality. This is who Andrew, this is personality. This is who Andrew, this is personality. This is who they are. And we can psychotherapize they are. And we can psychotherapize they are. And we can psychotherapize them to be someone else. For their them to be someone else. For their them to be someone else. For their natural thoughts to change, for the way natural thoughts to change, for the way natural thoughts to change, for the way that they see the world to change, for that they see the world to change, for that they see the world to change, for their behaviors to change on its own. It their behaviors to change on its own. It their behaviors to change on its own. It doesn't require Willpower is necessary doesn't require Willpower is necessary doesn't require Willpower is necessary when you are trying to not be when you are trying to not be when you are trying to not be narcissistic. It is not necessary when narcissistic. It is not necessary when narcissistic. It is not necessary when you are no longer narcissistic. you are no longer narcissistic. you are no longer narcissistic. So, we've done it in psychotherapy. We So, we've done it in psychotherapy. We So, we've done it in psychotherapy. We know that if your self-esteem changes, know that if your self-esteem changes, know that if your self-esteem changes, if your sense of being changes, if your sense of being changes, if your sense of being changes, treatment-refractory depression will treatment-refractory depression will treatment-refractory depression will change. Trauma, PTSD will change. Do you have Trauma, PTSD will change. Do you have Trauma, PTSD will change. Do you have your patients do nidra? Some of them. your patients do nidra? Some of them. your patients do nidra? Some of them. So, I also have a whole I mean, I just So, I also have a whole I mean, I just So, I also have a whole I mean, I just started this research and then left started this research and then left started this research and then left academia, but I was trying to develop academia, but I was trying to develop academia, but I was trying to develop evidence-based protocols for particular evidence-based protocols for particular evidence-based protocols for particular diagnoses for certain kinds of diagnoses for certain kinds of diagnoses for certain kinds of meditation practices. Beautiful. Right? meditation practices. Beautiful. Right? meditation practices. Beautiful. Right? So, for narcissism, I would lean into So, for narcissism, I would lean into So, for narcissism, I would lean into shunya practices. For trauma healing and shunya practices. For trauma healing and shunya practices. For trauma healing and specifically the patients who come in specifically the patients who come in specifically the patients who come in who need a fundamental belief change. who need a fundamental belief change. who need a fundamental belief change. If they just didn't believe this thing If they just didn't believe this thing If they just didn't believe this thing about themselves. So, I had one patient about themselves. So, I had one patient about themselves. So, I had one patient who had a lot of trauma. who had a lot of trauma. who had a lot of trauma. And the sun gulpa that she came up with And the sun gulpa that she came up with And the sun gulpa that she came up with or that we came up with together is, I or that we came up with together is, I or that we came up with together is, I deserve to be whole. Not I am whole. deserve to be whole. Not I am whole. deserve to be whole. Not I am whole. And then if you think about a sun gulpa, And then if you think about a sun gulpa, And then if you think about a sun gulpa, that's a compass that you will navigate that's a compass that you will navigate that's a compass that you will navigate life with. So, the main thing is once it life with. So, the main thing is once it life with. So, the main thing is once it gets into her mind, I deserve to be gets into her mind, I deserve to be gets into her mind, I deserve to be whole. If people even her own she had a whole. If people even her own she had a whole. If people even her own she had a lot of self-sabotaging behaviors. And lot of self-sabotaging behaviors. And lot of self-sabotaging behaviors. And it's like, no. I deserve to be whole. it's like, no. I deserve to be whole. it's like, no. I deserve to be whole. Right? That is something that she Right? That is something that she Right? That is something that she And this isn't telling yourself. This is And this isn't telling yourself. This is And this isn't telling yourself. This is the problem. This is I want to be the problem. This is I want to be the problem. This is I want to be precise. I know it sounds weird, but precise. I know it sounds weird, but precise. I know it sounds weird, but telling yourself is like there's a lot telling yourself is like there's a lot telling yourself is like there's a lot of mental activity and you're trying to of mental activity and you're trying to of mental activity and you're trying to say something from the outside. say something from the outside. say something from the outside. Like you can tell yourself, "Hey, Like you can tell yourself, "Hey, Like you can tell yourself, "Hey, Andrew, I'm going to remember this mathematical I'm going to remember this mathematical I'm going to remember this mathematical formula." Doesn't work. formula." Doesn't work. formula." Doesn't work. You can tell yourself all kinds of You can tell yourself all kinds of You can tell yourself all kinds of things, but like telling yourself is things, but like telling yourself is things, but like telling yourself is very surface-level mental activity. very surface-level mental activity. very surface-level mental activity. That's not how change happens. That's not how change happens. That's not how change happens. So, when we're talking about like So, when we're talking about like So, when we're talking about like narrative reconstruction post-trauma, narrative reconstruction post-trauma, narrative reconstruction post-trauma, and this is what's so terrible about and this is what's so terrible about and this is what's so terrible about social media. Everyone's like consuming social media. Everyone's like consuming social media. Everyone's like consuming this like, this like, this like, you know, you know, you know, "Tell yourself every single day that "Tell yourself every single day that "Tell yourself every single day that this is true." That's not how you change this is true." That's not how you change this is true." That's not how you change your beliefs. your beliefs. your beliefs. That's science of how beliefs change That's science of how beliefs change That's science of how beliefs change isn't by telling yourself things over isn't by telling yourself things over isn't by telling yourself things over and over and over again. That's and over and over again. That's and over and over again. That's gaslighting yourself. gaslighting yourself. gaslighting yourself. It's just trying to drown what you It's just trying to drown what you It's just trying to drown what you really believe with like it's like really believe with like it's like really believe with like it's like taking a piece of dog poop and putting taking a piece of dog poop and putting taking a piece of dog poop and putting icing on top. It's not how icing on top. It's not how icing on top. It's not how neuroplasticity works. neuroplasticity works. neuroplasticity works. &gt;&gt; I mean, I can say that with a 100% &gt;&gt; I mean, I can say that with a 100% &gt;&gt; I mean, I can say that with a 100% confidence that my confidence that my confidence that my as a neuroscientist and you know, I as a neuroscientist and you know, I as a neuroscientist and you know, I don't claim any relationship to the work don't claim any relationship to the work don't claim any relationship to the work my but my scientific great-grandparents my but my scientific great-grandparents my but my scientific great-grandparents won the Nobel Prize for neuroplasticity. won the Nobel Prize for neuroplasticity. won the Nobel Prize for neuroplasticity. It is a process that has certain It is a process that has certain It is a process that has certain requirements. They have to happen in a certain order They have to happen in a certain order They have to happen in a certain order and at a certain depth of the nervous and at a certain depth of the nervous and at a certain depth of the nervous system, which is what you're describing. system, which is what you're describing. system, which is what you're describing. And so no amount of repeating a And so no amount of repeating a And so no amount of repeating a phrase, positive or negative, is going to positive or negative, is going to positive or negative, is going to engage neuroplasticity. Yeah. And I wish engage neuroplasticity. Yeah. And I wish engage neuroplasticity. Yeah. And I wish I wish that people knew that because it I wish that people knew that because it I wish that people knew that because it would provide them a filter through a would provide them a filter through a would provide them a filter through a lot of So I think this lot of So I think this lot of So I think this Sankalpa idea and this idea of like, you Sankalpa idea and this idea of like, you Sankalpa idea and this idea of like, you know, focus on being statements because know, focus on being statements because know, focus on being statements because being statements are like more being statements are like more being statements are like more primordial and they will primordial and they will primordial and they will they will result in the mental they will result in the mental they will result in the mental fluctuations of your mind in a different fluctuations of your mind in a different fluctuations of your mind in a different way, right? So they'll automatically way, right? So they'll automatically way, right? So they'll automatically result in a certain kind of desire and a result in a certain kind of desire and a result in a certain kind of desire and a certain kind of planning and a certain kind of planning and a certain kind of planning and a certain kind of inclination. They're your most kind of inclination. They're your most kind of inclination. They're your most natural tendency. natural tendency. natural tendency. And like I'm lazy. And like I'm lazy. And like I'm lazy. Like people don't realize this, but like Like people don't realize this, but like Like people don't realize this, but like I'm lazy. I'm still the degenerate I'm lazy. I'm still the degenerate I'm lazy. I'm still the degenerate gamer, you know, I don't like to work. I gamer, you know, I don't like to work. I gamer, you know, I don't like to work. I work 7 days a week, but it's not work. I work 7 days a week, but it's not work. I work 7 days a week, but it's not work. The only way I can work 7 days a week is The only way I can work 7 days a week is The only way I can work 7 days a week is to shape my experience of the thing. shape my experience of the thing. shape my experience of the thing. And this is [clears throat] what a lot And this is [clears throat] what a lot And this is [clears throat] what a lot of people don't realize. There's a of people don't realize. There's a of people don't realize. There's a fascinating theory that I think is fascinating theory that I think is fascinating theory that I think is somewhat true called the theory of somewhat true called the theory of somewhat true called the theory of constructed emotion. constructed emotion. constructed emotion. So I forget who's the person who's the So I forget who's the person who's the So I forget who's the person who's the pioneer of it, but it's sort of this pioneer of it, but it's sort of this pioneer of it, but it's sort of this idea that like we think that, you know, idea that like we think that, you know, idea that like we think that, you know, when something happens to us, the when something happens to us, the when something happens to us, the emotion is automatic, but we actually emotion is automatic, but we actually emotion is automatic, but we actually construct that emotion. construct that emotion. construct that emotion. We have a hand in how we receive the We have a hand in how we receive the We have a hand in how we receive the world around us. world around us. world around us. Right? So you can people can criticize Right? So you can people can criticize Right? So you can people can criticize you. But you can take it constructively. The But you can take it constructively. The But you can take it constructively. The way that you mentally respond to way that you mentally respond to way that you mentally respond to something is huge. something is huge. something is huge. So when we when we are doing a Sankalpa, So when we when we are doing a Sankalpa, So when we when we are doing a Sankalpa, when we're doing Yoga Nidra, are we when we're doing Yoga Nidra, are we when we're doing Yoga Nidra, are we burning away some scars? Sure. The some burning away some scars? Sure. The some burning away some scars? Sure. The some scars the negative emotional scars the negative emotional scars the negative emotional programming, then the adaptation that we programming, then the adaptation that we programming, then the adaptation that we made. So it'll burn that stuff away, so made. So it'll burn that stuff away, so made. So it'll burn that stuff away, so you will be free of that stuff, but you will be free of that stuff, but you will be free of that stuff, but that's not what I would do practice that's not what I would do practice that's not what I would do practice for. It's really to put a positive thing in It's really to put a positive thing in It's really to put a positive thing in there. And by having a being statement, it may And by having a being statement, it may And by having a being statement, it may somehow counteract. I think this is somehow counteract. I think this is somehow counteract. I think this is where like my science head, I can't be where like my science head, I can't be where like my science head, I can't be precise enough. I sort of know that how precise enough. I sort of know that how precise enough. I sort of know that how a sun cup works. I've used it for a sun cup works. I've used it for a sun cup works. I've used it for myself. I've used it for many patients. myself. I've used it for many patients. myself. I've used it for many patients. It really is about attaining that It really is about attaining that It really is about attaining that neuroplasticity. It's about attaining neuroplasticity. It's about attaining neuroplasticity. It's about attaining that state of mind. And if you don't get that state of mind. And if you don't get that state of mind. And if you don't get there, it doesn't work. Then you're just there, it doesn't work. Then you're just there, it doesn't work. Then you're just repeating things to yourself. repeating things to yourself. repeating things to yourself. Which is why there's such an emphasis on Which is why there's such an emphasis on Which is why there's such an emphasis on the physiology because in order to enter the physiology because in order to enter the physiology because in order to enter into that state of mind, we have to be into that state of mind, we have to be into that state of mind, we have to be really precise with what we're doing really precise with what we're doing really precise with what we're doing autonomically, physiologically. autonomically, physiologically. autonomically, physiologically. Do you think that liminal states between Do you think that liminal states between Do you think that liminal states between sleep and awake are also a valuable sleep and awake are also a valuable sleep and awake are also a valuable opportunity for people to rewire their opportunity for people to rewire their opportunity for people to rewire their beliefs about themselves um beliefs about themselves um beliefs about themselves um and engage neuroplasticity? Absolutely. and engage neuroplasticity? Absolutely. and engage neuroplasticity? Absolutely. So hypnagogic hypnopompic hallucinations So hypnagogic hypnopompic hallucinations So hypnagogic hypnopompic hallucinations are like good examples of this. That are like good examples of this. That are like good examples of this. That state is really weird. So there is one state is really weird. So there is one state is really weird. So there is one of the 112 techniques that will bring of the 112 techniques that will bring of the 112 techniques that will bring you to enlightenment is to catch the you to enlightenment is to catch the you to enlightenment is to catch the moment of sleep. moment of sleep. moment of sleep. Beautiful technique. Incredibly hard to Beautiful technique. Incredibly hard to Beautiful technique. Incredibly hard to do. So this is something that people do. So this is something that people do. So this is something that people need to understand. When we're talking need to understand. When we're talking need to understand. When we're talking about meditation, I want y'all to about meditation, I want y'all to about meditation, I want y'all to understand that this is a technique that understand that this is a technique that understand that this is a technique that I did for 12 years before seeing a I did for 12 years before seeing a I did for 12 years before seeing a single result. single result. single result. And this technique will give you an hour And this technique will give you an hour And this technique will give you an hour going completely off the rails, okay? going completely off the rails, okay? going completely off the rails, okay? Uh will give you a lot of insight into Uh will give you a lot of insight into Uh will give you a lot of insight into your past lives. your past lives. your past lives. So there's something and we can get So there's something and we can get So there's something and we can get into the science of that if you want to. into the science of that if you want to. into the science of that if you want to. Um but like there's something like when Um but like there's something like when Um but like there's something like when people come to me and they say, "Hey, people come to me and they say, "Hey, people come to me and they say, "Hey, like I want to learn about my past like I want to learn about my past like I want to learn about my past lives." The technique that I give them lives." The technique that I give them lives." The technique that I give them is to focus on the liminal state between is to focus on the liminal state between is to focus on the liminal state between consciousness and sleep. And consciousness and sleep. And consciousness and sleep. And specifically to catch the moment of specifically to catch the moment of specifically to catch the moment of sleep. To So to see yourself fall sleep. To So to see yourself fall sleep. To So to see yourself fall asleep. &gt;&gt; So I do that in Nidra. &gt;&gt; So I do that in Nidra. &gt;&gt; So I do that in Nidra. I can I can I can observe myself falling asleep and I'm observe myself falling asleep and I'm observe myself falling asleep and I'm aware that I'm falling asleep, but I'm aware that I'm falling asleep, but I'm aware that I'm falling asleep, but I'm not lucid dreaming. not lucid dreaming. not lucid dreaming. I'm watching myself sleep. Um it's a I'm watching myself sleep. Um it's a I'm watching myself sleep. Um it's a and it and it and it and I literally feel like I'm falling. and I literally feel like I'm falling. and I literally feel like I'm falling. It's probably some deactivation of the It's probably some deactivation of the It's probably some deactivation of the vestibular system or something going on vestibular system or something going on vestibular system or something going on there. Um Proprioceptive hallucination. there. Um Proprioceptive hallucination. there. Um Proprioceptive hallucination. &gt;&gt; Yeah, so some something going on. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah, so some something going on. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah, so some something going on. Um I mean, what we're talking about here is I mean, what we're talking about here is I mean, what we're talking about here is to really just break it down is to really just break it down is to really just break it down is deeply relaxed state. So so autonomic deeply relaxed state. So so autonomic deeply relaxed state. So so autonomic tone is very parasympathetic, tone is very parasympathetic, tone is very parasympathetic, but a little but alert enough to observe but a little but alert enough to observe but a little but alert enough to observe the self. So this is an unusual state, the self. So this is an unusual state, the self. So this is an unusual state, right? Cuz I normally think about the right? Cuz I normally think about the right? Cuz I normally think about the autonomic nervous system like a seesaw, autonomic nervous system like a seesaw, autonomic nervous system like a seesaw, parasympathetic, sympathetic. So alert, parasympathetic, sympathetic. So alert, parasympathetic, sympathetic. So alert, stressed, panic, or asleep, coma, stressed, panic, or asleep, coma, stressed, panic, or asleep, coma, dead, right? You know, and it's going dead, right? You know, and it's going dead, right? You know, and it's going back and forth the entire time we're back and forth the entire time we're back and forth the entire time we're alive. But what we're talking about here alive. But what we're talking about here alive. But what we're talking about here is a weird kind of bending of the is a weird kind of bending of the is a weird kind of bending of the seesaw, where we're both very relaxed seesaw, where we're both very relaxed seesaw, where we're both very relaxed and very alert. And in that state, the and very alert. And in that state, the and very alert. And in that state, the brain is more available for the brain is more available for the brain is more available for instruction, for editing. Many instruction, for editing. Many instruction, for editing. Many people, I think, people, I think, people, I think, use psychedelics use psychedelics use psychedelics trying to achieve this state. trying to achieve this state. trying to achieve this state. But that's one avenue. I think it But that's one avenue. I think it But that's one avenue. I think it it'll be amazing if there were more uh it'll be amazing if there were more uh it'll be amazing if there were more uh faster entry points. 12 years is a long faster entry points. 12 years is a long faster entry points. 12 years is a long time. I hear that. Other people hear that I hear that. Other people hear that I hear that. Other people hear that like, "Oh you know, that's like, "Oh you know, that's like, "Oh you know, that's a lot of meditating before I get where I a lot of meditating before I get where I a lot of meditating before I get where I want to be." But do you think that want to be." But do you think that want to be." But do you think that there's opportunity for Nidra and um there's opportunity for Nidra and um there's opportunity for Nidra and um excuse me, I'm uh Shunya, excuse me, I'm uh Shunya, excuse me, I'm uh Shunya, the void meditation, to be valuable in the void meditation, to be valuable in the void meditation, to be valuable in the short term as well? the short term as well? the short term as well? &gt;&gt; This is one of the 112 tantra &gt;&gt; This is one of the 112 tantra &gt;&gt; This is one of the 112 tantra techniques. &gt;&gt; that technique. &gt;&gt; that technique. &gt;&gt; that technique. &gt;&gt; yeah, that that's a really hard one &gt;&gt; yeah, that that's a really hard one &gt;&gt; yeah, that that's a really hard one because it has no preparatory practice. because it has no preparatory practice. because it has no preparatory practice. It has no physiology to it. It's just It has no physiology to it. It's just It has no physiology to it. It's just catch the moment of sleep. That's it. catch the moment of sleep. That's it. catch the moment of sleep. That's it. Mhm. So that's where, you know, that Mhm. So that's where, you know, that Mhm. So that's where, you know, that technique is normally, if you've trained technique is normally, if you've trained technique is normally, if you've trained yourself, then you can do it, but it's yourself, then you can do it, but it's yourself, then you can do it, but it's really hard to do just off the cuff. really hard to do just off the cuff. really hard to do just off the cuff. Nidra is very helpful from the get-go, Nidra is very helpful from the get-go, Nidra is very helpful from the get-go, right? So from an autonomic nervous right? So from an autonomic nervous right? So from an autonomic nervous system standpoint, very helpful. We tend system standpoint, very helpful. We tend system standpoint, very helpful. We tend to be hyper sympathetically activated, to be hyper sympathetically activated, to be hyper sympathetically activated, so yoga nidra is very good for so yoga nidra is very good for so yoga nidra is very good for parasympathetic activation. Yoga nidra parasympathetic activation. Yoga nidra parasympathetic activation. Yoga nidra is also very good for the rotation of is also very good for the rotation of is also very good for the rotation of your somatosensory cortex. So, you know, your somatosensory cortex. So, you know, your somatosensory cortex. So, you know, like we have this idea of the like we have this idea of the like we have this idea of the homunculus, that's not really what it homunculus, that's not really what it homunculus, that's not really what it is. And we can if I'm is. And we can if I'm is. And we can if I'm &gt;&gt; of self, yeah. &gt;&gt; of self, yeah. &gt;&gt; of self, yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right? So, so really what it is &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right? So, so really what it is &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right? So, so really what it is there your somatosensory cortex is there your somatosensory cortex is there your somatosensory cortex is plastic. And when you do rotations of plastic. And when you do rotations of plastic. And when you do rotations of awareness through your body, it's really awareness through your body, it's really awareness through your body, it's really good for you. good for you. good for you. Really helps with things like chronic Really helps with things like chronic Really helps with things like chronic pain. Um so, in chronic pain, what happens is Um so, in chronic pain, what happens is Um so, in chronic pain, what happens is patients, their somatosensory cortex is patients, their somatosensory cortex is patients, their somatosensory cortex is literally locked into the part of the of literally locked into the part of the of literally locked into the part of the of their body that's in pain. People think their body that's in pain. People think their body that's in pain. People think that and it's a it's a that and it's a it's a that and it's a it's a you know, it's a self-reinforcing thing you know, it's a self-reinforcing thing you know, it's a self-reinforcing thing where something hurts, so your brain is where something hurts, so your brain is where something hurts, so your brain is thinking about it. And the more that thinking about it. And the more that thinking about it. And the more that your brain thinks about it, the more your brain thinks about it, the more your brain thinks about it, the more that it hurts. that it hurts. that it hurts. So, nidra is really good from the So, nidra is really good from the So, nidra is really good from the get-go. And and that's where I sort of get-go. And and that's where I sort of get-go. And and that's where I sort of think about the benefits of meditation think about the benefits of meditation think about the benefits of meditation as first of all, scientific to woo-woo. first of all, scientific to woo-woo. first of all, scientific to woo-woo. This we know works, this we have no This we know works, this we have no This we know works, this we have no clue. Um in my personal journey, it's been really in my personal journey, it's been really in my personal journey, it's been really weird. So, I was brought to this weird weird. So, I was brought to this weird weird. So, I was brought to this weird mystical stuff like kicking and mystical stuff like kicking and mystical stuff like kicking and screaming. Where, you know, once you're Where, you know, once you're Where, you know, once you're meditating one day and you have meditating one day and you have meditating one day and you have a memory from your past life, like you a memory from your past life, like you a memory from your past life, like you sit there and you're like, "What the sit there and you're like, "What the sit there and you're like, "What the is that?" is that?" is that?" Like, is this a hallucination? Is this Like, is this a hallucination? Is this Like, is this a hallucination? Is this some form of genetic memory? Like, is some form of genetic memory? Like, is some form of genetic memory? Like, is this epigenetic memory? Like, what is this epigenetic memory? Like, what is this epigenetic memory? Like, what is this? I have no idea. So, I'm not saying this? I have no idea. So, I'm not saying this? I have no idea. So, I'm not saying that past lives even exist. All I'm that past lives even exist. All I'm that past lives even exist. All I'm saying is that there are things that saying is that there are things that saying is that there are things that maybe some people can do that will give maybe some people can do that will give maybe some people can do that will give you the illusion of a past life. That's you the illusion of a past life. That's you the illusion of a past life. That's all we know. Right? There's no And this all we know. Right? There's no And this all we know. Right? There's no And this is why I think a lot of people are very is why I think a lot of people are very is why I think a lot of people are very unscientific because they say, "If I unscientific because they say, "If I unscientific because they say, "If I have a memory of something that didn't have a memory of something that didn't have a memory of something that didn't happen, that means it hap- No, it happen, that means it hap- No, it happen, that means it hap- No, it didn't. The human brain constructs didn't. The human brain constructs didn't. The human brain constructs memory all the time. Most of our memory all the time. Most of our memory all the time. Most of our memory is stuff that didn't happen, actually is stuff that didn't happen, actually is stuff that didn't happen, actually technically. I have to say, I don't technically. I have to say, I don't technically. I have to say, I don't want to interrupt your flow, but I just want to interrupt your flow, but I just want to interrupt your flow, but I just have to say because I'm feeling it have to say because I'm feeling it have to say because I'm feeling it and I'm not saying this to make you and I'm not saying this to make you and I'm not saying this to make you feel good, but if it does, uh great. I feel good, but if it does, uh great. I feel good, but if it does, uh great. I mean, you're one of the more mean, you're one of the more mean, you're one of the more intellectually supple people I've ever intellectually supple people I've ever intellectually supple people I've ever encountered. I hope that lands cuz it encountered. I hope that lands cuz it encountered. I hope that lands cuz it you know, I've been around a lot of you know, I've been around a lot of you know, I've been around a lot of well-educated people and a lot of well-educated people and a lot of well-educated people and a lot of practitioners. Everything from former practitioners. Everything from former practitioners. Everything from former Mr. Olympias to Rick Rubin to David Mr. Olympias to Rick Rubin to David Mr. Olympias to Rick Rubin to David show. I mean we've I mean show. I mean we've I mean show. I mean we've I mean Martha Beck, I mean who has three Martha Beck, I mean who has three Martha Beck, I mean who has three degrees from Harvard but talks about degrees from Harvard but talks about degrees from Harvard but talks about spiritual downloads and spiritual downloads and spiritual downloads and I have to say like I have to say like I have to say like I feel what's missing from I feel what's missing from I feel what's missing from health public health, mental health, physical public health, mental health, physical public health, mental health, physical health, performance, you know, the health, performance, you know, the health, performance, you know, the broadly speaking is this ability to broadly speaking is this ability to broadly speaking is this ability to understand how the ancient practices are understand how the ancient practices are understand how the ancient practices are really of benefit really of benefit really of benefit where the neuroscience and other forms where the neuroscience and other forms where the neuroscience and other forms of science can explain it of science can explain it of science can explain it but also to acknowledge but also to acknowledge but also to acknowledge that even where we don't have that even where we don't have that even where we don't have mechanistic understanding, there's value mechanistic understanding, there's value mechanistic understanding, there's value in the practices. Like if you know, I in the practices. Like if you know, I in the practices. Like if you know, I really believe that the healing really believe that the healing really believe that the healing that everyone wants so badly for that everyone wants so badly for that everyone wants so badly for themselves and for the world, I really themselves and for the world, I really themselves and for the world, I really believe that most people want that believe that most people want that believe that most people want that resides in this business of going inward resides in this business of going inward resides in this business of going inward that only we can only do for ourselves that only we can only do for ourselves that only we can only do for ourselves and seeing where our is and seeing where our is and seeing where our is burning it down burning it down burning it down and unlearning the stuff that makes us and unlearning the stuff that makes us and unlearning the stuff that makes us unkind to ourselves and others and unkind to ourselves and others and unkind to ourselves and others and unproductive. You know, I think one of unproductive. You know, I think one of unproductive. You know, I think one of the dangers in discussions around yoga the dangers in discussions around yoga the dangers in discussions around yoga and uh these things is some people will uh these things is some people will uh these things is some people will think okay, this is navel-gazing. This is all okay, this is navel-gazing. This is all okay, this is navel-gazing. This is all me stuff. This is you know, you just got me stuff. This is you know, you just got me stuff. This is you know, you just got to you know, get out into the world and to you know, get out into the world and to you know, get out into the world and do stuff. But when we hosted a James do stuff. But when we hosted a James do stuff. But when we hosted a James Hollis, 84-year-old Union analyst, he Hollis, 84-year-old Union analyst, he Hollis, 84-year-old Union analyst, he said there two things that are critical said there two things that are critical said there two things that are critical to a good life. to a good life. to a good life. Of if I may. He said Of if I may. He said Of if I may. He said every day you have to shut up. These are every day you have to shut up. These are every day you have to shut up. These are his words. He said you got to shut up his words. He said you got to shut up his words. He said you got to shut up meaning no whining. meaning no whining. meaning no whining. Be grateful. Be grateful. Be grateful. You need to suit up meaning you need to You need to suit up meaning you need to You need to suit up meaning you need to prepare for your roles in life and then prepare for your roles in life and then prepare for your roles in life and then you need to show up to your roles in you need to show up to your roles in you need to show up to your roles in life. But you also need to spend some life. But you also need to spend some life. But you also need to spend some time getting out of stimulus and time getting out of stimulus and time getting out of stimulus and response, going inward, and really touching in going inward, and really touching in going inward, and really touching in with what he called your genuine heart's with what he called your genuine heart's with what he called your genuine heart's desires. And when he said that, I thought like, And when he said that, I thought like, And when he said that, I thought like, perfect. This is the ambition, the perfect. This is the ambition, the perfect. This is the ambition, the doing, the getting things done in life doing, the getting things done in life doing, the getting things done in life that we have to do, because no one wants that we have to do, because no one wants that we have to do, because no one wants to be the loser you described earlier. to be the loser you described earlier. to be the loser you described earlier. Like, no one wants to be that person. Like, no one wants to be that person. Like, no one wants to be that person. And at the same time, no one wants to be And at the same time, no one wants to be And at the same time, no one wants to be many people think they want to be, got the marriage and the kids, and is got the marriage and the kids, and is got the marriage and the kids, and is miserable, because they took a path that wasn't because they took a path that wasn't because they took a path that wasn't really for them. That they should have really for them. That they should have really for them. That they should have done that with someone else. They done that with someone else. They done that with someone else. They literally have the wrong No one would literally have the wrong No one would literally have the wrong No one would say they have the wrong kids, but they say they have the wrong kids, but they say they have the wrong kids, but they have the wrong life, right? And so, I have the wrong life, right? And so, I have the wrong life, right? And so, I think that what you're describing is the think that what you're describing is the think that what you're describing is the road map, road map, road map, and it involves this going inward. and it involves this going inward. and it involves this going inward. And I think that the language around And I think that the language around And I think that the language around yogic practices for Westerners is the yogic practices for Westerners is the yogic practices for Westerners is the separator. It's where people brace, and separator. It's where people brace, and separator. It's where people brace, and they go, what are they really talking they go, what are they really talking they go, what are they really talking about here? This is this And so, as a about here? This is this And so, as a about here? This is this And so, as a practitioner in the West with this practitioner in the West with this practitioner in the West with this Eastern mindset woven in, Eastern mindset woven in, Eastern mindset woven in, how do you bring that to your patients? how do you bring that to your patients? how do you bring that to your patients? How do you How do you convince them that How do you How do you convince them that How do you How do you convince them that this is the path? this is the path? this is the path? Because I really believe it is the path, Because I really believe it is the path, Because I really believe it is the path, and I think it's actually the and I think it's actually the and I think it's actually the most important thing that any of us the most important thing that any of us the most important thing that any of us can do for ourselves. First thing is I can do for ourselves. First thing is I can do for ourselves. First thing is I don't try to convince anyone of don't try to convince anyone of don't try to convince anyone of anything. So, convincing is not So, convincing is not So, convincing is not an objective that I have. an objective that I have. an objective that I have. So, I love research, consume a bunch of So, I love research, consume a bunch of So, I love research, consume a bunch of research, but there's a basic problem research, but there's a basic problem research, but there's a basic problem with science. with science. with science. Which is when we do a randomized control Which is when we do a randomized control Which is when we do a randomized control trial, we learn about a population. We trial, we learn about a population. We trial, we learn about a population. We don't learn about a person. don't learn about a person. don't learn about a person. So, we can say that SSRIs improve major So, we can say that SSRIs improve major So, we can say that SSRIs improve major depressive disorder by about 50%, let's depressive disorder by about 50%, let's depressive disorder by about 50%, let's say. But, if a patient walks into my office, But, if a patient walks into my office, But, if a patient walks into my office, I have no idea if an SSRI is going to I have no idea if an SSRI is going to I have no idea if an SSRI is going to help them. help them. help them. Does that kind of make sense? So, Does that kind of make sense? So, Does that kind of make sense? So, there's a basic problem of external there's a basic problem of external there's a basic problem of external validity of all of our science, all of validity of all of our science, all of validity of all of our science, all of our medical science anyway. I'm not sure our medical science anyway. I'm not sure our medical science anyway. I'm not sure about opto or neuroscience, but about opto or neuroscience, but about opto or neuroscience, but it when you apply it to a person some it when you apply it to a person some it when you apply it to a person some stuff works and some stuff doesn't work. stuff works and some stuff doesn't work. stuff works and some stuff doesn't work. So my focus is on helping like a person. my focus is on helping like a person. my focus is on helping like a person. And then the you don't need the woo And then the you don't need the woo And then the you don't need the woo stuff. I think the important stuff. I think the important stuff. I think the important thing is like understanding your ego. thing is like understanding your ego. thing is like understanding your ego. Like that's a fundamental thing that is Like that's a fundamental thing that is Like that's a fundamental thing that is missing from Western psychology. But we missing from Western psychology. But we missing from Western psychology. But we all intuitively understand that this all intuitively understand that this all intuitively understand that this person is egotistical. Right? Second person is egotistical. Right? Second person is egotistical. Right? Second thing is like things like perception. thing is like things like perception. thing is like things like perception. Understand your perception. Your Understand your perception. Your Understand your perception. Your perception and you were talking about perception and you were talking about perception and you were talking about the internet. The basic problem with the internet. The basic problem with the internet. The basic problem with the internet it is that it has allowed human internet it is that it has allowed human internet it is that it has allowed human beings to no longer live in the same beings to no longer live in the same beings to no longer live in the same world. This is where AI is even worse. So the This is where AI is even worse. So the This is where AI is even worse. So the more algorithmic you are more algorithmic you are more algorithmic you are so the problem with an algorithm is it so the problem with an algorithm is it so the problem with an algorithm is it shapes your perception. shapes your perception. shapes your perception. It it radicalizes your perception. So It it radicalizes your perception. So It it radicalizes your perception. So an algorithm shows you thing one and an algorithm shows you thing one and an algorithm shows you thing one and then it'll only show you things in that then it'll only show you things in that then it'll only show you things in that tunnel. Does that kind of make sense? So tunnel. Does that kind of make sense? So tunnel. Does that kind of make sense? So you go further and further down the you go further and further down the you go further and further down the tunnel and you are living in a different tunnel and you are living in a different tunnel and you are living in a different world than everybody else is living in. world than everybody else is living in. world than everybody else is living in. AI is even worse at this is which is why AI is even worse at this is which is why AI is even worse at this is which is why it's really scary, but there's a first it's really scary, but there's a first it's really scary, but there's a first case report of really AI induced case report of really AI induced case report of really AI induced psychosis in a patient that did not have psychosis in a patient that did not have psychosis in a patient that did not have any history of psychosis. How does that any history of psychosis. How does that any history of psychosis. How does that even come about? What are they talking even come about? What are they talking even come about? What are they talking to the AI about? to the AI about? to the AI about? &gt;&gt; I we can get into that if you want. It's &gt;&gt; I we can get into that if you want. It's &gt;&gt; I we can get into that if you want. It's actually really scary, but we know the actually really scary, but we know the actually really scary, but we know the mechanism. So here's the cool thing mechanism. So here's the cool thing mechanism. So here's the cool thing about this case report. This person got about this case report. This person got about this case report. This person got hospitalized for psychosis, was started hospitalized for psychosis, was started hospitalized for psychosis, was started on an antipsychotic, psychosis resolves. on an antipsychotic, psychosis resolves. on an antipsychotic, psychosis resolves. They get discharged, stop the They get discharged, stop the They get discharged, stop the antipsychotic, start to use AI again and antipsychotic, start to use AI again and antipsychotic, start to use AI again and become psychotic again. become psychotic again. become psychotic again. It's really scary and the basic problem It's really scary and the basic problem It's really scary and the basic problem is that AI is so sick of antic. is that AI is so sick of antic. is that AI is so sick of antic. Our reality testing of the world Our reality testing of the world Our reality testing of the world requires contrary opinions. requires contrary opinions. requires contrary opinions. Right? So like when you're like, "Hey, I Right? So like when you're like, "Hey, I Right? So like when you're like, "Hey, I have this idea I want to test throw have this idea I want to test throw have this idea I want to test throw something by you. And then I say, no. something by you. And then I say, no. something by you. And then I say, no. Mhm. So how do we know what reality is? Mhm. So how do we know what reality is? Mhm. So how do we know what reality is? Because we have this perception, but Because we have this perception, but Because we have this perception, but this person has this perception, this person has this perception, this person has this perception, this person has this perception. So we person has this perception. So we person has this perception. So we modulate our perception. Hey, I got modulate our perception. Hey, I got modulate our perception. Hey, I got you a gift. No, you didn't. you a gift. No, you didn't. you a gift. No, you didn't. What? I told you yesterday that I was What? I told you yesterday that I was What? I told you yesterday that I was going to pick this up. No, you didn't going to pick this up. No, you didn't going to pick this up. No, you didn't tell me that. So we stay in reality tell me that. So we stay in reality tell me that. So we stay in reality because we get signals from reality. The because we get signals from reality. The because we get signals from reality. The thing about the AIs is they're language thing about the AIs is they're language thing about the AIs is they're language learning models. They don't actually learning models. They don't actually learning models. They don't actually know anything. know anything. know anything. All they do is scrape the internet. Um All they do is scrape the internet. Um All they do is scrape the internet. Um this is a simplification. I'm not a data this is a simplification. I'm not a data this is a simplification. I'm not a data scientist or AI engineer, but here's my scientist or AI engineer, but here's my scientist or AI engineer, but here's my understanding cuz people wanted to build understanding cuz people wanted to build understanding cuz people wanted to build like a Dr. K chatbot and I tried to get like a Dr. K chatbot and I tried to get like a Dr. K chatbot and I tried to get into understanding the mechanism. into understanding the mechanism. into understanding the mechanism. What an AI does is it just says a word What an AI does is it just says a word What an AI does is it just says a word and then it and then it and then it tries to figure out which words are it tries to figure out which words are it tries to figure out which words are going to make you happy. That's how it going to make you happy. That's how it going to make you happy. That's how it knows what's right or wrong. The user knows what's right or wrong. The user knows what's right or wrong. The user satisfaction is the ultimate thing that satisfaction is the ultimate thing that satisfaction is the ultimate thing that they're going for. So there's a they're going for. So there's a they're going for. So there's a lot of data that shows that literally lot of data that shows that literally lot of data that shows that literally there's a really cool paper I can I can there's a really cool paper I can I can there's a really cool paper I can I can send it to you later, but that shows send it to you later, but that shows send it to you later, but that shows that the number of statements that you that the number of statements that you that the number of statements that you have, the more psychophantic it have, the more psychophantic it have, the more psychophantic it becomes and the more paranoid people becomes and the more paranoid people becomes and the more paranoid people will become. So like you know, there's a will become. So like you know, there's a will become. So like you know, there's a another case of someone who um another case of someone who um another case of someone who um murdered their mom and then committed murdered their mom and then committed murdered their mom and then committed suicide because as they expressed suicide because as they expressed suicide because as they expressed concerns about their mom, the AI concerns about their mom, the AI concerns about their mom, the AI reinforces that and says, yeah, you're reinforces that and says, yeah, you're reinforces that and says, yeah, you're right. Like these people are leaving you right. Like these people are leaving you right. Like these people are leaving you out. Right? Cuz it's like trying to make out. Right? Cuz it's like trying to make out. Right? Cuz it's like trying to make you feel you feel you feel &gt;&gt; they kill themselves? &gt;&gt; they kill themselves? &gt;&gt; they kill themselves? &gt;&gt; I don't know the full details of the &gt;&gt; I don't know the full details of the &gt;&gt; I don't know the full details of the case. And and this is what's really case. And and this is what's really case. And and this is what's really scary about the AI stuff is like people scary about the AI stuff is like people scary about the AI stuff is like people will say, right? So like a lot of people will say, right? So like a lot of people will say, right? So like a lot of people will make the claim, oh yeah, like if will make the claim, oh yeah, like if will make the claim, oh yeah, like if you're mentally unwell and then you use you're mentally unwell and then you use you're mentally unwell and then you use AI. So a lot of AI companies will say AI. So a lot of AI companies will say AI. So a lot of AI companies will say it's people who are high risk will use it's people who are high risk will use it's people who are high risk will use the AI and it activates their the AI and it activates their the AI and it activates their delusions. But Andrew, here's what's delusions. But Andrew, here's what's delusions. But Andrew, here's what's really scary. really scary. really scary. In order to make that, I don't know if In order to make that, I don't know if In order to make that, I don't know if this makes sense. Like maybe this is this makes sense. Like maybe this is this makes sense. Like maybe this is kind of read my mind question, but in kind of read my mind question, but in kind of read my mind question, but in order to say only at risk people order to say only at risk people order to say only at risk people will become psychotic from AI, what data will become psychotic from AI, what data will become psychotic from AI, what data do you need to make that statement? I do you need to make that statement? I do you need to make that statement? I think you need people to be harmed by AI think you need people to be harmed by AI think you need people to be harmed by AI to have to have to have to have that basis. Yeah, so in my to have that basis. Yeah, so in my to have that basis. Yeah, so in my mind from a clinical perspective, in mind from a clinical perspective, in mind from a clinical perspective, in order to make the claim that AI only order to make the claim that AI only order to make the claim that AI only makes vulnerable people psychotic, mentally vulnerable people psychotic, mentally vulnerable people psychotic, mentally ill people psychotic, you need to ill people psychotic, you need to ill people psychotic, you need to have your control group, which is people who your control group, which is people who your control group, which is people who are not mentally ill. You need to have are not mentally ill. You need to have are not mentally ill. You need to have your intervention group, which is people your intervention group, which is people your intervention group, which is people who are mentally ill. You need to give who are mentally ill. You need to give who are mentally ill. You need to give them an intervention, and you need to them an intervention, and you need to them an intervention, and you need to measure their psychosis at the other measure their psychosis at the other measure their psychosis at the other end. No AI company I've ever heard of end. No AI company I've ever heard of end. No AI company I've ever heard of has ever done that. Does that make has ever done that. Does that make has ever done that. Does that make sense? Like fundamentally, they are not sense? Like fundamentally, they are not sense? Like fundamentally, they are not determining ahead of time whether this determining ahead of time whether this determining ahead of time whether this person is mentally ill or not. And they person is mentally ill or not. And they person is mentally ill or not. And they don't they're not they're not monitoring don't they're not they're not monitoring don't they're not they're not monitoring psychosis. Well, I think the studies psychosis. Well, I think the studies psychosis. Well, I think the studies that have not been done, at least not that have not been done, at least not that have not been done, at least not until recently, that needed to be done until recently, that needed to be done until recently, that needed to be done and desperately need to be done is to and desperately need to be done is to and desperately need to be done is to evaluate what are the neuroplastic evaluate what are the neuroplastic evaluate what are the neuroplastic changes that are caused by social media changes that are caused by social media changes that are caused by social media and AI. I mean, these are the and AI. I mean, these are the and AI. I mean, these are the digital anvils that we're shaping, digital anvils that we're shaping, digital anvils that we're shaping, especially young brains on. And now especially young brains on. And now especially young brains on. And now we're surprised, like, oh, you know, we're surprised, like, oh, you know, we're surprised, like, oh, you know, from 2010 to, you know, 2025, everyone's from 2010 to, you know, 2025, everyone's from 2010 to, you know, 2025, everyone's been, you know, using progressively more been, you know, using progressively more been, you know, using progressively more social media online more and oh, we got social media online more and oh, we got social media online more and oh, we got brain rot and oh, we And and surprise, brain rot and oh, we And and surprise, brain rot and oh, we And and surprise, like, well, no, there's this surprise, like, well, no, there's this surprise, like, well, no, there's this thing called plasticity that we knew thing called plasticity that we knew thing called plasticity that we knew about. It's just we didn't understand about. It's just we didn't understand about. It's just we didn't understand how the brain gets modified on these how the brain gets modified on these how the brain gets modified on these platforms, on these algorithms. And platforms, on these algorithms. And platforms, on these algorithms. And instead, we looked at instead, we looked at instead, we looked at It was like we were so focused on the It was like we were so focused on the It was like we were so focused on the content, but not the content, but not the content, but not the algorithmic underpinnings of the algorithmic underpinnings of the algorithmic underpinnings of the content. &gt;&gt; Excellent. So so, I am convinced there &gt;&gt; Excellent. So so, I am convinced there &gt;&gt; Excellent. So so, I am convinced there is not great data because it's early, is not great data because it's early, is not great data because it's early, but I am convinced that basically, cuz but I am convinced that basically, cuz but I am convinced that basically, cuz we know this from like basic psychology, we know this from like basic psychology, we know this from like basic psychology, right? Like AI is basically like a cult right? Like AI is basically like a cult right? Like AI is basically like a cult of one. of one. of one. You get indoctrinated in your own You get indoctrinated in your own You get indoctrinated in your own thoughts. So, whatever you say to the AI is what So, whatever you say to the AI is what So, whatever you say to the AI is what the AI will tell you back. This is the AI will tell you back. This is the AI will tell you back. This is the narcissism. What you described before, the AI What you described before, the AI What you described before, the AI becoming more sycophantic, the person becoming more sycophantic, the person becoming more sycophantic, the person getting more paranoid. You know the getting more paranoid. You know the getting more paranoid. You know the image that was in my mind? image that was in my mind? image that was in my mind? &gt;&gt; What? Was an eccentric billionaire who &gt;&gt; What? Was an eccentric billionaire who &gt;&gt; What? Was an eccentric billionaire who can control everything in their can control everything in their can control everything in their environment, but is terrified and is environment, but is terrified and is environment, but is terrified and is controlling of everything because they controlling of everything because they controlling of everything because they feel like they're vulnerable if they feel like they're vulnerable if they feel like they're vulnerable if they don't. That's exactly what you described AI is That's exactly what you described AI is That's exactly what you described AI is doing to essentially everyone. And and doing to essentially everyone. And and doing to essentially everyone. And and we'll see it also like not only in and we'll see it also like not only in and we'll see it also like not only in the in the billionaire. So the and there the in the billionaire. So the and there the in the billionaire. So the and there are some cool studies that there are some cool studies that there are some cool studies that show basically like who's at risk. So it's basically like who's at risk. So it's basically like who's at risk. So it's really fascinating what the risk factors really fascinating what the risk factors really fascinating what the risk factors are. The amount of usage is huge. The amount of usage is huge. The amount of usage is huge. Um so the more you use AI, the more Um so the more you use AI, the more Um so the more you use AI, the more likely this is to happen to you. But I likely this is to happen to you. But I likely this is to happen to you. But I kid you not, I'm really I'm not trying kid you not, I'm really I'm not trying kid you not, I'm really I'm not trying to be alarmist. to be alarmist. to be alarmist. As a psychiatrist, when someone comes As a psychiatrist, when someone comes As a psychiatrist, when someone comes into my office, I ask them, "Do you use into my office, I ask them, "Do you use into my office, I ask them, "Do you use meth?" Because I'm trying to assess meth?" Because I'm trying to assess meth?" Because I'm trying to assess their risk of becoming psychotic based their risk of becoming psychotic based their risk of becoming psychotic based on something that is not like on something that is not like on something that is not like schizophrenia or type one bipolar schizophrenia or type one bipolar schizophrenia or type one bipolar disease. Now I'm starting to ask people, disease. Now I'm starting to ask people, disease. Now I'm starting to ask people, "Do you use AI? How much?" So I'll ask "Do you use AI? How much?" So I'll ask "Do you use AI? How much?" So I'll ask them these questions. "How much do you them these questions. "How much do you them these questions. "How much do you use AI? Do you customize the AI to be use AI? Do you customize the AI to be use AI? Do you customize the AI to be more effective for what you want?" So more effective for what you want?" So more effective for what you want?" So this is what's really scary is like this is what's really scary is like this is what's really scary is like this is what people call prompt engineering, is what people call prompt engineering, is what people call prompt engineering, right? Do you train the AI to give you right? Do you train the AI to give you right? Do you train the AI to give you more effective answers? more effective answers? more effective answers? Um do you use the AI for mental health Um do you use the AI for mental health Um do you use the AI for mental health issues? And do you find that the AI's answers And do you find that the AI's answers And do you find that the AI's answers are far superior to humans? are far superior to humans? are far superior to humans? And these are the These are four of the And these are the These are four of the And these are the These are four of the seven proposed risk factors seven proposed risk factors seven proposed risk factors for like for like for like bad outcomes from AI. And the crazy bad outcomes from AI. And the crazy bad outcomes from AI. And the crazy thing is like this is the use case. thing is like this is the use case. thing is like this is the use case. Right? Like we want people to be using Right? Like we want people to be using Right? Like we want people to be using AI more. We want The whole point is that AI more. We want The whole point is that AI more. We want The whole point is that AI is better than other people. I'm AI is better than other people. I'm AI is better than other people. I'm going to use prompt engineering. And I going to use prompt engineering. And I going to use prompt engineering. And I you know, in my community there's a lot you know, in my community there's a lot you know, in my community there's a lot of mental illness and a lot of a lot of mental illness and a lot of a lot of mental illness and a lot of a lot of mental struggles. So a lot of people mental struggles. So a lot of people mental struggles. So a lot of people will use AI. will use AI. will use AI. And it's really scary that like the use And it's really scary that like the use And it's really scary that like the use case is the risk factor. is the risk factor. is the risk factor. And I really think that there's a chance And I really think that there's a chance And I really think that there's a chance I don't think AI is evil or all bad or I don't think AI is evil or all bad or I don't think AI is evil or all bad or anything like that, but I think we anything like that, but I think we anything like that, but I think we really could be looking at like really could be looking at like really could be looking at like 60 years from now we're going to be like 60 years from now we're going to be like 60 years from now we're going to be looking back and we're going to be looking back and we're going to be looking back and we're going to be talking about AI the way that we talk talking about AI the way that we talk talking about AI the way that we talk about nicotine about nicotine about nicotine and tobacco. and tobacco. and tobacco. I'm letting that sink in. When I I'm letting that sink in. When I I'm letting that sink in. When I think about the algorithm being the think about the algorithm being the think about the algorithm being the thing that shapes the brain, thing that shapes the brain, thing that shapes the brain, um the analogy that pops to mind um the analogy that pops to mind um the analogy that pops to mind is, you know, if I want to change a is, you know, if I want to change a is, you know, if I want to change a nervous system nervous system nervous system I don't care if it's a rat, cat, monkey, I don't care if it's a rat, cat, monkey, I don't care if it's a rat, cat, monkey, bat, or human. I know what you're going bat, or human. I know what you're going bat, or human. I know what you're going to say. Yeah. I'm going to spike to say. Yeah. I'm going to spike to say. Yeah. I'm going to spike adrenaline and I'm going to provide an adrenaline and I'm going to provide an adrenaline and I'm going to provide an experience. I mean, these experiments experience. I mean, these experiments experience. I mean, these experiments have been done by James McGaugh and have been done by James McGaugh and have been done by James McGaugh and others over many years. Like, I can and others over many years. Like, I can and others over many years. Like, I can give an animal or a person a terrifying give an animal or a person a terrifying give an animal or a person a terrifying experience give them a beta-blocker give them a beta-blocker give them a beta-blocker and their memory for it what their and their memory for it what their and their memory for it what their memory for it will be will be meager if memory for it will be will be meager if memory for it will be will be meager if any. If I don't, they're going to if any. If I don't, they're going to if any. If I don't, they're going to have a very salient memory. It's that have a very salient memory. It's that have a very salient memory. It's that one-pointedness that you referred to. one-pointedness that you referred to. one-pointedness that you referred to. So, spiking adrenaline is the So, spiking adrenaline is the So, spiking adrenaline is the opportunity to create plasticity. Turns opportunity to create plasticity. Turns opportunity to create plasticity. Turns out so is spiking dopamine. So is out so is spiking dopamine. So is out so is spiking dopamine. So is spiking acetylcholine. Turns out that spiking acetylcholine. Turns out that spiking acetylcholine. Turns out that there's this kind of there's this kind of there's this kind of uh equality to all the neuromodulators. uh equality to all the neuromodulators. uh equality to all the neuromodulators. If you can create high amount of arousal If you can create high amount of arousal If you can create high amount of arousal or a unusual state, you can modify the or a unusual state, you can modify the or a unusual state, you can modify the brain for some period of time. I feel brain for some period of time. I feel brain for some period of time. I feel like what was never like what was never like what was never thought about until recently thought about until recently thought about until recently is that when we scroll social media or is that when we scroll social media or is that when we scroll social media or we are on the internet, we're getting we are on the internet, we're getting we are on the internet, we're getting pulsed, like you said earlier, we're pulsed, like you said earlier, we're pulsed, like you said earlier, we're getting pulsed with getting pulsed with getting pulsed with typically norepinephrine epinephrine, typically norepinephrine epinephrine, typically norepinephrine epinephrine, right? And so, it makes perfect sense right? And so, it makes perfect sense right? And so, it makes perfect sense that the plasticity is both for what that the plasticity is both for what that the plasticity is both for what we're observing, but also for the action we're observing, but also for the action we're observing, but also for the action of scrolling and going through that the of scrolling and going through that the of scrolling and going through that the wheel of experience that you the wheel of experience that you the wheel of experience that you described earlier. The the puppy, the described earlier. The the puppy, the described earlier. The the puppy, the explosion, the you know, the explosion, the you know, the explosion, the you know, the political thing, the opportunity to make political thing, the opportunity to make political thing, the opportunity to make money, the relationship thing, and then money, the relationship thing, and then money, the relationship thing, and then and then repeat. And surely the and then repeat. And surely the and then repeat. And surely the platforms knew this and I don't think platforms knew this and I don't think platforms knew this and I don't think they're diabolical in the sense that they're diabolical in the sense that they're diabolical in the sense that they wanted to harm humanity. I don't. I they wanted to harm humanity. I don't. I they wanted to harm humanity. I don't. I think that they are businesses and they think that they are businesses and they think that they are businesses and they want to make money. They want to drive want to make money. They want to drive want to make money. They want to drive engagement. &gt;&gt; So so many people are don't like what I &gt;&gt; So so many people are don't like what I &gt;&gt; So so many people are don't like what I say about AI because they like AI. Mhm. say about AI because they like AI. Mhm. say about AI because they like AI. Mhm. And and I I'm also with you. Like I And and I I'm also with you. Like I And and I I'm also with you. Like I don't think the platforms are evil. I don't think the platforms are evil. I don't think the platforms are evil. I think they're just not looking at that think they're just not looking at that think they're just not looking at that dimension, right? So like no one at an dimension, right? So like no one at an dimension, right? So like no one at an AI company is designing a clinical trial AI company is designing a clinical trial AI company is designing a clinical trial to be run through the FDA to measure to be run through the FDA to measure to be run through the FDA to measure like they're just not measuring like they're just not measuring like they're just not measuring like safety issues as far as I know. like safety issues as far as I know. like safety issues as far as I know. Like not at the level that we do when Like not at the level that we do when Like not at the level that we do when we're like looking at pharmacology. I we're like looking at pharmacology. I we're like looking at pharmacology. I think these people are, you know, so think these people are, you know, so think these people are, you know, so someone and I mean I I've worked someone and I mean I I've worked someone and I mean I I've worked with so many people who like work at with so many people who like work at with so many people who like work at YouTube and meta and stuff like YouTube and meta and stuff like YouTube and meta and stuff like that. Twitch. that. Twitch. that. Twitch. And I don't think they're like bad evil And I don't think they're like bad evil And I don't think they're like bad evil people. Like this is a big this is a people. Like this is a big this is a people. Like this is a big this is a very black or white thinking induced by very black or white thinking induced by very black or white thinking induced by social media content where like all social media content where like all social media content where like all these companies are evil or these companies are evil or these companies are evil or they're totally fine. No, it's like they're totally fine. No, it's like they're totally fine. No, it's like &gt;&gt; No, I know some of the founders and &gt;&gt; No, I know some of the founders and &gt;&gt; No, I know some of the founders and owners of these companies and owners of these companies and owners of these companies and platforms well and I think they are platforms well and I think they are platforms well and I think they are benevolent people. Absolutely. And I benevolent people. Absolutely. And I benevolent people. Absolutely. And I think a lot of times, you know, they're think a lot of times, you know, they're think a lot of times, you know, they're just like, "Okay, if I'm Instagram Reels just like, "Okay, if I'm Instagram Reels just like, "Okay, if I'm Instagram Reels and I'm like a programmer or developer and I'm like a programmer or developer and I'm like a programmer or developer there and someone's like, "Okay, like there and someone's like, "Okay, like there and someone's like, "Okay, like this amount of the market share is this amount of the market share is this amount of the market share is TikTok. How do we bring those TikTok TikTok. How do we bring those TikTok TikTok. How do we bring those TikTok users over here, right?" It's like if I users over here, right?" It's like if I users over here, right?" It's like if I have a have a have a car and it's like how do I get someone a car and it's like how do I get someone a car and it's like how do I get someone who buys a different kind of car to buy who buys a different kind of car to buy who buys a different kind of car to buy my car? That's just what business is. my car? That's just what business is. my car? That's just what business is. I don't think they're evil. I think what I don't think they're evil. I think what I don't think they're evil. I think what they're doing and this is how humanity they're doing and this is how humanity they're doing and this is how humanity works, right? So it's like we invent works, right? So it's like we invent works, right? So it's like we invent something and then we figure out something and then we figure out something and then we figure out afterward that it's harmful. afterward that it's harmful. afterward that it's harmful. So I don't think people should stop So I don't think people should stop So I don't think people should stop using AI by any means, but I think that using AI by any means, but I think that using AI by any means, but I think that the health what I'm most concerned about the health what I'm most concerned about the health what I'm most concerned about is that the health effects are a lot is that the health effects are a lot is that the health effects are a lot more causal Mhm. more causal Mhm. more causal Mhm. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; as opposed to &gt;&gt; as opposed to &gt;&gt; as opposed to uncovering. I think there's like uncovering. I think there's like uncovering. I think there's like starting to be like some pretty starting to be like some pretty starting to be like some pretty startling data startling data startling data behind that. behind that. behind that. So what do you recommend for young men So what do you recommend for young men So what do you recommend for young men and women or older uh, men and women and women or older uh, men and women and women or older uh, men and women around two things, around two things, around two things, around social media use, social media use, social media use, AI use, AI use, AI use, and we have to talk about pornography. Okay. we have to talk about pornography. Okay. we have to talk about pornography. Okay. So, let's talk about social media use. So, let's talk about social media use. So, let's talk about social media use. Do you believe that people should have Do you believe that people should have Do you believe that people should have prescriptions of amount of time, types prescriptions of amount of time, types prescriptions of amount of time, types of interactions they have or won't have? of interactions they have or won't have? of interactions they have or won't have? Um, I realize it's hard to create a Um, I realize it's hard to create a Um, I realize it's hard to create a blanket statement there. blanket statement there. blanket statement there. &gt;&gt; It's it's not that it's hard to it's &gt;&gt; It's it's not that it's hard to it's &gt;&gt; It's it's not that it's hard to it's that this is a whole other podcast. So, that this is a whole other podcast. So, that this is a whole other podcast. So, like I've studied this like I've studied this like I've studied this &gt;&gt; going to have to have you back. We've &gt;&gt; going to have to have you back. We've &gt;&gt; going to have to have you back. We've got a lot of conversations. got a lot of conversations. got a lot of conversations. &gt;&gt; there's so much nuance to this because &gt;&gt; there's so much nuance to this because &gt;&gt; there's so much nuance to this because social media is not uniform in the way social media is not uniform in the way social media is not uniform in the way that it affects your brain. So, that it affects your brain. So, that it affects your brain. So, right? That's the number one thing. Um, right? That's the number one thing. Um, right? That's the number one thing. Um, so, just because all drugs of abuse so, just because all drugs of abuse so, just because all drugs of abuse are in some way dopaminergic, does not are in some way dopaminergic, does not are in some way dopaminergic, does not mean that their effects are uniform on mean that their effects are uniform on mean that their effects are uniform on the brain. the brain. the brain. So, first thing about use of social So, first thing about use of social So, first thing about use of social media, I think a big thing that people miss, I think a big thing that people miss, I think a big thing that people miss, so, there's some like common stuff so, there's some like common stuff so, there's some like common stuff that's like just use it less, bro. that's like just use it less, bro. that's like just use it less, bro. What a lot of people miss is the mental What a lot of people miss is the mental What a lot of people miss is the mental state that you are in when you use it state that you are in when you use it state that you are in when you use it determines a lot. determines a lot. determines a lot. Right? So, if you are feeling bad Right? So, if you are feeling bad Right? So, if you are feeling bad and you use social media, you are you're and you use social media, you are you're and you use social media, you are you're primed for salience. You will be primed for salience. You will be primed for salience. You will be programmed more. programmed more. programmed more. Right? So, so, this is where like people Right? So, so, this is where like people Right? So, so, this is where like people who use it as a form of emotional who use it as a form of emotional who use it as a form of emotional regulation, big problem. regulation, big problem. regulation, big problem. Another interesting thing about social Another interesting thing about social Another interesting thing about social media, when to not use it. media, when to not use it. media, when to not use it. See, you know, you require a certain See, you know, you require a certain See, you know, you require a certain amount of frontal lobe function, amount of frontal lobe function, amount of frontal lobe function, executive function, and willpower in executive function, and willpower in executive function, and willpower in order to fall asleep. You need to be order to fall asleep. You need to be order to fall asleep. You need to be able to suppress your impulses in order able to suppress your impulses in order able to suppress your impulses in order to be able to go to sleep. Don't use to be able to go to sleep. Don't use to be able to go to sleep. Don't use social media before you go to bed. And social media before you go to bed. And social media before you go to bed. And the main reason for that is if you use the main reason for that is if you use the main reason for that is if you use social media social media social media to the point where you've missed your to the point where you've missed your to the point where you've missed your sleep window, sleep window, sleep window, then it's very hard to fall asleep. then it's very hard to fall asleep. then it's very hard to fall asleep. Because now your brain doesn't have Because now your brain doesn't have Because now your brain doesn't have enough willpower. And this is what enough willpower. And this is what enough willpower. And this is what happens to people. So, there's a really happens to people. So, there's a really happens to people. So, there's a really interesting study about interesting study about interesting study about procrastination before bed. And what the procrastination before bed. And what the procrastination before bed. And what the study found is that there's two kinds of study found is that there's two kinds of study found is that there's two kinds of procrastination. There's before bed procrastination. There's before bed procrastination. There's before bed procrastination, procrastinating going procrastination, procrastinating going procrastination, procrastinating going to bed, and then there's in bed to bed, and then there's in bed to bed, and then there's in bed procrastination. When you procrastinate going to sleep When you procrastinate going to sleep When you procrastinate going to sleep after you're in bed. So, don't use it after you're in bed. So, don't use it after you're in bed. So, don't use it when you're not feeling good. when you're not feeling good. when you're not feeling good. Don't use it before bed. Don't use it before bed. Don't use it before bed. Especially because it's going to you're Especially because it's going to you're Especially because it's going to you're going to miss that window and then it's going to miss that window and then it's going to miss that window and then it's going to mess you up for the next day. going to mess you up for the next day. going to mess you up for the next day. You'll be more emotionally fried, more You'll be more emotionally fried, more You'll be more emotionally fried, more emotionally vulnerable. emotionally vulnerable. emotionally vulnerable. &gt;&gt; hour before bed? Yeah, just nowhere &gt;&gt; hour before bed? Yeah, just nowhere &gt;&gt; hour before bed? Yeah, just nowhere near bed. near bed. near bed. Um there's a blue light stuff, but I Um there's a blue light stuff, but I Um there's a blue light stuff, but I think this think this think this you don't miss your sleep window. you don't miss your sleep window. you don't miss your sleep window. That's been such a useful clinical That's been such a useful clinical That's been such a useful clinical revelation when I'm working with a human revelation when I'm working with a human revelation when I'm working with a human being. Cuz if you get past 10:30 and being. Cuz if you get past 10:30 and being. Cuz if you get past 10:30 and you're on your phone, then it's going to you're on your phone, then it's going to you're on your phone, then it's going to become 12:30. Cuz you no longer have the become 12:30. Cuz you no longer have the become 12:30. Cuz you no longer have the frontal lobe function to be able to the frontal lobe function to be able to the frontal lobe function to be able to stop yourself. stop yourself. stop yourself. Um that's the second thing. Third thing Um that's the second thing. Third thing Um that's the second thing. Third thing is understand that is understand that is understand that your brain is How can I say this? How can I say this? How can I say this? You are developing the standards You are developing the standards You are developing the standards for yourself through social media. So, for yourself through social media. So, for yourself through social media. So, we're seeing a rise in body dysmorphia. we're seeing a rise in body dysmorphia. we're seeing a rise in body dysmorphia. So, this is interesting because it used So, this is interesting because it used So, this is interesting because it used to be that body dysmorphia was like more to be that body dysmorphia was like more to be that body dysmorphia was like more common in women than men. We're starting common in women than men. We're starting common in women than men. We're starting to see that even out, especially as we to see that even out, especially as we to see that even out, especially as we have all these like alpha male have all these like alpha male have all these like alpha male influencers. What you see is going to be influencers. What you see is going to be influencers. What you see is going to be your standard. your standard. your standard. &gt;&gt; I'll put alpha in air quotes there. &gt;&gt; I'll put alpha in air quotes there. &gt;&gt; I'll put alpha in air quotes there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, so everyone's expectations for You know, so everyone's expectations for You know, so everyone's expectations for what they should be. So, I went to what they should be. So, I went to what they should be. So, I went to Germany recently and I had my kids there Germany recently and I had my kids there Germany recently and I had my kids there and we went to like a like a spa and we went to like a like a spa and we went to like a like a spa and there were like a lot of like we and there were like a lot of like we and there were like a lot of like we went in the middle of the day. So, like went in the middle of the day. So, like went in the middle of the day. So, like we were on vacation, but you know, we were on vacation, but you know, we were on vacation, but you know, everybody else is at school and whatnot. everybody else is at school and whatnot. everybody else is at school and whatnot. There were a bunch of old German people There were a bunch of old German people There were a bunch of old German people there. And like old German people in swimsuits And like old German people in swimsuits And like old German people in swimsuits are like not the most attractive human are like not the most attractive human are like not the most attractive human beings on the planet. And and my kids beings on the planet. And and my kids beings on the planet. And and my kids were like kind of surprised because were like kind of surprised because were like kind of surprised because there's just a lot of like German people there's just a lot of like German people there's just a lot of like German people who are old. But I like this is what who are old. But I like this is what who are old. But I like this is what normal people look like. And we've normal people look like. And we've normal people look like. And we've forgotten what normal people look like. forgotten what normal people look like. forgotten what normal people look like. We've forgotten what normal is. And the We've forgotten what normal is. And the We've forgotten what normal is. And the more time that you spend on social more time that you spend on social more time that you spend on social media, the more you will be divorced media, the more you will be divorced media, the more you will be divorced from normal. So, I'd say those are like from normal. So, I'd say those are like from normal. So, I'd say those are like the three things. And sure, if you want the three things. And sure, if you want the three things. And sure, if you want to use it less, like use it less. The to use it less, like use it less. The to use it less, like use it less. The less you use it, the better off you're less you use it, the better off you're less you use it, the better off you're going to be. But, I'm sure everyone has going to be. But, I'm sure everyone has going to be. But, I'm sure everyone has said that a thousand times. said that a thousand times. said that a thousand times. I think what people don't realize is I think what people don't realize is I think what people don't realize is that the impact of it is not always that the impact of it is not always that the impact of it is not always uniform. That your psychological vulnerabilities That your psychological vulnerabilities That your psychological vulnerabilities and people know this, if you've ever and people know this, if you've ever and people know this, if you've ever stalked your ex on stalked your ex on stalked your ex on after they get together with somebody after they get together with somebody after they get together with somebody else, like people know what I mean, else, like people know what I mean, else, like people know what I mean, right? Like, you're like your ex is now right? Like, you're like your ex is now right? Like, you're like your ex is now dating someone else and then you look at dating someone else and then you look at dating someone else and then you look at their pictures and you like look at all their pictures and you like look at all their pictures and you like look at all their pictures and you make yourself their pictures and you make yourself their pictures and you make yourself like kind of feel worse. Don't use it like kind of feel worse. Don't use it like kind of feel worse. Don't use it when you're vulnerable. That's huge. I when you're vulnerable. That's huge. I when you're vulnerable. That's huge. I realized that my statement about, uh, realized that my statement about, uh, realized that my statement about, uh, you know, alpha males in air quotes, I you know, alpha males in air quotes, I you know, alpha males in air quotes, I want to be very specific, um, not to want to be very specific, um, not to want to be very specific, um, not to protect feelings at all because no one protect feelings at all because no one protect feelings at all because no one I'm about to talk about needs uh I'm about to talk about needs uh I'm about to talk about needs uh protection for their feelings, but I protection for their feelings, but I protection for their feelings, but I think there are some incredible think there are some incredible think there are some incredible male educators and examples online, uh, male educators and examples online, uh, male educators and examples online, uh, you know, of people who are showing up you know, of people who are showing up you know, of people who are showing up in different aspects of their life in different aspects of their life in different aspects of their life in really spectacular ways. I mean, really spectacular ways. I mean, really spectacular ways. I mean, good friend Jocko Willink, for instance, good friend Jocko Willink, for instance, good friend Jocko Willink, for instance, right? I think, uh, he has a ton to right? I think, uh, he has a ton to right? I think, uh, he has a ton to offer. I my friend Ken Rideout has a ton offer. I my friend Ken Rideout has a ton offer. I my friend Ken Rideout has a ton to offer, you know, um, to offer, you know, um, to offer, you know, um, there are many, many great examples. there are many, many great examples. there are many, many great examples. When the people I was referring to in When the people I was referring to in When the people I was referring to in air quotes or the air quotes or the air quotes or the was in reference to this kind of newer was in reference to this kind of newer was in reference to this kind of newer trend of looks maxing as Yeah. it trend of looks maxing as Yeah. it trend of looks maxing as Yeah. it relates to what you're talking about relates to what you're talking about relates to what you're talking about this about this about this you know, over obsession in my opinion you know, over obsession in my opinion you know, over obsession in my opinion on looks and on, um, cosmetic on looks and on, um, cosmetic on looks and on, um, cosmetic perfection, uh, which I do think is perfection, uh, which I do think is perfection, uh, which I do think is going to be, if it's not already, very going to be, if it's not already, very going to be, if it's not already, very hazardous for young men. The feeling hazardous for young men. The feeling hazardous for young men. The feeling that even just, um, that even just, um, that even just, um, the idea that variation in looks is the idea that variation in looks is the idea that variation in looks is being discouraged, that there's sort of being discouraged, that there's sort of being discouraged, that there's sort of this need for everyone to look the this need for everyone to look the this need for everyone to look the same is so very different than how I same is so very different than how I same is so very different than how I grew up where, uh, I've feel very grew up where, uh, I've feel very grew up where, uh, I've feel very fortunate that there was, you know, kind fortunate that there was, you know, kind fortunate that there was, you know, kind of a range of different appearances, of a range of different appearances, of a range of different appearances, um, within the scope of healthy that, um, within the scope of healthy that, um, within the scope of healthy that, uh, that defined people's unique that defined people's unique that defined people's unique characteristics. And now it this looks characteristics. And now it this looks characteristics. And now it this looks maxing thing seems to be all about maxing thing seems to be all about maxing thing seems to be all about everyone having like this angle of jaw, everyone having like this angle of jaw, everyone having like this angle of jaw, this cheekbone thing, this type of skin, this cheekbone thing, this type of skin, this cheekbone thing, this type of skin, this type and that's the part where this type and that's the part where this type and that's the part where I go like hey guys, like please don't I go like hey guys, like please don't I go like hey guys, like please don't waste your life. Like this is going to waste your life. Like this is going to waste your life. Like this is going to this is a fool's errand. It's going to this is a fool's errand. It's going to this is a fool's errand. It's going to destroy them. Here's what's really destroy them. Here's what's really destroy them. Here's what's really scary. So like I'm not a couple's scary. So like I'm not a couple's scary. So like I'm not a couple's therapist, but I just made a guide to therapist, but I just made a guide to therapist, but I just made a guide to relationships because relationships because relationships because everyone in my community is struggling everyone in my community is struggling everyone in my community is struggling with loneliness. And here's the really with loneliness. And here's the really with loneliness. And here's the really scary thing. If you look at the scary thing. If you look at the scary thing. If you look at the research, looks are not that important for a looks are not that important for a looks are not that important for a relationship. So if you there's some relationship. So if you there's some relationship. So if you there's some really fascinating studies on charisma. really fascinating studies on charisma. really fascinating studies on charisma. So looks are number six So looks are number six So looks are number six on if you do a multivariate regression if you do a multivariate regression if you do a multivariate regression analysis. Actually, I don't think it was analysis. Actually, I don't think it was analysis. Actually, I don't think it was multivariate, but if you if you look multivariate, but if you if you look multivariate, but if you if you look at the factors of charisma, looks is at the factors of charisma, looks is at the factors of charisma, looks is number six. number six. number six. And and if you look at like the most And and if you look at like the most And and if you look at like the most charismatic people on the planet, like charismatic people on the planet, like charismatic people on the planet, like no offense, but like you know, Winston no offense, but like you know, Winston no offense, but like you know, Winston Churchill, amazingly charismatic. Not Churchill, amazingly charismatic. Not Churchill, amazingly charismatic. Not the most looks maxing guy out there, you the most looks maxing guy out there, you the most looks maxing guy out there, you know. &gt;&gt; Right. And so I think the really &gt;&gt; Right. And so I think the really &gt;&gt; Right. And so I think the really scary thing is that a lot of this like scary thing is that a lot of this like scary thing is that a lot of this like information on social media is just information on social media is just information on social media is just wrong. It's not based in science at all. wrong. It's not based in science at all. wrong. It's not based in science at all. Like what we talked about with flirting. Like what we talked about with flirting. Like what we talked about with flirting. People don't realize if you're People don't realize if you're People don't realize if you're flirting with someone and they don't get flirting with someone and they don't get flirting with someone and they don't get it, that's actually fine. That's why you it, that's actually fine. That's why you it, that's actually fine. That's why you have to make three attempts to flirt have to make three attempts to flirt have to make three attempts to flirt with someone statistically. And then you with someone statistically. And then you with someone statistically. And then you should level up like escalate the signal should level up like escalate the signal should level up like escalate the signal that you're transmitting. Now the really that you're transmitting. Now the really that you're transmitting. Now the really interesting data point cuz I'm excited interesting data point cuz I'm excited interesting data point cuz I'm excited about this. But um women who are of about this. But um women who are of about this. But um women who are of average attractiveness and high average attractiveness and high average attractiveness and high signaling are more likely to end up in a signaling are more likely to end up in a signaling are more likely to end up in a relationship and be approached than relationship and be approached than relationship and be approached than women who are very high attractiveness women who are very high attractiveness women who are very high attractiveness and low signaling. Uh could you define and low signaling. Uh could you define and low signaling. Uh could you define signaling? Yeah. signaling? Yeah. signaling? Yeah. Making it known that you're open for a Making it known that you're open for a Making it known that you're open for a relationship. Eye contact, smiling. relationship. Eye contact, smiling. relationship. Eye contact, smiling. So this is what people don't understand So this is what people don't understand So this is what people don't understand is like they think like okay, if I'm is like they think like okay, if I'm is like they think like okay, if I'm hot, things will happen. hot, things will happen. hot, things will happen. That's not how it works at all. There's That's not how it works at all. There's That's not how it works at all. There's a lot about how to flirt, how to a lot about how to flirt, how to a lot about how to flirt, how to communicate interest, how to be communicate interest, how to be communicate interest, how to be embarrassed. And all of these things are embarrassed. And all of these things are embarrassed. And all of these things are like positive things that people don't like positive things that people don't like positive things that people don't understand. That charisma is about understand. That charisma is about understand. That charisma is about having vision because if you're looking having vision because if you're looking having vision because if you're looking for a long-term partner and they're for a long-term partner and they're for a long-term partner and they're trying to figure out can I be with this trying to figure out can I be with this trying to figure out can I be with this person? They have to have a sense of person? They have to have a sense of person? They have to have a sense of your vision of life to see if they fit your vision of life to see if they fit your vision of life to see if they fit with you. It's actually way more with you. It's actually way more with you. It's actually way more important than looks. The ability to important than looks. The ability to important than looks. The ability to handle adversity. handle adversity. handle adversity. Huge element of charisma. Huge element of charisma. Huge element of charisma. So someone wants to know if stuff goes So someone wants to know if stuff goes So someone wants to know if stuff goes south, can I count on you? south, can I count on you? south, can I count on you? Way more important than looks. Way more important than looks. Way more important than looks. So the only thing with looks is that in So the only thing with looks is that in So the only thing with looks is that in online dating specifically people will online dating specifically people will online dating specifically people will judge based on looks, but there are judge based on looks, but there are judge based on looks, but there are numerous studies that show not numerous studies that show not numerous studies that show not numerous actually. One study at least that I've actually. One study at least that I've actually. One study at least that I've seen that shows that if your profile seen that shows that if your profile seen that shows that if your profile indicates purpose, man or woman, it indicates purpose, man or woman, it indicates purpose, man or woman, it increases your attractiveness. increases your attractiveness. increases your attractiveness. So the problem with all this social So the problem with all this social So the problem with all this social media stuff is not that it's wrong. media stuff is not that it's wrong. media stuff is not that it's wrong. I work with a lot of incels. I work with I work with a lot of incels. I work with I work with a lot of incels. I work with a lot of beta males. a lot of beta males. a lot of beta males. It's not that they're wrong. It's that It's not that they're wrong. It's that It's not that they're wrong. It's that they're woefully incomplete. They they're woefully incomplete. They they're woefully incomplete. They haven't done a study of the whole haven't done a study of the whole haven't done a study of the whole literature. Sure, if you're more literature. Sure, if you're more literature. Sure, if you're more attractive, it is easier to get dates. attractive, it is easier to get dates. attractive, it is easier to get dates. Here's the scariest statistic. Here's the scariest statistic. Here's the scariest statistic. Drive for muscularity is inversely Drive for muscularity is inversely Drive for muscularity is inversely correlated with length of relationship. correlated with length of relationship. correlated with length of relationship. Right? So the more that you if you're Right? So the more that you if you're Right? So the more that you if you're watching social media and you're like I watching social media and you're like I watching social media and you're like I need to be pumped. I want to be pumped. need to be pumped. I want to be pumped. need to be pumped. I want to be pumped. I want to be pumped. I want to be I want to be pumped. I want to be I want to be pumped. I want to be pumped. That's what That's what That's what drives people away. It's hard to have a drives people away. It's hard to have a drives people away. It's hard to have a relationship with that kind of relationship with that kind of relationship with that kind of person. So by all means get muscular, person. So by all means get muscular, person. So by all means get muscular, but want it less, which is really but want it less, which is really but want it less, which is really interesting because what I see is people interesting because what I see is people interesting because what I see is people wanting it more. Like looks maxing, I wanting it more. Like looks maxing, I wanting it more. Like looks maxing, I want this. I want this. I want this. So want this. I want this. I want this. So want this. I want this. I want this. So deprioritize it. Yeah. Yeah, it's so deprioritize it. Yeah. Yeah, it's so deprioritize it. Yeah. Yeah, it's so interesting. I mean the drive and interesting. I mean the drive and interesting. I mean the drive and vision thing is um vision thing is um vision thing is um and purpose thing is so interesting and purpose thing is so interesting and purpose thing is so interesting because uh you know, this is one thing where I'm uh you know, this is one thing where I'm uh you know, this is one thing where I'm not saying everyone should go into not saying everyone should go into not saying everyone should go into science, but in science you science, but in science you science, but in science you apprentice yourself to somebody else and apprentice yourself to somebody else and apprentice yourself to somebody else and then to somebody else as a postdoc and then to somebody else as a postdoc and then to somebody else as a postdoc and then eventually, whether or not you get then eventually, whether or not you get then eventually, whether or not you get to succeed or not as an independent to succeed or not as an independent to succeed or not as an independent scientist is entirely based not on what scientist is entirely based not on what scientist is entirely based not on what you did, that's just proof of an you did, that's just proof of an you did, that's just proof of an ability, right? It's based on your ability, right? It's based on your ability, right? It's based on your vision. Like is there something vision. Like is there something vision. Like is there something exciting? And that's what That's what we exciting? And that's what That's what we exciting? And that's what That's what we joke in the in science like every year joke in the in science like every year joke in the in science like every year there's a prom king and a prom queen on there's a prom king and a prom queen on there's a prom king and a prom queen on the on the job market. It's the person the on the job market. It's the person the on the job market. It's the person who has the most interesting and who has the most interesting and who has the most interesting and compelling vision. That's who you're compelling vision. That's who you're compelling vision. That's who you're hiring. And yes, they tend to have been And yes, they tend to have been And yes, they tend to have been successful in the past. You need that, successful in the past. You need that, successful in the past. You need that, but that's necessary but not sufficient. but that's necessary but not sufficient. but that's necessary but not sufficient. So important that you're raising So important that you're raising So important that you're raising this. Do you think that a young men are this. Do you think that a young men are this. Do you think that a young men are indeed falling behind in terms of we indeed falling behind in terms of we indeed falling behind in terms of we hear this all the time that they're hear this all the time that they're hear this all the time that they're falling behind their age-matched peers falling behind their age-matched peers falling behind their age-matched peers that are women in terms of just sort of that are women in terms of just sort of that are women in terms of just sort of life progression. Oh, absolutely. I mean life progression. Oh, absolutely. I mean life progression. Oh, absolutely. I mean there's no I think there's no question there's no I think there's no question there's no I think there's no question of that. So of that. So of that. So I forget if it was 41% of college I forget if it was 41% of college I forget if it was 41% of college graduates are men now. graduates are men now. graduates are men now. Um so I think like the it's really Um so I think like the it's really Um so I think like the it's really lopsided. I think in 1975 lopsided. I think in 1975 lopsided. I think in 1975 the average age of marriage for a man the average age of marriage for a man the average age of marriage for a man was 23.8. And now it's 30.8. And now it's 30.8. And now it's 30.8. Uh it's not average, median. So half of Uh it's not average, median. So half of Uh it's not average, median. So half of the people are actually older than that. the people are actually older than that. the people are actually older than that. For women it was 21.1 to 28.4. People For women it was 21.1 to 28.4. People For women it was 21.1 to 28.4. People will make um financial arguments around will make um financial arguments around will make um financial arguments around that. I see that a lot. People say, that. I see that a lot. People say, that. I see that a lot. People say, "Well, it's very expensive to you know, "Well, it's very expensive to you know, "Well, it's very expensive to you know, to be able to raise a family, etc." to be able to raise a family, etc." to be able to raise a family, etc." That's that's often what you hear at That's that's often what you hear at That's that's often what you hear at least in California. People say that least in California. People say that least in California. People say that they're waiting because they need to they're waiting because they need to they're waiting because they need to establish a certain level of income. Is establish a certain level of income. Is establish a certain level of income. Is that is that true? Sure. I mean I that is that true? Sure. I mean I that is that true? Sure. I mean I think that's what people are think that's what people are think that's what people are subjectively feeling. 50% of people subjectively feeling. 50% of people subjectively feeling. 50% of people under the age of adults under the age of under the age of adults under the age of under the age of adults under the age of 30 live with their parents now. I forget 30 live with their parents now. I forget 30 live with their parents now. I forget what the statistic used to be like what the statistic used to be like what the statistic used to be like 20 years ago. So we are absolutely 20 years ago. So we are absolutely 20 years ago. So we are absolutely seeing like economic difficulties. So seeing like economic difficulties. So seeing like economic difficulties. So every everything is slowing down, right? every everything is slowing down, right? every everything is slowing down, right? That And but I think that there is the That And but I think that there is the That And but I think that there is the biggest difference biggest difference biggest difference is as a society men are the one group of as a society men are the one group of as a society men are the one group of people that we expect to help people that we expect to help people that we expect to help themselves. So, if you look at like and there's So, if you look at like and there's So, if you look at like and there's like I'm not I'm not saying women like I'm not I'm not saying women like I'm not I'm not saying women don't deserve help. So, you know, don't deserve help. So, you know, don't deserve help. So, you know, there's some examples of this that I there's some examples of this that I there's some examples of this that I think are not great. So, there are think are not great. So, there are think are not great. So, there are homeless shelters for every gender and homeless shelters for every gender and homeless shelters for every gender and then there are homeless shelters for then there are homeless shelters for then there are homeless shelters for women. There are only there are no women. There are only there are no women. There are only there are no male-only homeless shelters. I think male-only homeless shelters. I think male-only homeless shelters. I think that's a good example of you don't need that's a good example of you don't need that's a good example of you don't need a male-only homeless shelter because a male-only homeless shelter because a male-only homeless shelter because that's an example of like women who are that's an example of like women who are that's an example of like women who are in every all-gender homeless shelters in every all-gender homeless shelters in every all-gender homeless shelters are really way more unsafe than if are really way more unsafe than if are really way more unsafe than if they're on their own. So, like that's an they're on their own. So, like that's an they're on their own. So, like that's an example of like I don't think everything example of like I don't think everything example of like I don't think everything should be equal between all genders, but should be equal between all genders, but should be equal between all genders, but I think the challenge is that I think the challenge is that I think the challenge is that you know, if you just talk to men or if you know, if you just talk to men or if you know, if you just talk to men or if you talk about men, there are many you talk about men, there are many you talk about men, there are many things that we'll say, "Okay, like the things that we'll say, "Okay, like the things that we'll say, "Okay, like the patriarchy is harmful to both men and patriarchy is harmful to both men and patriarchy is harmful to both men and women." Fair enough. But like women." Fair enough. But like women." Fair enough. But like what are we going to do societally, what are we going to do societally, what are we going to do societally, systemically to support the men who are systemically to support the men who are systemically to support the men who are struggling? So, there aren't even though struggling? So, there aren't even though struggling? So, there aren't even though only 41% of people who graduate from only 41% of people who graduate from only 41% of people who graduate from college are men, there the number of college are men, there the number of college are men, there the number of male-only scholarships is like really male-only scholarships is like really male-only scholarships is like really small. So, as a society, it's really So, as a society, it's really So, as a society, it's really interesting. I think we're not interesting. I think we're not interesting. I think we're not really supporting men in the way that we really supporting men in the way that we really supporting men in the way that we need to. Now, a lot of people will hear need to. Now, a lot of people will hear need to. Now, a lot of people will hear this as, "Oh, it is my responsibility as this as, "Oh, it is my responsibility as this as, "Oh, it is my responsibility as a woman to do things for my husband a woman to do things for my husband a woman to do things for my husband or boyfriend or whatever." I don't think or boyfriend or whatever." I don't think or boyfriend or whatever." I don't think it's like women's responsibility. I it's like women's responsibility. I it's like women's responsibility. I think that's a big problem historically think that's a big problem historically think that's a big problem historically that women have been responsible for that women have been responsible for that women have been responsible for certain aspects of men. I think the certain aspects of men. I think the certain aspects of men. I think the work that I do and the work you do, the work that I do and the work you do, the work that I do and the work you do, the work we do is to try to help men, women, work we do is to try to help men, women, work we do is to try to help men, women, and everybody else take care of and everybody else take care of and everybody else take care of themselves. But I do think there's plenty But I do think there's plenty But I do think there's plenty of data that suggests that of data that suggests that of data that suggests that you know, men are falling behind. If you know, men are falling behind. If you know, men are falling behind. If you look at rates of look at rates of look at rates of addiction, um deaths of despair, this is addiction, um deaths of despair, this is addiction, um deaths of despair, this is a really interesting uh a really interesting uh a really interesting uh scientific measure that came a lot out scientific measure that came a lot out scientific measure that came a lot out of the UK. of the UK. of the UK. These are basically deaths that relate These are basically deaths that relate These are basically deaths that relate to suicide. You know, male suicide rates to suicide. You know, male suicide rates to suicide. You know, male suicide rates are four times what women are four times what women are four times what women what they are for women. So, it's what they are for women. So, it's what they are for women. So, it's interesting like interesting like interesting like now hopefully this is changing, but when now hopefully this is changing, but when now hopefully this is changing, but when I was in residency, you know, we had I was in residency, you know, we had I was in residency, you know, we had women's mental health clinics. We didn't women's mental health clinics. We didn't women's mental health clinics. We didn't have male mental health clinics. have male mental health clinics. have male mental health clinics. Do men in relationships Do men in relationships Do men in relationships um you know are they protected from some of you know are they protected from some of you know are they protected from some of the negative effects that you're the negative effects that you're the negative effects that you're describing? &gt;&gt; This is fascinating. So, do you know &gt;&gt; This is fascinating. So, do you know &gt;&gt; This is fascinating. So, do you know what takotsubo cardiomyopathy is? Have what takotsubo cardiomyopathy is? Have what takotsubo cardiomyopathy is? Have you heard of this? you heard of this? you heard of this? &gt;&gt; This is when people die of a broken &gt;&gt; This is when people die of a broken &gt;&gt; This is when people die of a broken heart. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, this is what's really &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, this is what's really &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, this is what's really fascinating. People don't realize this, fascinating. People don't realize this, fascinating. People don't realize this, but women are far more likely to initiate women are far more likely to initiate women are far more likely to initiate divorce. So, I think the interesting So, I think the interesting So, I think the interesting statistic about this is you can look at statistic about this is you can look at statistic about this is you can look at gay couples. gay couples. gay couples. Um so, gay men who get married have less Um so, gay men who get married have less Um so, gay men who get married have less than a 50% divorce rate. I think they than a 50% divorce rate. I think they than a 50% divorce rate. I think they get divorced maybe 30% of the time. they get divorced maybe 30% of the time. they get divorced maybe 30% of the time. Lesbian couples have the highest divorce Lesbian couples have the highest divorce Lesbian couples have the highest divorce rate. So, they get divorced I think rate. So, they get divorced I think rate. So, they get divorced I think something like 60% of the time. So, it's something like 60% of the time. So, it's something like 60% of the time. So, it's even greater than 50%. even greater than 50%. even greater than 50%. So, I did a lot of work on this because I did a lot of work on this because I did a lot of work on this because I I've had so many patients who when they I've had so many patients who when they I've had so many patients who when they go through a breakup, like it really go through a breakup, like it really go through a breakup, like it really ruins their life. And there's research ruins their life. And there's research ruins their life. And there's research on this, okay? I'm not like on this, okay? I'm not like on this, okay? I'm not like misogynist or anything like that. misogynist or anything like that. misogynist or anything like that. So, if you look at qualitative research, So, if you look at qualitative research, So, if you look at qualitative research, if you ask a woman after she goes if you ask a woman after she goes if you ask a woman after she goes through a divorce, what did you lose? through a divorce, what did you lose? through a divorce, what did you lose? She will say, I lost a relationship. She will say, I lost a relationship. She will say, I lost a relationship. If you ask a man, what did you lose? If you ask a man, what did you lose? If you ask a man, what did you lose? They say, I lost a life. They say, I lost a life. They say, I lost a life. So, this is just it's just different. So, this is just it's just different. So, this is just it's just different. So, women will oftentimes form many women will oftentimes form many women will oftentimes form many connections. So, when they lose their connections. So, when they lose their connections. So, when they lose their relationship, they lose a relationship, they lose a relationship, they lose a relationship. But, men are by some amount of biology, But, men are by some amount of biology, But, men are by some amount of biology, by some amount of conditioning, by some by some amount of conditioning, by some by some amount of conditioning, by some amount of culture, oftentimes will have amount of culture, oftentimes will have amount of culture, oftentimes will have one emotional support in their life, one emotional support in their life, one emotional support in their life, which is their wife. And I've worked which is their wife. And I've worked which is their wife. And I've worked with plenty of women for whom this is with plenty of women for whom this is with plenty of women for whom this is overwhelming because they become their overwhelming because they become their overwhelming because they become their husband's therapist because their husband's therapist because their husband's therapist because their husband doesn't know how to manage their husband doesn't know how to manage their husband doesn't know how to manage their own emotions. That's not good. That's own emotions. That's not good. That's own emotions. That's not good. That's not healthy. But if we're looking at not healthy. But if we're looking at not healthy. But if we're looking at outcomes, the cortisol spike that men get after the cortisol spike that men get after the cortisol spike that men get after divorce is way higher. The amount of divorce is way higher. The amount of divorce is way higher. The amount of inflammation that they experience is way inflammation that they experience is way inflammation that they experience is way higher. Um I think they have an acute higher. Um I think they have an acute higher. Um I think they have an acute risk of heart attack that elevates. So risk of heart attack that elevates. So risk of heart attack that elevates. So some of this is probably biology. some of this is probably biology. some of this is probably biology. We're we're just wired differently. Like We're we're just wired differently. Like We're we're just wired differently. Like this is also another thing that's really this is also another thing that's really this is also another thing that's really interesting. Um the inflammatory interesting. Um the inflammatory interesting. Um the inflammatory response from a cold is greater in men response from a cold is greater in men response from a cold is greater in men than it is in women. than it is in women. than it is in women. So like when my wife gets sick, she's So like when my wife gets sick, she's So like when my wife gets sick, she's able to do stuff, but like my able to do stuff, but like my able to do stuff, but like my inflammatory response is actually like inflammatory response is actually like inflammatory response is actually like I'm out. And there's a lot of I'm out. And there's a lot of I'm out. And there's a lot of physiological evidence for why that is. physiological evidence for why that is. physiological evidence for why that is. And it may have something to do with if And it may have something to do with if And it may have something to do with if you sort of look at like in the animal you sort of look at like in the animal you sort of look at like in the animal kingdom, you know, a male lion is much more you know, a male lion is much more you know, a male lion is much more likely to fight by baboons, much more likely to fight by baboons, much more likely to fight by baboons, much more likely to get scratches and things like likely to get scratches and things like likely to get scratches and things like that. So we need a more robust uh that. So we need a more robust uh that. So we need a more robust uh um immune system. um immune system. um immune system. So we want a stronger immune response. So we want a stronger immune response. So we want a stronger immune response. But yeah, takotsubo car- cardiomyopathy, But yeah, takotsubo car- cardiomyopathy, But yeah, takotsubo car- cardiomyopathy, I mean the mortality risk of divorce I mean the mortality risk of divorce I mean the mortality risk of divorce for a man is way higher than a woman. for a man is way higher than a woman. for a man is way higher than a woman. It's interesting because It's interesting because It's interesting because um and these are individual cases, but um and these are individual cases, but um and these are individual cases, but um not population studies, but I've had um not population studies, but I've had um not population studies, but I've had a lot of young men and their parents a lot of young men and their parents a lot of young men and their parents uh reach out to me. Like my kid is uh reach out to me. Like my kid is uh reach out to me. Like my kid is really struggling. He really struggling. He really struggling. He uh you know, he's really languishing and uh you know, he's really languishing and uh you know, he's really languishing and he's really falling behind. You know, he's really falling behind. You know, he's really falling behind. You know, he's got these issues that issues. he's got these issues that issues. he's got these issues that issues. Um uh there are all these like loose uh there are all these like loose uh there are all these like loose correlations that I'll just throw out correlations that I'll just throw out correlations that I'll just throw out there. I often hear, and I'm not saying there. I often hear, and I'm not saying there. I often hear, and I'm not saying this is the cause, but I'll hear, "Oh this is the cause, but I'll hear, "Oh this is the cause, but I'll hear, "Oh yeah, you know, and even their moms yeah, you know, and even their moms yeah, you know, and even their moms will know sometimes. They'll say, 'You will know sometimes. They'll say, 'You will know sometimes. They'll say, 'You know, he's had some like really know, he's had some like really know, he's had some like really serious sexual side effects. He was serious sexual side effects. He was serious sexual side effects. He was using these uh anti-hair loss meds. I using these uh anti-hair loss meds. I using these uh anti-hair loss meds. I wonder, is it that?'" They always want wonder, is it that?'" They always want wonder, is it that?'" They always want to find like what's the one thing that to find like what's the one thing that to find like what's the one thing that can put them back on track. And I'm not can put them back on track. And I'm not can put them back on track. And I'm not psychiatrist, so I've talked to them psychiatrist, so I've talked to them psychiatrist, so I've talked to them before and often times we'll uh get a before and often times we'll uh get a before and often times we'll uh get a sense of what's going on more generally. sense of what's going on more generally. sense of what's going on more generally. And I actually have noticed that a And I actually have noticed that a And I actually have noticed that a number of these guys have relationships. number of these guys have relationships. number of these guys have relationships. They're very close with their They're very close with their They're very close with their girlfriend. They have very kind, loving, girlfriend. They have very kind, loving, girlfriend. They have very kind, loving, supportive girlfriends. And the supportive girlfriends. And the supportive girlfriends. And the girlfriends are doing well in life. girlfriends are doing well in life. girlfriends are doing well in life. They're moving forward professionally, They're moving forward professionally, They're moving forward professionally, but the guy isn't. He's sort of stuck. but the guy isn't. He's sort of stuck. but the guy isn't. He's sort of stuck. And that was a surprise to me. I thought And that was a surprise to me. I thought And that was a surprise to me. I thought they would be totally alone. They'd have they would be totally alone. They'd have they would be totally alone. They'd have no access to to, you know, dating or no access to to, you know, dating or no access to to, you know, dating or mates. No, that's not what's happening mates. No, that's not what's happening mates. No, that's not what's happening in many cases. They're just they're in many cases. They're just they're in many cases. They're just they're sort of just stuck. They can't seem to sort of just stuck. They can't seem to sort of just stuck. They can't seem to find a profession. They can't seem to find a profession. They can't seem to find a profession. They can't seem to get ahead. They're and they've got get ahead. They're and they've got get ahead. They're and they've got these very kind, very, very patient very kind, very, very patient very kind, very, very patient girlfriends that are sitting it out with girlfriends that are sitting it out with girlfriends that are sitting it out with them for, I don't know how long. Uh I them for, I don't know how long. Uh I them for, I don't know how long. Uh I don't know if they'll stick around, but don't know if they'll stick around, but don't know if they'll stick around, but that seems more and more common. So, that seems more and more common. So, that seems more and more common. So, they can find the relationship, but they can find the relationship, but they can find the relationship, but they can't seem to can't seem to can't seem to launch into being a grown man, launch into being a grown man, launch into being a grown man, frankly. Yeah, so I think, um first of frankly. Yeah, so I think, um first of frankly. Yeah, so I think, um first of all, that was me. So, uh you know, when all, that was me. So, uh you know, when all, that was me. So, uh you know, when I it took me 5 and 1/2 years to graduate I it took me 5 and 1/2 years to graduate I it took me 5 and 1/2 years to graduate from college. I graduated with a 2.4 from college. I graduated with a 2.4 from college. I graduated with a 2.4 GPA. And then I started med school at 28. I And then I started med school at 28. I And then I started med school at 28. I couldn't support myself financially couldn't support myself financially couldn't support myself financially until I started residency at the age of until I started residency at the age of until I started residency at the age of 32. My wife started working at 16 and has My wife started working at 16 and has My wife started working at 16 and has never stopped. never stopped. never stopped. And so, there was a period of like 5 And so, there was a period of like 5 And so, there was a period of like 5 years where like what was I doing? I had years where like what was I doing? I had years where like what was I doing? I had a research assistant position at a research assistant position at a research assistant position at Harvard, but I was basically applying to Harvard, but I was basically applying to Harvard, but I was basically applying to medical school. medical school. medical school. And so, like I was going nowhere real And so, like I was going nowhere real And so, like I was going nowhere real fast, and she stuck it out with me, fast, and she stuck it out with me, fast, and she stuck it out with me, which is quite amazing. Like I'm which is quite amazing. Like I'm which is quite amazing. Like I'm still surprised by her still surprised by her still surprised by her and her lack of pressure, and also her and her lack of pressure, and also her and her lack of pressure, and also her like supreme confidence that I was going like supreme confidence that I was going like supreme confidence that I was going to figure it out. to figure it out. to figure it out. Um so, I been in those shoes. Um so, I been in those shoes. Um so, I been in those shoes. And I think the big thing for me was I And I think the big thing for me was I And I think the big thing for me was I figured out how I worked. And so, I you figured out how I worked. And so, I you figured out how I worked. And so, I you know, we have this picture failure to know, we have this picture failure to know, we have this picture failure to launch, which is a lot of what I deal launch, which is a lot of what I deal launch, which is a lot of what I deal with. These are gifted kids with. These are gifted kids with. These are gifted kids who then hit a wall like I did. So, had who then hit a wall like I did. So, had who then hit a wall like I did. So, had a lot of potential, just never really a lot of potential, just never really a lot of potential, just never really comes to it. comes to it. comes to it. They struggle a lot with things like They struggle a lot with things like They struggle a lot with things like discipline, motivation. I think often discipline, motivation. I think often discipline, motivation. I think often times they will look for some kind of times they will look for some kind of times they will look for some kind of solution, right? Because we as human solution, right? Because we as human solution, right? Because we as human beings, we don't realize that most of beings, we don't realize that most of beings, we don't realize that most of life is multifactorial. life is multifactorial. life is multifactorial. That if you do a multivariate regression That if you do a multivariate regression That if you do a multivariate regression analysis, you're not going to find that analysis, you're not going to find that analysis, you're not going to find that it was the hair loss meds. it was the hair loss meds. it was the hair loss meds. And so, this is where we kind of come And so, this is where we kind of come And so, this is where we kind of come back to the road map, where I think back to the road map, where I think back to the road map, where I think the most important thing and I I've the most important thing and I I've the most important thing and I I've helped I've helped I've helped anywhere between hundreds anywhere between hundreds anywhere between hundreds to millions, whether you consider to millions, whether you consider to millions, whether you consider YouTube or not. And the main thing is they don't know And the main thing is they don't know And the main thing is they don't know how they work. See, how they work. See, how they work. See, men are not taught to understand, men are not taught to understand, men are not taught to understand, they're taught to do. they're taught to do. they're taught to do. Like we we're like, you know, do this Like we we're like, you know, do this Like we we're like, you know, do this thing. Like get a job, do this. And thing. Like get a job, do this. And thing. Like get a job, do this. And women have all kinds of expectations, women have all kinds of expectations, women have all kinds of expectations, have babies, have babies, have babies, um and work, and do everything, all, you um and work, and do everything, all, you um and work, and do everything, all, you know, exceptionally well. know, exceptionally well. know, exceptionally well. But I think we're just not But I think we're just not But I think we're just not taught how to understand ourselves. So, taught how to understand ourselves. So, taught how to understand ourselves. So, the biggest thing that I see is the biggest thing that I see is the biggest thing that I see is not a problem of treatment, but is a not a problem of treatment, but is a not a problem of treatment, but is a problem of misdiagnosis. problem of misdiagnosis. problem of misdiagnosis. And one of the things that you learn, I And one of the things that you learn, I And one of the things that you learn, I think people don't really realize this, think people don't really realize this, think people don't really realize this, but like most of medicine is not but like most of medicine is not but like most of medicine is not treatment. Like I don't think treatment treatment. Like I don't think treatment treatment. Like I don't think treatment is usually the hard part. I think the is usually the hard part. I think the is usually the hard part. I think the diagnosis is the hard part. diagnosis is the hard part. diagnosis is the hard part. Understanding really what's wrong. Understanding really what's wrong. Understanding really what's wrong. Uh just as another example of this, Uh just as another example of this, Uh just as another example of this, I've worked with so many people, young I've worked with so many people, young I've worked with so many people, young men, who are like, "I'm so tired. How do I who are like, "I'm so tired. How do I who are like, "I'm so tired. How do I increase my energy? How do I increase my increase my energy? How do I increase my increase my energy? How do I increase my energy?" And what they don't realize is like if And what they don't realize is like if And what they don't realize is like if you think about tiredness, you think about tiredness, you think about tiredness, tiredness is a signal from the brain. tiredness is a signal from the brain. tiredness is a signal from the brain. Tiredness is not always low energy. Tiredness is not always low energy. Tiredness is not always low energy. Tiredness is your brain's way of telling Tiredness is your brain's way of telling Tiredness is your brain's way of telling you that this is not worth doing. you that this is not worth doing. you that this is not worth doing. And the interesting thing is there are a And the interesting thing is there are a And the interesting thing is there are a lot of things that we do need to do that lot of things that we do need to do that lot of things that we do need to do that we will feel tired for, but the real we will feel tired for, but the real we will feel tired for, but the real solution to that is sometimes is to solution to that is sometimes is to solution to that is sometimes is to force yourself to it and kind of get force yourself to it and kind of get force yourself to it and kind of get yourself out of it. yourself out of it. yourself out of it. Um you know, there's some studies that Um you know, there's some studies that Um you know, there's some studies that show that exercise is equally effective show that exercise is equally effective show that exercise is equally effective to an SSRI, so there's a value to that. to an SSRI, so there's a value to that. to an SSRI, so there's a value to that. But, I think what a lot of people are But, I think what a lot of people are But, I think what a lot of people are missing is missing is missing is their conception of the thing is what's their conception of the thing is what's their conception of the thing is what's making them tired. making them tired. making them tired. You know, if you think about something You know, if you think about something You know, if you think about something that you haven't done before and you're that you haven't done before and you're that you haven't done before and you're like, "Oh my god, I have to do this like, "Oh my god, I have to do this like, "Oh my god, I have to do this thing." And then when you do it, you're thing." And then when you do it, you're thing." And then when you do it, you're like, "Oh, it's not that bad." like, "Oh, it's not that bad." like, "Oh, it's not that bad." And then you procrastinate on doing the And then you procrastinate on doing the And then you procrastinate on doing the thing even though it's actually pretty easy to even though it's actually pretty easy to even though it's actually pretty easy to do. So, changing your understanding of what So, changing your understanding of what So, changing your understanding of what you are tired to do is the fastest way you are tired to do is the fastest way you are tired to do is the fastest way to be able to do it. to be able to do it. to be able to do it. But, the problem is we don't teach men But, the problem is we don't teach men But, the problem is we don't teach men what's going on inside them. what's going on inside them. what's going on inside them. Right? We don't teach them about their Right? We don't teach them about their Right? We don't teach them about their emotions. We don't teach them about emotions. We don't teach them about emotions. We don't teach them about motivation. Um and so when I when I focus on that, Um and so when I when I focus on that, Um and so when I when I focus on that, that's really what I focus on doing. that's really what I focus on doing. that's really what I focus on doing. There is a you know, an old Sanskrit There is a you know, an old Sanskrit There is a you know, an old Sanskrit sentiment that avidya sentiment that avidya sentiment that avidya which means ignorance is the source of which means ignorance is the source of which means ignorance is the source of dukkha, which is suffering. All of your dukkha, which is suffering. All of your dukkha, which is suffering. All of your suffering in life has nothing to do with suffering in life has nothing to do with suffering in life has nothing to do with willpower, motivation, anything like willpower, motivation, anything like willpower, motivation, anything like that. It's all a lack of understanding. that. It's all a lack of understanding. that. It's all a lack of understanding. And the more I work, the more I've And the more I work, the more I've And the more I work, the more I've realized that the most powerful thing realized that the most powerful thing realized that the most powerful thing that you can give yourself is that you can give yourself is that you can give yourself is understanding. Even if I if I were to ask you, you Even if I if I were to ask you, you Even if I if I were to ask you, you know, like know, like know, like the things that are easy for you the things that are easy for you the things that are easy for you are the things that you understand. And are the things that you understand. And are the things that you understand. And before you understood them, they were before you understood them, they were before you understood them, they were hard. As someone who's lazy As someone who's lazy As someone who's lazy like understanding what motivates you like understanding what motivates you like understanding what motivates you is actually more important than is actually more important than is actually more important than discipline or willpower for me, anyway. discipline or willpower for me, anyway. discipline or willpower for me, anyway. I'm a degenerate. I'm a degenerate. I'm a degenerate. You know, and I think this is what You know, and I think this is what You know, and I think this is what a lot of these young men who what a lot of these young men who what a lot of these young men who failure to thrive, like I had one failure to thrive, like I had one failure to thrive, like I had one patient who patient who patient who you know, was 31 years old, struggled you know, was 31 years old, struggled you know, was 31 years old, struggled with addiction, dropout you know, 2 with addiction, dropout you know, 2 with addiction, dropout you know, 2 years later, not only is he finishing years later, not only is he finishing years later, not only is he finishing um therapy school, he's becoming a um therapy school, he's becoming a um therapy school, he's becoming a therapist, so he's supporting himself, therapist, so he's supporting himself, therapist, so he's supporting himself, making about 150k a year. He's also making about 150k a year. He's also making about 150k a year. He's also writing a dystopian novel. Two years uh writing a dystopian novel. Two years uh writing a dystopian novel. Two years uh Two years later he messaged me that it'd Two years later he messaged me that it'd Two years later he messaged me that it'd been published. been published. been published. Right? And and it's like Right? And and it's like Right? And and it's like understanding why he behaved the way understanding why he behaved the way understanding why he behaved the way that he did. that he did. that he did. And the more that you understand how the And the more that you understand how the And the more that you understand how the system works, then you can make minor system works, then you can make minor system works, then you can make minor adjustments and you can make it work. adjustments and you can make it work. adjustments and you can make it work. A car is really hard to move if you're A car is really hard to move if you're A car is really hard to move if you're not driving it and you don't know how to not driving it and you don't know how to not driving it and you don't know how to turn it on. turn it on. turn it on. I totally agree. Uh I totally agree. Uh I totally agree. Uh and I think that the and I think that the and I think that the false message that many people have false message that many people have false message that many people have received is and that we hear all the received is and that we hear all the received is and that we hear all the time is that a focus on self, trying to time is that a focus on self, trying to time is that a focus on self, trying to understand the self, is really just um understand the self, is really just um understand the self, is really just um indulgent uh focus on one's emotions. indulgent uh focus on one's emotions. indulgent uh focus on one's emotions. It's the like me culture, navel gazing, It's the like me culture, navel gazing, It's the like me culture, navel gazing, but that's not what you're talking but that's not what you're talking but that's not what you're talking about. You're talking about doing the about. You're talking about doing the about. You're talking about doing the work of work of work of addressing what parts of you are ego, addressing what parts of you are ego, addressing what parts of you are ego, what do you really want, um what do you really want, um what do you really want, um doing a shinya meditation, like learning doing a shinya meditation, like learning doing a shinya meditation, like learning to access the void so that you can to access the void so that you can to access the void so that you can really see the difference between who really see the difference between who really see the difference between who you really are and what's coming at you really are and what's coming at you really are and what's coming at you from the outside so you can so you can from the outside so you can so you can from the outside so you can so you can steer. I mean, that's what I'm hearing steer. I mean, that's what I'm hearing steer. I mean, that's what I'm hearing and I think that the challenge is and I think that the challenge is and I think that the challenge is that I don't think that there's a that I don't think that there's a that I don't think that there's a language for this exploring of self that language for this exploring of self that language for this exploring of self that makes it very clear makes it very clear makes it very clear from the outset in two sentences from the outset in two sentences from the outset in two sentences that it's not about that it's not about that it's not about just being a victim, not about just being a victim, not about just being a victim, not about just feeling one's feelings so that you just feeling one's feelings so that you just feeling one's feelings so that you can justify Yeah. everything as a can justify Yeah. everything as a can justify Yeah. everything as a trauma, right? And I do think there's trauma, right? And I do think there's trauma, right? And I do think there's trauma out there. I think there are a trauma out there. I think there are a trauma out there. I think there are a lot of traumatized people. I also think lot of traumatized people. I also think lot of traumatized people. I also think that you [snorts] know, we've left now the you [snorts] know, we've left now the you [snorts] know, we've left now the diagnosis of trauma in the in the diagnosis of trauma in the in the diagnosis of trauma in the in the beholder. Like everyone's decided that beholder. Like everyone's decided that beholder. Like everyone's decided that they're traumatized by this and that and they're traumatized by this and that and they're traumatized by this and that and it's created this other form of and it's created this other form of and it's created this other form of trauma, which is that people are trauma, which is that people are trauma, which is that people are fundamentally weak. And the people with fundamentally weak. And the people with fundamentally weak. And the people with real trauma probably aren't getting the real trauma probably aren't getting the real trauma probably aren't getting the treatment they need and deserve. treatment they need and deserve. treatment they need and deserve. So, you know, I it's interesting that we you know, I it's interesting that we you know, I it's interesting that we keep coming back to men and boys in keep coming back to men and boys in keep coming back to men and boys in the way that they're suffering. Do the way that they're suffering. Do the way that they're suffering. Do This is probably a good opportunity to This is probably a good opportunity to This is probably a good opportunity to talk about pornography. Um, do you talk about pornography. Um, do you talk about pornography. Um, do you recommend that recommend that recommend that young males just not young males just not young males just not look at pornography? look at pornography? look at pornography? &gt;&gt; I think the majority of people report no &gt;&gt; I think the majority of people report no &gt;&gt; I think the majority of people report no problems from watching pornography. problems from watching pornography. problems from watching pornography. So, you know, some people will say it's So, you know, some people will say it's So, you know, some people will say it's healthy. I don't know that it's healthy healthy. I don't know that it's healthy healthy. I don't know that it's healthy or not. I think it's like the way that or not. I think it's like the way that or not. I think it's like the way that you use it, just like any other you use it, just like any other you use it, just like any other addictive substance. So, I don't think addictive substance. So, I don't think addictive substance. So, I don't think it is all bad. That being said, there it is all bad. That being said, there it is all bad. That being said, there are a couple of things that are really are a couple of things that are really are a couple of things that are really problematic. Um, the first is that problematic. Um, the first is that problematic. Um, the first is that pornography is getting more pornography is getting more pornography is getting more neuroscientifically engaging. Here's the neuroscientifically engaging. Here's the neuroscientifically engaging. Here's the scariest like statistic about addiction. scariest like statistic about addiction. scariest like statistic about addiction. So, 5% of people under the age of 30 had So, 5% of people under the age of 30 had So, 5% of people under the age of 30 had erectile dysfunction maybe like 20, 30 erectile dysfunction maybe like 20, 30 erectile dysfunction maybe like 20, 30 years ago. That number has climbed to years ago. That number has climbed to years ago. That number has climbed to like 20%. like 20%. like 20%. And a lot of that erectile dysfunction, And a lot of that erectile dysfunction, And a lot of that erectile dysfunction, if you define what erectile dysfunction if you define what erectile dysfunction if you define what erectile dysfunction is, it is inability to maintain an is, it is inability to maintain an is, it is inability to maintain an erection through the completion of the sexual through the completion of the sexual through the completion of the sexual act. So, it's not that this is So, a lot act. So, it's not that this is So, a lot act. So, it's not that this is So, a lot of people think that this means they of people think that this means they of people think that this means they can't get hard. It's not that they can't get hard. It's not that they can't get hard. It's not that they can't get a hard. They can get an erection. get a hard. They can get an erection. get a hard. They can get an erection. It's just they can't achieve orgasm or It's just they can't achieve orgasm or It's just they can't achieve orgasm or climax. So, I think we're seeing a lot climax. So, I think we're seeing a lot climax. So, I think we're seeing a lot of problems with pornography. We're of problems with pornography. We're of problems with pornography. We're seeing a lot of very young people having seeing a lot of very young people having seeing a lot of very young people having erectile dysfunction, being unable to erectile dysfunction, being unable to erectile dysfunction, being unable to achieve climax through penetrative achieve climax through penetrative achieve climax through penetrative intercourse. It's affecting the brain a lot more. So, It's affecting the brain a lot more. So, It's affecting the brain a lot more. So, the colors are brighter, things are the colors are brighter, things are the colors are brighter, things are jigglier, things are bouncier. There's jigglier, things are bouncier. There's jigglier, things are bouncier. There's virtual reality, 8K, 4K. virtual reality, 8K, 4K. virtual reality, 8K, 4K. The bigger problem that I'm seeing um or The bigger problem that I'm seeing um or The bigger problem that I'm seeing um or the scarier problem the scarier problem the scarier problem is pornography used to be something of is pornography used to be something of is pornography used to be something of passive consumption. passive consumption. passive consumption. So, the porn is over there and I'm over So, the porn is over there and I'm over So, the porn is over there and I'm over here. There's no emotional connection. There's no emotional connection. There's no emotional connection. There's no parasocial relationship. no parasocial relationship. no parasocial relationship. The really scary thing is with the The really scary thing is with the The really scary thing is with the things like OnlyFans, now the things like OnlyFans, now the things like OnlyFans, now the person that you're watching pornography for is that you're watching pornography for is that you're watching pornography for is interacting with you. interacting with you. interacting with you. They're saying thank you. They're saying thank you. They're saying thank you. They're appreciating you. appreciating you. appreciating you. You're asking them and then they're You're asking them and then they're You're asking them and then they're sending you a picture or making a video sending you a picture or making a video sending you a picture or making a video just for you. So, I'm seeing a lot more just for you. So, I'm seeing a lot more just for you. So, I'm seeing a lot more scary parasocial relationships develop. scary parasocial relationships develop. scary parasocial relationships develop. I'm seeing emotional affairs. So, now I'm seeing emotional affairs. So, now I'm seeing emotional affairs. So, now like we've added a dimension like we've added a dimension like we've added a dimension of our brain, the empathic circuit, the of our brain, the empathic circuit, the of our brain, the empathic circuit, the social circuits, the relationship social circuits, the relationship social circuits, the relationship circuits, are now starting to activate circuits, are now starting to activate circuits, are now starting to activate with pornography. with pornography. with pornography. So, that's like a whole different So, that's like a whole different So, that's like a whole different ballgame. And then there's a lot of data just And then there's a lot of data just And then there's a lot of data just about ease of access and things like about ease of access and things like about ease of access and things like that. I think pornography addiction, you that. I think pornography addiction, you that. I think pornography addiction, you know, it's interesting a very strong know, it's interesting a very strong know, it's interesting a very strong risk factor is pre-pubescent exposure to risk factor is pre-pubescent exposure to risk factor is pre-pubescent exposure to pornography. Young young kids are on the pornography. Young young kids are on the pornography. Young young kids are on the internet now. internet now. internet now. &gt;&gt; Majority of people actually get exposed &gt;&gt; Majority of people actually get exposed &gt;&gt; Majority of people actually get exposed to their first pornography now before to their first pornography now before to their first pornography now before they hit puberty, but they hit puberty, but they hit puberty, but there's something about when you when there's something about when you when there's something about when you when you get exposed to pornography when your you get exposed to pornography when your you get exposed to pornography when your brain is developing before puberty, it brain is developing before puberty, it brain is developing before puberty, it increases your risk factor for it increases your risk factor for it increases your risk factor for it increases the risk of developing increases the risk of developing increases the risk of developing addiction later in life. addiction later in life. addiction later in life. So, there is something just special So, there is something just special So, there is something just special about sex in the way that it affects our about sex in the way that it affects our about sex in the way that it affects our brain. You know, we're talking about brain. You know, we're talking about brain. You know, we're talking about salience and things like that. We've salience and things like that. We've salience and things like that. We've basically evolved this whole thing to basically evolved this whole thing to basically evolved this whole thing to procreate. So, when we get visual stimuli, when we So, when we get visual stimuli, when we So, when we get visual stimuli, when we get auditory stimuli, you know, it turns get auditory stimuli, you know, it turns get auditory stimuli, you know, it turns our brain on and in a very profound way. our brain on and in a very profound way. our brain on and in a very profound way. Um we see a lot of emotional Um we see a lot of emotional Um we see a lot of emotional suppression. So, what a lot of people suppression. So, what a lot of people suppression. So, what a lot of people don't realize, I work with a lot of don't realize, I work with a lot of don't realize, I work with a lot of people who struggle with pornography, people who struggle with pornography, people who struggle with pornography, it really the emotional regulation it really the emotional regulation it really the emotional regulation component is huge. They're not horny. component is huge. They're not horny. component is huge. They're not horny. It's not necessarily a lot of It's not necessarily a lot of It's not necessarily a lot of masturbation, which is what a lot of masturbation, which is what a lot of masturbation, which is what a lot of people assume. people assume. people assume. Um often times it's like second screen Um often times it's like second screen Um often times it's like second screen kind of stuff. It's watching pornography kind of stuff. It's watching pornography kind of stuff. It's watching pornography like when you use the restroom and just like when you use the restroom and just like when you use the restroom and just like you're not doing you're not jerking like you're not doing you're not jerking like you're not doing you're not jerking off or anything, you're just like off or anything, you're just like off or anything, you're just like watching porn. So, sort of a like a watching porn. So, sort of a like a watching porn. So, sort of a like a numbing out type of activity. numbing out type of activity. numbing out type of activity. &gt;&gt; right? So, this is key thing to remember &gt;&gt; right? So, this is key thing to remember &gt;&gt; right? So, this is key thing to remember is in order for something to be is in order for something to be is in order for something to be addictive, it needs two things. addictive, it needs two things. addictive, it needs two things. It needs to give us pleasure, and it It needs to give us pleasure, and it It needs to give us pleasure, and it needs to take away pain. needs to take away pain. needs to take away pain. And as we see addiction, over time it And as we see addiction, over time it And as we see addiction, over time it shifts away from pleasure into taking shifts away from pleasure into taking shifts away from pleasure into taking away pain. When we become dependent on away pain. When we become dependent on away pain. When we become dependent on something is when we require it to something is when we require it to something is when we require it to numb ourselves. numb ourselves. numb ourselves. So, I think we're also seeing more So, I think we're also seeing more So, I think we're also seeing more pornography because pornography because pornography because life for everybody, young people life for everybody, young people life for everybody, young people and young men is getting harder. and young men is getting harder. and young men is getting harder. So, as we become more socially isolated, So, as we become more socially isolated, So, as we become more socially isolated, as we it's harder to find a girlfriend, as we it's harder to find a girlfriend, as we it's harder to find a girlfriend, um as we get indoctrinated by social um as we get indoctrinated by social um as we get indoctrinated by social media, as we become delusional because media, as we become delusional because media, as we become delusional because of social media, as our social skills of social media, as our social skills of social media, as our social skills atrophy, you know, like all of these things are you know, like all of these things are you know, like all of these things are happening. It's pretty bleak picture. happening. It's pretty bleak picture. happening. It's pretty bleak picture. It is bleak. It is bleak. It is bleak. And and I think the reason it's bleak is And and I think the reason it's bleak is And and I think the reason it's bleak is because we haven't been fighting back in because we haven't been fighting back in because we haven't been fighting back in a very focused way. a very focused way. a very focused way. So, you know, part of the reason I focus you know, part of the reason I focus you know, part of the reason I focus so much on relationships so much on relationships so much on relationships um cuz I'm not a couple therapist, but um cuz I'm not a couple therapist, but um cuz I'm not a couple therapist, but like what I found is that in my patients like what I found is that in my patients like what I found is that in my patients I could only do so much without give I could only do so much without give I could only do so much without give like having them have a relationship. like having them have a relationship. like having them have a relationship. Mhm. Like you can be depressed, you can Mhm. Like you can be depressed, you can Mhm. Like you can be depressed, you can be anxious, but if you have a solid be anxious, but if you have a solid be anxious, but if you have a solid relationship, that is one of the most relationship, that is one of the most relationship, that is one of the most important things. Like some point I important things. Like some point I important things. Like some point I really started focusing on this. It was really started focusing on this. It was really started focusing on this. It was like literally I was down the like literally I was down the like literally I was down the street or, you know, on the opposite street or, you know, on the opposite street or, you know, on the opposite side of town filming a guide side of town filming a guide side of town filming a guide about like what is the science behind about like what is the science behind about like what is the science behind arousal, activation, how do you flirt? Like these activation, how do you flirt? Like these activation, how do you flirt? Like these are the skills, like how do we help are the skills, like how do we help are the skills, like how do we help people? I think it's like giving them people? I think it's like giving them people? I think it's like giving them the skills that we used to learn the skills that we used to learn the skills that we used to learn organically. Do you think that a lot of organically. Do you think that a lot of organically. Do you think that a lot of the attention on the muscle building, on looks maxing is the muscle building, on looks maxing is the muscle building, on looks maxing is actually just a safer actually just a safer actually just a safer um discussion um discussion um discussion for young males? Like they can talk for young males? Like they can talk for young males? Like they can talk about that, they can talk about, you about that, they can talk about, you about that, they can talk about, you know, trying to get body fat percentages know, trying to get body fat percentages know, trying to get body fat percentages or they're doing like mewing for their or they're doing like mewing for their or they're doing like mewing for their jaw or something, you know, like jaw or something, you know, like jaw or something, you know, like and like I think nasal breathing can be and like I think nasal breathing can be and like I think nasal breathing can be very helpful, but this the whole thing very helpful, but this the whole thing very helpful, but this the whole thing of looks maxing is so insane to me, of looks maxing is so insane to me, of looks maxing is so insane to me, but maybe but maybe but maybe it's a way of talking about wanting to it's a way of talking about wanting to it's a way of talking about wanting to be different because the conversation be different because the conversation be different because the conversation about sex, about intimacy, about maybe about sex, about intimacy, about maybe about sex, about intimacy, about maybe someone has issues with porn or someone has issues with porn or someone has issues with porn or erectile issues, maybe that's just like erectile issues, maybe that's just like erectile issues, maybe that's just like so scary that they have to that it it's so scary that they have to that it it's so scary that they have to that it it's kind of a way of them getting close to kind of a way of them getting close to kind of a way of them getting close to the topic but not like really in the topic but not like really in the topic but not like really in the topics. Because when people have topics. Because when people have topics. Because when people have approached me uh and said, "Hey man, can approached me uh and said, "Hey man, can approached me uh and said, "Hey man, can you help me out? I'm really having you help me out? I'm really having you help me out? I'm really having problems." They're not talking to me problems." They're not talking to me problems." They're not talking to me about what I just described. They're they're what I just described. They're they're what I just described. They're they're talking about not knowing which career talking about not knowing which career talking about not knowing which career to have. But, then they're asking me to have. But, then they're asking me to have. But, then they're asking me about how to work out. And then they're about how to work out. And then they're about how to work out. And then they're it's sort of like it's almost like it's sort of like it's almost like it's sort of like it's almost like they're kind of they're kind of they're kind of I have a feeling there's a lot more I have a feeling there's a lot more I have a feeling there's a lot more going on. Yeah. So, here's what I'd say. going on. Yeah. So, here's what I'd say. going on. Yeah. So, here's what I'd say. One of the great things I learned as a One of the great things I learned as a One of the great things I learned as a psychiatrist, the best way the best way the best way to run away from an unsolvable problem to run away from an unsolvable problem to run away from an unsolvable problem is to solve something else. is to solve something else. is to solve something else. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; So, I think you're absolutely right. &gt;&gt; So, I think you're absolutely right. &gt;&gt; So, I think you're absolutely right. There's a displacement. There's a displacement. There's a displacement. Because I don't even know where to start Because I don't even know where to start Because I don't even know where to start with how to flirt. But, you know what I with how to flirt. But, you know what I with how to flirt. But, you know what I can control? Like here's the thing can control? Like here's the thing can control? Like here's the thing about looks maxing. There's no other about looks maxing. There's no other about looks maxing. There's no other humans involved. humans involved. humans involved. There's no possibility like There's no possibility like There's no possibility like getting somebody else to fall in love getting somebody else to fall in love getting somebody else to fall in love with me? Like that's so hard. I with me? Like that's so hard. I with me? Like that's so hard. I don't even know where to start. I don't even know where to start. I don't even know where to start. I don't even like myself. How am I supposed to even like myself. How am I supposed to even like myself. How am I supposed to get somebody else to fall in love with get somebody else to fall in love with get somebody else to fall in love with me? When I look in the mirror, I see me? When I look in the mirror, I see me? When I look in the mirror, I see disgust. I cannot I cannot I cannot fathom or tolerate the idea of going on fathom or tolerate the idea of going on fathom or tolerate the idea of going on a date and having this person look at a date and having this person look at a date and having this person look at this. So, I'm going to transform myself. this. So, I'm going to transform myself. this. So, I'm going to transform myself. I'm going to solve all of those problems I'm going to solve all of those problems I'm going to solve all of those problems by solving one problem. by solving one problem. by solving one problem. I'm going to turn if I can just do this I'm going to turn if I can just do this I'm going to turn if I can just do this one thing. I'm going to take a one thing. I'm going to take a one thing. I'm going to take a multivariate regression analysis and multivariate regression analysis and multivariate regression analysis and hyperfocus on one variable. I'm going to hyperfocus on one variable. I'm going to hyperfocus on one variable. I'm going to do a very interesting selection bias and do a very interesting selection bias and do a very interesting selection bias and cognitive bias cognitive filtering of cognitive bias cognitive filtering of cognitive bias cognitive filtering of ignoring all of the beautiful people ignoring all of the beautiful people ignoring all of the beautiful people who are still single or divorced. And the are still single or divorced. And the are still single or divorced. And the other huge cognitive bias that I'm going other huge cognitive bias that I'm going other huge cognitive bias that I'm going to do, when I go to a playground and I to do, when I go to a playground and I to do, when I go to a playground and I see lots of kids running around and I see lots of kids running around and I see lots of kids running around and I look at the parents of those kids, look at the parents of those kids, look at the parents of those kids, they're average-looking. they're average-looking. they're average-looking. Right? Most people who have Right? Most people who have Right? Most people who have relationships look average. Like relationships look average. Like relationships look average. Like statistically, that's how it works. statistically, that's how it works. statistically, that's how it works. But the mind does not know how to grab But the mind does not know how to grab But the mind does not know how to grab the problem is too big. the problem is too big. the problem is too big. Where do I start? Do I learn how to Where do I start? Do I learn how to Where do I start? Do I learn how to flirt? I'm creepy. How do I learn how to flirt? I'm creepy. How do I learn how to flirt? I'm creepy. How do I learn how to flirt? How do I learn how to flirt without How do I learn how to flirt without How do I learn how to flirt without getting rejected? I'm tired of getting rejected? I'm tired of getting rejected? I'm tired of getting rejected. I don't want to get rejected. I don't want to get rejected. I don't want to get rejected. It hurts to get rejected. It proves all It hurts to get rejected. It proves all It hurts to get rejected. It proves all of my insecurities about myself. And of my insecurities about myself. And of my insecurities about myself. And that's just flirting. that's just flirting. that's just flirting. So, if you talk to these people, a lot So, if you talk to these people, a lot So, if you talk to these people, a lot of times what you'll get is anytime you of times what you'll get is anytime you of times what you'll get is anytime you tell them to move forward, what they'll tell them to move forward, what they'll tell them to move forward, what they'll say is, "But how do I solve the next say is, "But how do I solve the next say is, "But how do I solve the next thing? That doesn't account for this. That doesn't account for this. That doesn't account for this. Even if I looksmax, it doesn't do this. Even if I looksmax, it doesn't do this. Even if I looksmax, it doesn't do this. It doesn't do this. It doesn't do this." It doesn't do this. It doesn't do this." It doesn't do this. It doesn't do this." And that's why like the more that they And that's why like the more that they And that's why like the more that they go into looksmaxing because they go into looksmaxing because they go into looksmaxing because there's this idea that if you're there's this idea that if you're there's this idea that if you're beautiful, right? And this is some really right? And this is some really right? And this is some really interesting theory of mine. interesting theory of mine. interesting theory of mine. When they look at the people that When they look at the people that When they look at the people that they're attracted to, they're attracted to, they're attracted to, in their mind, if someone's a 10 out of in their mind, if someone's a 10 out of in their mind, if someone's a 10 out of 10, I'd date them in a heartbeat. And if 10, I'd date them in a heartbeat. And if 10, I'd date them in a heartbeat. And if I date them, someone would date me. I date them, someone would date me. I date them, someone would date me. So, I think this looksmaxing thing is So, I think this looksmaxing thing is So, I think this looksmaxing thing is like a really great way of displacing like a really great way of displacing like a really great way of displacing all of our all of our all of our terrifying, overwhelming feelings of how terrifying, overwhelming feelings of how terrifying, overwhelming feelings of how do I get another human being to accept do I get another human being to accept do I get another human being to accept me. It's way more complicated. It's way more complicated. It's way more complicated. The good news is that I think we can The good news is that I think we can The good news is that I think we can actually figure it out. Like, I don't actually figure it out. Like, I don't actually figure it out. Like, I don't know how many research studies are know how many research studies are know how many research studies are published, but I was blown away. published, but I was blown away. published, but I was blown away. Did you know that half the studies on Did you know that half the studies on Did you know that half the studies on charisma are published in religious charisma are published in religious charisma are published in religious studies journals? studies journals? studies journals? It's fascinating. There's so much It's fascinating. There's so much It's fascinating. There's so much science out there. Like, we know so many science out there. Like, we know so many science out there. Like, we know so many things. We literally know like how things. We literally know like how things. We literally know like how people fall in love. We know that one of people fall in love. We know that one of people fall in love. We know that one of the reasons that it's harder to fall in the reasons that it's harder to fall in the reasons that it's harder to fall in love is because the feeling of being in love is because the feeling of being in love is because the feeling of being in love, you know that feeling of like when you know that feeling of like when you know that feeling of like when you just seeing someone and like just seeing someone and like just seeing someone and like you feel amazing. you feel amazing. you feel amazing. And like just their presence makes you And like just their presence makes you And like just their presence makes you feel amazing, floods your brain with feel amazing, floods your brain with feel amazing, floods your brain with dopamine. So as our dopamine system gets messed up So as our dopamine system gets messed up So as our dopamine system gets messed up by social media, it has literally become by social media, it has literally become by social media, it has literally become neurochemically harder to fall in love. neurochemically harder to fall in love. neurochemically harder to fall in love. So now when I have patients, I tell them So now when I have patients, I tell them So now when I have patients, I tell them go for a walk for 1 hour before you go for a walk for 1 hour before you go for a walk for 1 hour before you go on a date and stay off of any on a date and stay off of any on a date and stay off of any technology. Love that. technology. Love that. technology. Love that. &gt;&gt; Literally your neuroscientific capacity &gt;&gt; Literally your neuroscientific capacity &gt;&gt; Literally your neuroscientific capacity to fall in love to fall in love to fall in love is increased. May I ask what you think is increased. May I ask what you think is increased. May I ask what you think about this? I'm a big fan lately of about this? I'm a big fan lately of about this? I'm a big fan lately of boring breaks in order to stay on task boring breaks in order to stay on task boring breaks in order to stay on task for things like writing, uh podcast for things like writing, uh podcast for things like writing, uh podcast research, etc. I find that if breaks research, etc. I find that if breaks research, etc. I find that if breaks between cognitive tasks, which are between cognitive tasks, which are between cognitive tasks, which are demanding, if those breaks are too demanding, if those breaks are too demanding, if those breaks are too engaging, that it makes it much, much harder to that it makes it much, much harder to that it makes it much, much harder to re-engage in hard work, which I love re-engage in hard work, which I love re-engage in hard work, which I love hard work, hard work, hard work, but I also experience some of the but I also experience some of the but I also experience some of the friction going into a bout of work. friction going into a bout of work. friction going into a bout of work. &gt;&gt; what most people do on their breaks &gt;&gt; what most people do on their breaks &gt;&gt; what most people do on their breaks is exhausting. is exhausting. is exhausting. Literally. Right? So if you spend time on social Right? So if you spend time on social Right? So if you spend time on social media, your brain will be more tired at media, your brain will be more tired at media, your brain will be more tired at the end of the break. the end of the break. the end of the break. So boredom is great. There's a lot of So boredom is great. There's a lot of So boredom is great. There's a lot of stuff around yoga and boredom and stuff around yoga and boredom and stuff around yoga and boredom and focusing the mind and things focusing the mind and things focusing the mind and things like that. But yeah, I'm with you like that. But yeah, I'm with you like that. But yeah, I'm with you 100%. So people don't understand what's So people don't understand what's So people don't understand what's happening to them. They don't understand happening to them. They don't understand happening to them. They don't understand also like how to make people fall in also like how to make people fall in also like how to make people fall in love with you. Like it I don't mean that love with you. Like it I don't mean that love with you. Like it I don't mean that in a that's the wrong phrase, but in a that's the wrong phrase, but in a that's the wrong phrase, but so human beings have been falling in so human beings have been falling in so human beings have been falling in love since the dawn of humanity, like love since the dawn of humanity, like love since the dawn of humanity, like literally. And there are certain circumstances that And there are certain circumstances that And there are certain circumstances that lead to that. There's a cool study that lead to that. There's a cool study that lead to that. There's a cool study that I cite over and over and over again. I cite over and over and over again. I cite over and over and over again. They had couples go on a date They had couples go on a date They had couples go on a date on a stone bridge or a rickety wooden on a stone bridge or a rickety wooden on a stone bridge or a rickety wooden bridge. And the couples that were on the And the couples that were on the And the couples that were on the rickety wooden bridge formed a stronger rickety wooden bridge formed a stronger rickety wooden bridge formed a stronger emotional bond. emotional bond. emotional bond. People don't realize that forming an People don't realize that forming an People don't realize that forming an emotional bond emotional bond emotional bond depends on shared emotional experience. depends on shared emotional experience. depends on shared emotional experience. So I have to feel the same thing. This So I have to feel the same thing. This So I have to feel the same thing. This is such a problem in rehab. My biggest is such a problem in rehab. My biggest is such a problem in rehab. My biggest problem when I'm running a rehab is an problem when I'm running a rehab is an problem when I'm running a rehab is an attending is like people keep falling in attending is like people keep falling in attending is like people keep falling in love. Like we're trying really hard. love. Like we're trying really hard. love. Like we're trying really hard. Like don't fall in love. Don't fall in. Like don't fall in love. Don't fall in. Like don't fall in love. Don't fall in. These two are getting together. All the These two are getting together. All the These two are getting together. All the nursing staff is aware. They went to nursing staff is aware. They went to nursing staff is aware. They went to their rooms overnight. Like this is their rooms overnight. Like this is their rooms overnight. Like this is happening. Like you know, we're like happening. Like you know, we're like happening. Like you know, we're like don't no love and no don't no love and no don't no love and no in rehab. But it happens over and in rehab. But it happens over and in rehab. But it happens over and over again because everyone is sharing. over again because everyone is sharing. over again because everyone is sharing. Trauma bonding is what people call it Trauma bonding is what people call it Trauma bonding is what people call it now. But when you share an emotional now. But when you share an emotional now. But when you share an emotional experience with someone else, that is experience with someone else, that is experience with someone else, that is what fosters love. what fosters love. what fosters love. But nowadays what happens is like dating But nowadays what happens is like dating But nowadays what happens is like dating is like interviews. Everyone's making is like interviews. Everyone's making is like interviews. Everyone's making judgments on each other from based on a judgments on each other from based on a judgments on each other from based on a profile. None of those things actually profile. None of those things actually profile. None of those things actually correlate with the relationship success. correlate with the relationship success. correlate with the relationship success. Whether you're 6 ft, how much money you Whether you're 6 ft, how much money you Whether you're 6 ft, how much money you make, doesn't correlate with I mean, I'm make, doesn't correlate with I mean, I'm make, doesn't correlate with I mean, I'm sure maybe correlates on some level. But sure maybe correlates on some level. But sure maybe correlates on some level. But if you look at the big variables, it's if you look at the big variables, it's if you look at the big variables, it's not any of that stuff. not any of that stuff. not any of that stuff. And if you think about like how you fell And if you think about like how you fell And if you think about like how you fell in love with your girlfriend, how I fell in love with your girlfriend, how I fell in love with your girlfriend, how I fell in love. Like I was I was going to be a in love. Like I was I was going to be a in love. Like I was I was going to be a monk. I told my girlfriend. I didn't know we I told my girlfriend. I didn't know we I told my girlfriend. I didn't know we were dating. I didn't even ask her out were dating. I didn't even ask her out were dating. I didn't even ask her out on a date. I was like, "Hey, you want to on a date. I was like, "Hey, you want to on a date. I was like, "Hey, you want to grab food sometime?" I was going to be a grab food sometime?" I was going to be a grab food sometime?" I was going to be a monk. And then I even told her. I was monk. And then I even told her. I was monk. And then I even told her. I was like, "Hey, I'm going to be like, "Hey, I'm going to be like, "Hey, I'm going to be I'm going to be a monk. Like this is a I'm going to be a monk. Like this is a I'm going to be a monk. Like this is a temporary thing." And she's like, "Yeah, temporary thing." And she's like, "Yeah, temporary thing." And she's like, "Yeah, whatever." 7 years later, you're back from India. 7 years later, you're back from India. 7 years later, you're back from India. Oh, no. Well, I so I would come back Oh, no. Well, I so I would come back Oh, no. Well, I so I would come back and forth. But Um so we like dated back and forth. But Um so we like dated back and forth. But Um so we like dated during that time. And the cool thing is during that time. And the cool thing is during that time. And the cool thing is like, you know, like, you know, like, you know, as an educator, right? Like it's amazing as an educator, right? Like it's amazing as an educator, right? Like it's amazing if you teach someone how something if you teach someone how something if you teach someone how something works. And like love is like not that And like love is like not that And like love is like not that complicated actually. complicated actually. complicated actually. If given the right environment. Internal If given the right environment. Internal If given the right environment. Internal and external environment. and external environment. and external environment. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not trying to be academic &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not trying to be academic &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm not trying to be academic about it. But what you described about it. But what you described about it. But what you described about an hour off social media before going on an hour off social media before going on an hour off social media before going on a date, I think that's terrific advice a date, I think that's terrific advice a date, I think that's terrific advice to people. I think that to people. I think that to people. I think that this idea that our nervous systems are this idea that our nervous systems are this idea that our nervous systems are somehow able to pivot from one sensory somehow able to pivot from one sensory somehow able to pivot from one sensory experience to the next without the experience to the next without the experience to the next without the previous sensory experience completely previous sensory experience completely previous sensory experience completely either contaminating or supporting what either contaminating or supporting what either contaminating or supporting what comes next is so obvious in the case of comes next is so obvious in the case of comes next is so obvious in the case of what you get a great night's sleep, you what you get a great night's sleep, you what you get a great night's sleep, you wake up the next morning you feel great. wake up the next morning you feel great. wake up the next morning you feel great. You get a terrible night's sleep the You get a terrible night's sleep the You get a terrible night's sleep the next morning you feel terrible. Everyone next morning you feel terrible. Everyone next morning you feel terrible. Everyone understands that, but people can't understands that, but people can't understands that, but people can't understand the idea of understand the idea of understand the idea of dopamine depletion or just over arousal dopamine depletion or just over arousal dopamine depletion or just over arousal and then going into the next thing that and then going into the next thing that and then going into the next thing that should be arousing and it's like under should be arousing and it's like under should be arousing and it's like under arousing. And I'm not even talking about arousing. And I'm not even talking about arousing. And I'm not even talking about sex here, I'm talking about social sex here, I'm talking about social sex here, I'm talking about social interaction. So when I was looking at interaction. So when I was looking at interaction. So when I was looking at the mechanisms of this, I realized why the mechanisms of this, I realized why the mechanisms of this, I realized why going on a movie is a great first date. going on a movie is a great first date. going on a movie is a great first date. You know, people like back when we were You know, people like back when we were You know, people like back when we were growing up, people would go on movies on growing up, people would go on movies on growing up, people would go on movies on first dates, right? And everyone's like, first dates, right? And everyone's like, first dates, right? And everyone's like, why would you go on a movie for a first why would you go on a movie for a first why would you go on a movie for a first date? You're not even talking or getting date? You're not even talking or getting date? You're not even talking or getting to know the other person. Well, it turns to know the other person. Well, it turns to know the other person. Well, it turns out that movies create shared emotional out that movies create shared emotional out that movies create shared emotional experiences, which is why people experiences, which is why people experiences, which is why people organically figured out that you can go organically figured out that you can go organically figured out that you can go to a movie and it'll actually it's a to a movie and it'll actually it's a to a movie and it'll actually it's a great first date. But I great first date. But I great first date. But I the tools to reverse it. So I think the tools to reverse it. So I think the tools to reverse it. So I think the cool thing is we do have all of this the cool thing is we do have all of this the cool thing is we do have all of this information. And so like we know how to how to how And so like we know how to how to how And so like we know how to how to how to be charming, how to flirt. What are to be charming, how to flirt. What are to be charming, how to flirt. What are the situations that you need to create the situations that you need to create the situations that you need to create in order to foster interactions foster a in order to foster interactions foster a in order to foster interactions foster a relationship foster emotional relationship foster emotional relationship foster emotional connection. Um you know, what makes you connection. Um you know, what makes you connection. Um you know, what makes you charismatic? What makes you attractive? charismatic? What makes you attractive? charismatic? What makes you attractive? Things like humor and kindness are Things like humor and kindness are Things like humor and kindness are incredibly important. Humor is a huge incredibly important. Humor is a huge incredibly important. Humor is a huge signal that signals both intelligence cuz if that signals both intelligence cuz if that signals both intelligence cuz if you can make someone laugh you can make someone laugh you can make someone laugh you can read them. you can read them. you can read them. And so it's also a signal of empathy. And so it's also a signal of empathy. And so it's also a signal of empathy. And ability like does this person get And ability like does this person get And ability like does this person get me? If they can make you laugh, that me? If they can make you laugh, that me? If they can make you laugh, that means that they get you. means that they get you. means that they get you. And and the last thing that I'll kind of And and the last thing that I'll kind of And and the last thing that I'll kind of mention is that we were talking about mention is that we were talking about mention is that we were talking about how you know, the internet is like how you know, the internet is like how you know, the internet is like people live in different worlds on the people live in different worlds on the people live in different worlds on the internet. And the really scary thing I internet. And the really scary thing I internet. And the really scary thing I made a great YouTube video that was kind made a great YouTube video that was kind made a great YouTube video that was kind of controversial, but why controversial, but why controversial, but why women prefer beta males. why women prefer beta males. why women prefer beta males. And the really interesting thing is that And the really interesting thing is that And the really interesting thing is that a lot of people were really upset by it. a lot of people were really upset by it. a lot of people were really upset by it. It was about this drive for muscularity It was about this drive for muscularity It was about this drive for muscularity and some of the scientific research. But and some of the scientific research. But and some of the scientific research. But the really interesting thing was the really interesting thing was the really interesting thing was the male versus female response to the male versus female response to the male versus female response to the video. That women were like, "Yeah, this guy's That women were like, "Yeah, this guy's That women were like, "Yeah, this guy's right. We're actually like these super alpha We're actually like these super alpha We're actually like these super alpha guys are like not guys are like not guys are like not actually like not attractive. Like actually like not attractive. Like actually like not attractive. Like I would run for the hills." I would run for the hills." I would run for the hills." And then a lot of dudes were like, "Oh, And then a lot of dudes were like, "Oh, And then a lot of dudes were like, "Oh, this guy's like he doesn't know what this guy's like he doesn't know what this guy's like he doesn't know what he's talking about." So, it's really he's talking about." So, it's really he's talking about." So, it's really interesting. Part of what makes it so hard is not Part of what makes it so hard is not Part of what makes it so hard is not only do we have these like effects from only do we have these like effects from only do we have these like effects from pornography and atrophy of the social pornography and atrophy of the social pornography and atrophy of the social circuits of our brain, but then we're circuits of our brain, but then we're circuits of our brain, but then we're also like we just have bad information. also like we just have bad information. also like we just have bad information. And in my experience, once you get good And in my experience, once you get good And in my experience, once you get good information, I'm sure this is true of information, I'm sure this is true of information, I'm sure this is true of you, too, right? Like once you get good you, too, right? Like once you get good you, too, right? Like once you get good information and once you start applying information and once you start applying information and once you start applying it, once you start practicing it, once you start practicing it, once you start practicing it, you'd be amazed you'd be amazed you'd be amazed at how much understanding a system can at how much understanding a system can at how much understanding a system can give you mastery over it. Oh, give you mastery over it. Oh, give you mastery over it. Oh, absolutely. I mean, I can't claim it absolutely. I mean, I can't claim it absolutely. I mean, I can't claim it in the domains that you're so proficient in the domains that you're so proficient in the domains that you're so proficient in, but I'll never forget as an in, but I'll never forget as an in, but I'll never forget as an undergraduate working in a sleep undergraduate working in a sleep undergraduate working in a sleep laboratory over a summer at Stanford, laboratory over a summer at Stanford, laboratory over a summer at Stanford, and then every afternoon and then every afternoon and then every afternoon the entire laboratory would go outside the entire laboratory would go outside the entire laboratory would go outside to watch the sunset. And I asked I I'll to watch the sunset. And I asked I I'll to watch the sunset. And I asked I I'll never forget I asked Seiji Nishino, I never forget I asked Seiji Nishino, I never forget I asked Seiji Nishino, I asked, you know, asked, you know, asked, you know, uh Emmanuel Mignot. I These guys uh Emmanuel Mignot. I These guys uh Emmanuel Mignot. I These guys discovered the genes that underlie discovered the genes that underlie discovered the genes that underlie narcolepsy and they narcolepsy and they narcolepsy and they druggable targets now exist and drugs druggable targets now exist and drugs druggable targets now exist and drugs exist to treat but at the time they exist to treat but at the time they exist to treat but at the time they said, "Oh, we do this to entrain our said, "Oh, we do this to entrain our said, "Oh, we do this to entrain our circadian rhythm. And you need to watch circadian rhythm. And you need to watch circadian rhythm. And you need to watch the sunrise. You need to see sun within the sunrise. You need to see sun within the sunrise. You need to see sun within the first hours of your day." This was the first hours of your day." This was the first hours of your day." This was um mid-90s. And I remember thinking like, "How could And I remember thinking like, "How could And I remember thinking like, "How could that be?" And I started reading about it that be?" And I started reading about it that be?" And I started reading about it and the cells that regulate this and the cells that regulate this and the cells that regulate this had not yet been discovered. That was in had not yet been discovered. That was in had not yet been discovered. That was in the early 2000s. Like we didn't even the early 2000s. Like we didn't even the early 2000s. Like we didn't even know which retinal neurons mediated know which retinal neurons mediated know which retinal neurons mediated this. But these guys knew this from their own But these guys knew this from their own But these guys knew this from their own lives and their own practices. And and I lives and their own practices. And and I lives and their own practices. And and I started realizing, "Oh, there's a started realizing, "Oh, there's a started realizing, "Oh, there's a mechanism here." And as more became they mechanism here." And as more became they mechanism here." And as more became they got discovered, like, "This changes got discovered, like, "This changes got discovered, like, "This changes mood, mental health, metabolism." I'm We mood, mental health, metabolism." I'm We mood, mental health, metabolism." I'm We now just all take this for granted. But now just all take this for granted. But now just all take this for granted. But understanding the mechanism behind understanding the mechanism behind understanding the mechanism behind something tremendously empowering. And I share tremendously empowering. And I share tremendously empowering. And I share that story because that wasn't but, you that story because that wasn't but, you that story because that wasn't but, you know, 25 years ago or so. So, what that means 25 years ago or so. So, what that means 25 years ago or so. So, what that means is that is that is that the things that we think are kind of out the things that we think are kind of out the things that we think are kind of out there now that are a little bit woo or a there now that are a little bit woo or a there now that are a little bit woo or a lot woo, I guarantee lot woo, I guarantee lot woo, I guarantee in 10 years we're going to understand in 10 years we're going to understand in 10 years we're going to understand the mechanisms. the mechanisms. the mechanisms. They'll be called something different or They'll be called something different or They'll be called something different or similar or maybe the same and people similar or maybe the same and people similar or maybe the same and people will be putting that to work. And it's will be putting that to work. And it's will be putting that to work. And it's going to improve mental health and in a going to improve mental health and in a going to improve mental health and in a major way. In other words, the science major way. In other words, the science major way. In other words, the science catches up eventually but the practices catches up eventually but the practices catches up eventually but the practices that work need to be talked about. And that work need to be talked about. And that work need to be talked about. And that's why I again I'm so grateful that that's why I again I'm so grateful that that's why I again I'm so grateful that you're willing to go there. I think the you're willing to go there. I think the you're willing to go there. I think the reason there's skepticism, so I'm a reason there's skepticism, so I'm a reason there's skepticism, so I'm a Reiki healer, I'm a crystal healer, I Reiki healer, I'm a crystal healer, I Reiki healer, I'm a crystal healer, I learned Bach flower remedies, and I learned Bach flower remedies, and I learned Bach flower remedies, and I don't talk about any of that stuff don't talk about any of that stuff don't talk about any of that stuff because I think there's no basis for it. because I think there's no basis for it. because I think there's no basis for it. Like maybe the energy healer. Like maybe the energy healer. Like maybe the energy healer. But like But like But like so I've studied all kinds of things but so I've studied all kinds of things but so I've studied all kinds of things but I think the reason that people are so I think the reason that people are so I think the reason that people are so skeptical is because there's so much BS skeptical is because there's so much BS skeptical is because there's so much BS out there. out there. out there. So the reason I leaned into yoga and So the reason I leaned into yoga and So the reason I leaned into yoga and meditation or first of actually meditation or first of actually meditation or first of actually primarily because of certain personal primarily because of certain personal primarily because of certain personal experiences I had but those have the experiences I had but those have the experiences I had but those have the best evidence behind them. best evidence behind them. best evidence behind them. And I think the real challenge right And I think the real challenge right And I think the real challenge right now, so the reason I do it this way is now, so the reason I do it this way is now, so the reason I do it this way is because if you look at some of the really if you look at some of the really if you look at some of the really powerful techniques from meditation, powerful techniques from meditation, powerful techniques from meditation, people can't wait. people can't wait. people can't wait. Like at least the people I work with. Like at least the people I work with. Like at least the people I work with. They can't wait 20 years to elucidate They can't wait 20 years to elucidate They can't wait 20 years to elucidate the mechanisms. the mechanisms. the mechanisms. You know, when we're talking about You know, when we're talking about You know, when we're talking about sankalpa and yoga nidra. sankalpa and yoga nidra. sankalpa and yoga nidra. So you can get all the autonomic stuff, So you can get all the autonomic stuff, So you can get all the autonomic stuff, great. You can get some neuroscience great. You can get some neuroscience great. You can get some neuroscience stuff maybe, right? That's kind of iffy, stuff maybe, right? That's kind of iffy, stuff maybe, right? That's kind of iffy, we don't really know. we don't really know. we don't really know. But then some of this other stuff like I But then some of this other stuff like I But then some of this other stuff like I think if people are not I think if people are not I think if people are not achieving what they want, achieving what they want, achieving what they want, what I encourage them to do is explore what I encourage them to do is explore what I encourage them to do is explore and be skeptical. and be skeptical. and be skeptical. Like don't just believe it but try it, Like don't just believe it but try it, Like don't just believe it but try it, right? So like if you're doing right? So like if you're doing right? So like if you're doing cardiac coherence breathing, that's nadi cardiac coherence breathing, that's nadi cardiac coherence breathing, that's nadi shodhana, right? Alternate nostril shodhana, right? Alternate nostril shodhana, right? Alternate nostril breathing. You know, do it regularly the way that You know, do it regularly the way that You know, do it regularly the way that you were taught and then do it for 8 you were taught and then do it for 8 you were taught and then do it for 8 seconds for the inhalation, 32 seconds for the inhalation, 32 seconds for the inhalation, 32 seconds for the hold, and 16 seconds for the for the hold, and 16 seconds for the for the hold, and 16 seconds for the exhalation cuz 60 exhalation cuz 60 exhalation cuz 60 &gt;&gt; Alternate nostrils. &gt;&gt; Alternate nostrils. &gt;&gt; Alternate nostrils. &gt;&gt; Yeah, alternating nostrils. &gt;&gt; Yeah, alternating nostrils. &gt;&gt; Yeah, alternating nostrils. &gt;&gt; Can I just insert one thing? Some people &gt;&gt; Can I just insert one thing? Some people &gt;&gt; Can I just insert one thing? Some people will hear alternating nostril breathing will hear alternating nostril breathing will hear alternating nostril breathing of plugging one nostril then the other of plugging one nostril then the other of plugging one nostril then the other and they'll go, "Oh my god, this is and they'll go, "Oh my god, this is and they'll go, "Oh my god, this is crazy." We had the guy who works on olfaction We had the guy who works on olfaction We had the guy who works on olfaction and frankly breathing cuz the two go and frankly breathing cuz the two go and frankly breathing cuz the two go hand in hand, um Noam Sobel. hand in hand, um Noam Sobel. hand in hand, um Noam Sobel. And he explained that And he explained that And he explained that every 90 minutes every 90 minutes every 90 minutes around the clock around the clock around the clock there's a switch in the dominant nostril there's a switch in the dominant nostril there's a switch in the dominant nostril through which we breathe. You can through which we breathe. You can through which we breathe. You can observe this even if you have a deviated observe this even if you have a deviated observe this even if you have a deviated septum but one will be more air will septum but one will be more air will septum but one will be more air will flow more readily than to the other and flow more readily than to the other and flow more readily than to the other and it's the alternation of a it's the alternation of a it's the alternation of a parasympathetic dominant and sympathetic parasympathetic dominant and sympathetic parasympathetic dominant and sympathetic dominant breathing through the autonomic dominant breathing through the autonomic dominant breathing through the autonomic nervous system. And so he's a nervous system. And so he's a nervous system. And so he's a physiologist and when he said that I physiologist and when he said that I physiologist and when he said that I thought, "Okay, this alternate nostril thought, "Okay, this alternate nostril thought, "Okay, this alternate nostril breathing thing like uh for some many breathing thing like uh for some many breathing thing like uh for some many years frankly I heard about this from years frankly I heard about this from years frankly I heard about this from the yogic community and I thought like, the yogic community and I thought like, the yogic community and I thought like, all right, this seems a little all right, this seems a little all right, this seems a little wacky." And here he's sitting exactly wacky." And here he's sitting exactly wacky." And here he's sitting exactly where you were, where you are now, where you were, where you are now, where you were, where you are now, excuse me, and he said, "Yeah, there's excuse me, and he said, "Yeah, there's excuse me, and he said, "Yeah, there's absolutely a physiological basis for absolutely a physiological basis for absolutely a physiological basis for this. When you breathe through one this. When you breathe through one this. When you breathe through one nostril, you get a very different effect nostril, you get a very different effect nostril, you get a very different effect on the autonomic nervous system than you on the autonomic nervous system than you on the autonomic nervous system than you do through the other nostril and this is do through the other nostril and this is do through the other nostril and this is constantly alternating even if you're constantly alternating even if you're constantly alternating even if you're not plugging your nostril every 90 not plugging your nostril every 90 not plugging your nostril every 90 minutes from birth until death." minutes from birth until death." minutes from birth until death." There were certain things I would find There were certain things I would find There were certain things I would find in the yogic texts and then I ran into in the yogic texts and then I ran into in the yogic texts and then I ran into this exact thing where there's I think this exact thing where there's I think this exact thing where there's I think they call it an all trading rhythm, they call it an all trading rhythm, they call it an all trading rhythm, right? That's that Oh, this is like a right? That's that Oh, this is like a right? That's that Oh, this is like a physiological thing. physiological thing. physiological thing. And so I lean towards the practices that And so I lean towards the practices that And so I lean towards the practices that were physiologically were physiologically were physiologically uh sound that there's some evidence for uh sound that there's some evidence for uh sound that there's some evidence for it cuz I was like, "I'm not going to it cuz I was like, "I'm not going to it cuz I was like, "I'm not going to waste my time and like nothing's going waste my time and like nothing's going waste my time and like nothing's going to happen. I'm going to do the stuff to happen. I'm going to do the stuff to happen. I'm going to do the stuff that at least I'll get a physiologic that at least I'll get a physiologic that at least I'll get a physiologic benefit." And then as you go into advanced And then as you go into advanced And then as you go into advanced practices like it's wild and the really practices like it's wild and the really practices like it's wild and the really scary thing is that scary thing is that scary thing is that in my mind in my mind in my mind there's a lot of this stuff is like there's a lot of this stuff is like there's a lot of this stuff is like scientifically valid but it's really scientifically valid but it's really scientifically valid but it's really hard to study. hard to study. hard to study. And then the really scary thing, the And then the really scary thing, the And then the really scary thing, the thing that bothers me the most thing that bothers me the most thing that bothers me the most is that I think there's a lot of stuff is that I think there's a lot of stuff is that I think there's a lot of stuff that's true that is not scientifically that's true that is not scientifically that's true that is not scientifically valid. I really think it's kind of like I really think it's kind of like I really think it's kind of like beyond what science is capable of beyond what science is capable of beyond what science is capable of measuring. Um at least now and in the Um at least now and in the Um at least now and in the foreseeable future. foreseeable future. foreseeable future. &gt;&gt; Spirituality. And I think &gt;&gt; Spirituality. And I think &gt;&gt; Spirituality. And I think the simple simplest example of this is a the simple simplest example of this is a the simple simplest example of this is a thought. We have no scientific evidence of a We have no scientific evidence of a We have no scientific evidence of a thought. The only reason that we know that the The only reason that we know that the The only reason that we know that the amygdala is where we feel anxiety for is amygdala is where we feel anxiety for is amygdala is where we feel anxiety for is because we measure what was going on in because we measure what was going on in because we measure what was going on in the amygdala and then we asked the amygdala and then we asked the amygdala and then we asked the person, "What are you feeling when this person, "What are you feeling when this person, "What are you feeling when this part of your brain lights up?" part of your brain lights up?" part of your brain lights up?" Well, you may be encouraged to learn Well, you may be encouraged to learn Well, you may be encouraged to learn that um the great Anna Lembke, my that um the great Anna Lembke, my that um the great Anna Lembke, my colleague at Stanford, right an MD and colleague at Stanford, right an MD and colleague at Stanford, right an MD and psychiatrist like you who wrote Dopamine psychiatrist like you who wrote Dopamine psychiatrist like you who wrote Dopamine Nation has a book Nation has a book Nation has a book &gt;&gt; Amazing work. Amazing work. She's an &gt;&gt; Amazing work. Amazing work. She's an &gt;&gt; Amazing work. Amazing work. She's an amazing woman at the level of clinician, amazing woman at the level of clinician, amazing woman at the level of clinician, human being, just all around and such a human being, just all around and such a human being, just all around and such a pioneer. She's If you look back, she's pioneer. She's If you look back, she's pioneer. She's If you look back, she's been 5 to 10 years ahead of everybody been 5 to 10 years ahead of everybody been 5 to 10 years ahead of everybody else in terms of her else in terms of her else in terms of her understanding and beliefs about her understanding and beliefs about her understanding and beliefs about where we're going vis-a-vis the where we're going vis-a-vis the where we're going vis-a-vis the neuroscience impact of neuroscience impact of neuroscience impact of social media, etc. social media, etc. social media, etc. She has a book that's coming out later She has a book that's coming out later She has a book that's coming out later this year this year this year um on spirituality. Hm. So, serious um on spirituality. Hm. So, serious um on spirituality. Hm. So, serious scientists and clinicians like yourself, scientists and clinicians like yourself, scientists and clinicians like yourself, like Anna, are starting to go there like Anna, are starting to go there like Anna, are starting to go there before we have the rat, cat, monkey, bat before we have the rat, cat, monkey, bat before we have the rat, cat, monkey, bat then clinical trial and human then clinical trial and human then clinical trial and human work done. So, what I love about work done. So, what I love about work done. So, what I love about spirituality personally, it scares me spirituality personally, it scares me spirituality personally, it scares me and it frustrates me, but what I like and it frustrates me, but what I like and it frustrates me, but what I like about it is it's the only scientific about it is it's the only scientific about it is it's the only scientific exploration that no one can do for you. exploration that no one can do for you. exploration that no one can do for you. So, what I love about it. So, I So, what I love about it. So, I So, what I love about it. So, I like learning. I'm not really like a like learning. I'm not really like a like learning. I'm not really like a researcher, but I'm a very like researcher, but I'm a very like researcher, but I'm a very like clinically oriented scientist, I guess clinically oriented scientist, I guess clinically oriented scientist, I guess you could say, or science-oriented you could say, or science-oriented you could say, or science-oriented clinician. And it's the one thing that And it's the one thing that And it's the one thing that you can never like an experience of you can never like an experience of you can never like an experience of shunya. Like we can you can you can look at like Like we can you can you can look at like Like we can you can you can look at like the brain scan of shunya potentially. the brain scan of shunya potentially. the brain scan of shunya potentially. But to experience it to figure it out, But to experience it to figure it out, But to experience it to figure it out, you have to be the scientist. you have to be the scientist. you have to be the scientist. It is the only kind of subjective It is the only kind of subjective It is the only kind of subjective experience, which is what spirituality experience, which is what spirituality experience, which is what spirituality is really about, is attaining certain is really about, is attaining certain is really about, is attaining certain states, is not something that is ever states, is not something that is ever states, is not something that is ever transmissible. And that's why people are hesitant to And that's why people are hesitant to And that's why people are hesitant to talk about because we sound like crazy talk about because we sound like crazy talk about because we sound like crazy people. You know, it's like if I mention this You know, it's like if I mention this You know, it's like if I mention this technique can give you insight into your technique can give you insight into your technique can give you insight into your past lives, they're like what this guy past lives, they're like what this guy past lives, they're like what this guy is insane. But here's the struggle that is insane. But here's the struggle that is insane. But here's the struggle that I had. You're meditating one day and I had. You're meditating one day and I had. You're meditating one day and then you have these memories. then you have these memories. then you have these memories. You have you have memories. You have you have memories. You have you have memories. But they're not from this life. But they're not from this life. But they're not from this life. And then it's like you're like, what the And then it's like you're like, what the And then it's like you're like, what the hell is that? hell is that? hell is that? And I'm not even saying that past lives And I'm not even saying that past lives And I'm not even saying that past lives exist. I want to be really clear about exist. I want to be really clear about exist. I want to be really clear about that. But for me it was confusing. It's that. But for me it was confusing. It's that. But for me it was confusing. It's like really like destabilizing for your like really like destabilizing for your like really like destabilizing for your understanding of like what the world is. understanding of like what the world is. understanding of like what the world is. &gt;&gt; Especially as a psychiatrist. Well, I &gt;&gt; Especially as a psychiatrist. Well, I &gt;&gt; Especially as a psychiatrist. Well, I wasn't a psychiatrist back then. wasn't a psychiatrist back then. wasn't a psychiatrist back then. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And and so then it's like, okay, and so then it's like, okay, and so then it's like, okay, well like now we have to figure this well like now we have to figure this well like now we have to figure this out. So if people are like interested in So if people are like interested in So if people are like interested in scientific exploration, scientific exploration, scientific exploration, you know, I think one of the sad things you know, I think one of the sad things you know, I think one of the sad things about the world is like we've explored about the world is like we've explored about the world is like we've explored the surface. We figured it out. the surface. We figured it out. the surface. We figured it out. But but within every single one of us is But but within every single one of us is But but within every single one of us is a dimension of exploration that only you a dimension of exploration that only you a dimension of exploration that only you can do. can do. can do. You know, do you think when we're You know, do you think when we're You know, do you think when we're talking about samskara or sankalpa, the talking about samskara or sankalpa, the talking about samskara or sankalpa, the unconscious parts of your our mind, unconscious parts of your our mind, unconscious parts of your our mind, these liminal states of consciousness, these liminal states of consciousness, these liminal states of consciousness, we can hear Andrew talk about it, but if we can hear Andrew talk about it, but if we can hear Andrew talk about it, but if you want to like be there, you have to you want to like be there, you have to you want to like be there, you have to go there. No one can go there for you. go there. No one can go there for you. go there. No one can go there for you. And that's ultimately what I think is And that's ultimately what I think is And that's ultimately what I think is like really cool about it. like really cool about it. like really cool about it. Man, you are one of a kind. you are one of a kind. you are one of a kind. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I have to say. And I also have to say &gt;&gt; I have to say. And I also have to say &gt;&gt; I have to say. And I also have to say there's so many things there's so many things there's so many things that we didn't cover, but that I would that we didn't cover, but that I would that we didn't cover, but that I would love to have you back to cover at some love to have you back to cover at some love to have you back to cover at some point soon. But I just want to say point soon. But I just want to say point soon. But I just want to say you're you one of a kind. I you're you one of a kind. I you're you one of a kind. I I've been you know, kind of peppering I've been you know, kind of peppering I've been you know, kind of peppering our conversation with this from time to our conversation with this from time to our conversation with this from time to time, but uh again, the time, but uh again, the time, but uh again, the degree the degree the degree and the depth to which you're able to and the depth to which you're able to and the depth to which you're able to think about the practical concerns that think about the practical concerns that think about the practical concerns that people have, the real problems, the people have, the real problems, the people have, the real problems, the real challenges that they face right real challenges that they face right real challenges that they face right now, and then offer tools that are grounded and then offer tools that are grounded and then offer tools that are grounded in neuroscience, psychiatry, psychology, in neuroscience, psychiatry, psychology, in neuroscience, psychiatry, psychology, and also ancient practices, and also ancient practices, and also ancient practices, um is just it's spectacular. Uh I I'm I um is just it's spectacular. Uh I I'm I um is just it's spectacular. Uh I I'm I have to say this is one of my favorite have to say this is one of my favorite have to say this is one of my favorite conversations I've ever had on or off conversations I've ever had on or off conversations I've ever had on or off the podcast. I'm totally lit up by the podcast. I'm totally lit up by the podcast. I'm totally lit up by it, and it, and it, and so grateful for what you do. You're so grateful for what you do. You're so grateful for what you do. You're an amazing public educator, and I You're an amazing public educator, and I You're an amazing public educator, and I just I can't thank you enough for coming to I can't thank you enough for coming to I can't thank you enough for coming to talk about these topics, and I know that talk about these topics, and I know that talk about these topics, and I know that there's lots more that we could talk there's lots more that we could talk there's lots more that we could talk about, and we will. Yeah. Um I really about, and we will. Yeah. Um I really about, and we will. Yeah. Um I really want to extend my gratitude. It's want to extend my gratitude. It's want to extend my gratitude. It's been an amazing thing to hear you touch been an amazing thing to hear you touch been an amazing thing to hear you touch into these things and to offer practical into these things and to offer practical into these things and to offer practical tools about ego dissolution, about tools about ego dissolution, about tools about ego dissolution, about distress tolerance, to make that, you distress tolerance, to make that, you distress tolerance, to make that, you know, operational awareness, to really know, operational awareness, to really know, operational awareness, to really define what that is, to talk about define what that is, to talk about define what that is, to talk about um unlearning is such a critical um unlearning is such a critical um unlearning is such a critical component of our health. component of our health. component of our health. The shinier meditation uh example and The shinier meditation uh example and The shinier meditation uh example and I was able to and I was able to and I was able to get moments of it during that get moments of it during that get moments of it during that instruction, even though we it was the instruction, even though we it was the instruction, even though we it was the first time I've ever done it. Um first time I've ever done it. Um first time I've ever done it. Um so many people are going to benefit from so many people are going to benefit from so many people are going to benefit from this, and I really want to encourage this, and I really want to encourage this, and I really want to encourage them to them to them to try these practices, to explore, just as try these practices, to explore, just as try these practices, to explore, just as you said, there's really no uh there's you said, there's really no uh there's you said, there's really no uh there's really no substitute for that really no substitute for that really no substitute for that self-exploration. Just thank you. Thank self-exploration. Just thank you. Thank self-exploration. Just thank you. Thank you for having me. you for having me. you for having me. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; I you know, Andrew, I got to say, you &gt;&gt; I you know, Andrew, I got to say, you &gt;&gt; I you know, Andrew, I got to say, you are also one of a kind. are also one of a kind. are also one of a kind. I feel like you could still go. I'm I feel like you could still go. I'm I feel like you could still go. I'm wiped. I mean, I got more hours in me if we I mean, I got more hours in me if we I mean, I got more hours in me if we need to, but I want to be fair to our need to, but I want to be fair to our need to, but I want to be fair to our audience and to you. audience and to you. audience and to you. &gt;&gt; I mean I mean I &gt;&gt; I mean I mean I &gt;&gt; I mean I mean I But yeah, I mean, you're really But yeah, I mean, you're really But yeah, I mean, you're really energetic. Um and so it's been it's been Um and so it's been it's been Um and so it's been it's been awesome being here and thank you so awesome being here and thank you so awesome being here and thank you so much. Thank you. Well, the energy is much. Thank you. Well, the energy is much. Thank you. Well, the energy is only partially intrinsic. It's also the only partially intrinsic. It's also the only partially intrinsic. It's also the consequence of what you offered today consequence of what you offered today consequence of what you offered today and uh and uh and uh again, this has been thrilling. So, again, this has been thrilling. So, again, this has been thrilling. So, please come back again. Sure. please come back again. Sure. please come back again. Sure. Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Alok Kanojia. To discussion with Dr. Alok Kanojia. To discussion with Dr. Alok Kanojia. To learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In zero-cost way to support us. In zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. I do in the comments section on YouTube. I do in the comments section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, platforms. So, that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Alok today's discussion with Dr. Alok today's discussion with Dr. Alok Kanojia. And last but certainly not Kanojia. And last but certainly not Kanojia. And last but certainly not least, &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; thank you for your interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]