And this is the goal. The goal is no And this is the goal. The goal is no And this is the goal. The goal is no because you're going to get nos. And because you're going to get nos. And because you're going to get nos. And then I'm going to call you after you've then I'm going to call you after you've then I'm going to call you after you've made the approach. You're going to text made the approach. You're going to text made the approach. You're going to text me, I did an approach. Did you get a no? me, I did an approach. Did you get a no? me, I did an approach. Did you get a no? Yeah, I got a no. That's exactly the Yeah, I got a no. That's exactly the Yeah, I got a no. That's exactly the point. That's the goal. Cuz everyone you point. That's the goal. Cuz everyone you point. That's the goal. Cuz everyone you admire, everyone you think has killed admire, everyone you think has killed admire, everyone you think has killed it. The only thing I can guarantee you it. The only thing I can guarantee you it. The only thing I can guarantee you is there were a ton of nos. than getting is there were a ton of nos. than getting is there were a ton of nos. than getting to one of the top 10 podcasts in the to one of the top 10 podcasts in the to one of the top 10 podcasts in the world, getting to a person as a partner world, getting to a person as a partner world, getting to a person as a partner who's higher character and hotter than who's higher character and hotter than who's higher character and hotter than you, getting to make more money than you you, getting to make more money than you you, getting to make more money than you would have ever guessed that person would have ever guessed that person would have ever guessed that person would have made. The only thing that got would have made. The only thing that got would have made. The only thing that got them there was the willingness in the them there was the willingness in the them there was the willingness in the endurance to re to anticipate no. endurance to re to anticipate no. endurance to re to anticipate no. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Scott Galloway. Scott Galloway today is Scott Galloway. Scott Galloway today is Scott Galloway. Scott Galloway is a professor at New York University's is a professor at New York University's is a professor at New York University's Stern School of Business and one of the Stern School of Business and one of the Stern School of Business and one of the world's leading public educators on world's leading public educators on world's leading public educators on intelligent life design, including intelligent life design, including intelligent life design, including finances, relationships, and as today's finances, relationships, and as today's finances, relationships, and as today's conversation also covers, on the conversation also covers, on the conversation also covers, on the socopolitical landscape. Today we mainly socopolitical landscape. Today we mainly socopolitical landscape. Today we mainly talk about masculinity and what men talk about masculinity and what men talk about masculinity and what men young and old and everything in between young and old and everything in between young and old and everything in between are facing today in terms of their roles are facing today in terms of their roles are facing today in terms of their roles to take in work, in relationships, and to take in work, in relationships, and to take in work, in relationships, and their health. And today we don't just their health. And today we don't just their health. And today we don't just review the data. You'll hear statistics. review the data. You'll hear statistics. review the data. You'll hear statistics. So Scott is very grounded in So Scott is very grounded in So Scott is very grounded in quantitative data, which is important, quantitative data, which is important, quantitative data, which is important, but he also shares several clear but he also shares several clear but he also shares several clear actionable steps that you can take daily actionable steps that you can take daily actionable steps that you can take daily to ensure that you're making progress in to ensure that you're making progress in to ensure that you're making progress in work and relationships and finances. We work and relationships and finances. We work and relationships and finances. We also get into a bit of debate or more also get into a bit of debate or more also get into a bit of debate or more about things like alcohol, the about things like alcohol, the about things like alcohol, the benevolence or lack thereof of big tech benevolence or lack thereof of big tech benevolence or lack thereof of big tech and social media. And we talk a lot and social media. And we talk a lot and social media. And we talk a lot about the male female dynamics in terms about the male female dynamics in terms about the male female dynamics in terms of the consequences of single bomb homes of the consequences of single bomb homes of the consequences of single bomb homes and divorce, but just generally male and divorce, but just generally male and divorce, but just generally male female dynamics. So while today's female dynamics. So while today's female dynamics. So while today's episode does include a lot of episode does include a lot of episode does include a lot of exploration of different topics that exploration of different topics that exploration of different topics that frankly I didn't anticipate, it's also frankly I didn't anticipate, it's also frankly I didn't anticipate, it's also very proactive. Scott delineates the very proactive. Scott delineates the very proactive. Scott delineates the things that you can do and frankly things that you can do and frankly things that you can do and frankly should do each day. These aren't just should do each day. These aren't just should do each day. These aren't just lists or hacks, but effective tools that lists or hacks, but effective tools that lists or hacks, but effective tools that come from knowledge, data, his deep come from knowledge, data, his deep come from knowledge, data, his deep thinking, and that reflect the landscape thinking, and that reflect the landscape thinking, and that reflect the landscape we are in now. I'm very grateful that we are in now. I'm very grateful that we are in now. I'm very grateful that Scott took the time for this Scott took the time for this Scott took the time for this conversation. You'll see that we agree conversation. You'll see that we agree conversation. You'll see that we agree on many things. We disagree on several. on many things. We disagree on several. on many things. We disagree on several. He's a very deep thinker, extremely He's a very deep thinker, extremely He's a very deep thinker, extremely smart, obviously. He also cares about smart, obviously. He also cares about smart, obviously. He also cares about people. That comes through over and over people. That comes through over and over people. That comes through over and over again. And he's extremely generous today again. And he's extremely generous today again. And he's extremely generous today on your behalf with indeed tough love on your behalf with indeed tough love on your behalf with indeed tough love knowledge. Before we begin, I'd like to knowledge. Before we begin, I'd like to knowledge. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science related tools to the general science related tools to the general science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Scott And now for my discussion with Scott And now for my discussion with Scott Galloway. Scott Galloway, welcome. Galloway. Scott Galloway, welcome. Galloway. Scott Galloway, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thanks, man. It's good to see you. &gt;&gt; Thanks, man. It's good to see you. &gt;&gt; Thanks, man. It's good to see you. Actually, I was nervous driving over Actually, I was nervous driving over Actually, I was nervous driving over here. I like you and respect you and here. I like you and respect you and here. I like you and respect you and I was think I was trying to figure out I was think I was trying to figure out I was think I was trying to figure out why I was nervous. I really want to I why I was nervous. I really want to I why I was nervous. I really want to I want to do well today. And the last time want to do well today. And the last time want to do well today. And the last time I had this feeling was when I was going I had this feeling was when I was going I had this feeling was when I was going to do Rich Rolls podcast. I really like to do Rich Rolls podcast. I really like to do Rich Rolls podcast. I really like you. I really like and respect Rich like you. I really like and respect Rich like you. I really like and respect Rich and I remember thinking I had that same and I remember thinking I had that same and I remember thinking I had that same feeling. I wanted to do well. Anyways, feeling. I wanted to do well. Anyways, feeling. I wanted to do well. Anyways, good to be here. good to be here. good to be here. &gt;&gt; Oh man. Well, great to have you here. &gt;&gt; Oh man. Well, great to have you here. &gt;&gt; Oh man. Well, great to have you here. It's funny you say that cuz um you know It's funny you say that cuz um you know It's funny you say that cuz um you know I was coming here and I was thinking, I was coming here and I was thinking, I was coming here and I was thinking, yeah, look up to Scott. Like I respect yeah, look up to Scott. Like I respect yeah, look up to Scott. Like I respect him and we've had one conversation prior him and we've had one conversation prior him and we've had one conversation prior to this that ended up being quite to this that ended up being quite to this that ended up being quite extended conversation. And I'm I told extended conversation. And I'm I told extended conversation. And I'm I told Rob right before coming in here, our Rob right before coming in here, our Rob right before coming in here, our producer, I'm super fired up toss to producer, I'm super fired up toss to producer, I'm super fired up toss to learn from you and just sit down and learn from you and just sit down and learn from you and just sit down and chat with you. So chat with you. So chat with you. So &gt;&gt; I actually am going to do something &gt;&gt; I actually am going to do something &gt;&gt; I actually am going to do something differently this podcast than any other differently this podcast than any other differently this podcast than any other podcast, which is the question I'm about podcast, which is the question I'm about podcast, which is the question I'm about to ask or the kind of thing I'm about to ask or the kind of thing I'm about to ask or the kind of thing I'm about to pose, I normally would do off camera. pose, I normally would do off camera. pose, I normally would do off camera. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; I'm do it on camera, which is coming in &gt;&gt; I'm do it on camera, which is coming in &gt;&gt; I'm do it on camera, which is coming in here today. It occurred to me that we as here today. It occurred to me that we as here today. It occurred to me that we as a How old are you? a How old are you? a How old are you? &gt;&gt; I'm going to be 62 in November. &gt;&gt; I'm going to be 62 in November. &gt;&gt; I'm going to be 62 in November. &gt;&gt; 62. You look great, man. you can share &gt;&gt; 62. You look great, man. you can share &gt;&gt; 62. You look great, man. you can share what you're doing if we get the time. what you're doing if we get the time. what you're doing if we get the time. Um, fitness wise, I'm 50 and the risk we Um, fitness wise, I'm 50 and the risk we Um, fitness wise, I'm 50 and the risk we run into, I realize, is that when I was run into, I realize, is that when I was run into, I realize, is that when I was 16, 20, 30, etc., yes, I wanted 16, 20, 30, etc., yes, I wanted 16, 20, 30, etc., yes, I wanted knowledge. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Maybe even wisdom from elders, but I &gt;&gt; Maybe even wisdom from elders, but I &gt;&gt; Maybe even wisdom from elders, but I also knew with certainty that they also knew with certainty that they also knew with certainty that they didn't understand a thing about what it didn't understand a thing about what it didn't understand a thing about what it was like to be that age at that time. So was like to be that age at that time. So was like to be that age at that time. So I realize that as much as we might think I realize that as much as we might think I realize that as much as we might think we know, we don't know what it's like to we know, we don't know what it's like to we know, we don't know what it's like to be 16, 25, 30, 40 year old men, and be 16, 25, 30, 40 year old men, and be 16, 25, 30, 40 year old men, and we'll also talk about women today, but we'll also talk about women today, but we'll also talk about women today, but probably mostly men probably mostly men probably mostly men &gt;&gt; in 2026. And so how do we reconcile that &gt;&gt; in 2026. And so how do we reconcile that &gt;&gt; in 2026. And so how do we reconcile that in a discussion like this? I just wanted in a discussion like this? I just wanted in a discussion like this? I just wanted to ask you, how do you think about that? to ask you, how do you think about that? to ask you, how do you think about that? because so much of your content and what because so much of your content and what because so much of your content and what you're teaching out there is about you're teaching out there is about you're teaching out there is about timeless truths, but there's also a lot timeless truths, but there's also a lot timeless truths, but there's also a lot of things that are happening now, not of things that are happening now, not of things that are happening now, not just pain points, but maybe just pain points, but maybe just pain points, but maybe opportunities that I don't know how do opportunities that I don't know how do opportunities that I don't know how do you think about you think about you think about do we really know like how should we do we really know like how should we do we really know like how should we pass along information in a way that's pass along information in a way that's pass along information in a way that's truly useful to people because that's truly useful to people because that's truly useful to people because that's what obviously we both want this to be what obviously we both want this to be what obviously we both want this to be about. Well, just what you said, you about. Well, just what you said, you about. Well, just what you said, you can't you can't fully relate to a 16 if can't you can't fully relate to a 16 if can't you can't fully relate to a 16 if you're not 16 years old and know what you're not 16 years old and know what you're not 16 years old and know what they're going through. And what you they're going through. And what you they're going through. And what you know, you guys are skateboarders. know, you guys are skateboarders. know, you guys are skateboarders. And when I was 16, I got home and it was And when I was 16, I got home and it was And when I was 16, I got home and it was either watch cartoons until my mom got either watch cartoons until my mom got either watch cartoons until my mom got home or it was take risks and go out and home or it was take risks and go out and home or it was take risks and go out and find friends and do things. And now find friends and do things. And now find friends and do things. And now there's so much temptation at home there's so much temptation at home there's so much temptation at home between big tech and having a casino in between big tech and having a casino in between big tech and having a casino in your pocket and Netflix in your pocket your pocket and Netflix in your pocket your pocket and Netflix in your pocket and porn in your pocket. it's just hard and porn in your pocket. it's just hard and porn in your pocket. it's just hard to relate to what they go through. I to relate to what they go through. I to relate to what they go through. I think the first thing is just think the first thing is just think the first thing is just acknowledging, you know, you don't know acknowledging, you know, you don't know acknowledging, you know, you don't know what you don't know and then turning to what you don't know and then turning to what you don't know and then turning to data because there are people who look data because there are people who look data because there are people who look at the data and I try to counter my at the data and I try to counter my at the data and I try to counter my biases or my, you know, my uninformed biases or my, you know, my uninformed biases or my, you know, my uninformed thesis with data and so I try to find thesis with data and so I try to find thesis with data and so I try to find good people, good research and inform good people, good research and inform good people, good research and inform it. Also, it helps. I have 15 and it. Also, it helps. I have 15 and it. Also, it helps. I have 15 and 18-year-old sons. I ask them a lot. I 18-year-old sons. I ask them a lot. I 18-year-old sons. I ask them a lot. I observe them a lot. I hang out with them observe them a lot. I hang out with them observe them a lot. I hang out with them a lot and you start to pick up on stuff. a lot and you start to pick up on stuff. a lot and you start to pick up on stuff. But I think the first is just being open But I think the first is just being open But I think the first is just being open to people pushing back and recognizing to people pushing back and recognizing to people pushing back and recognizing unfortunately every once in a while in unfortunately every once in a while in unfortunately every once in a while in the comment when someone points the comment when someone points the comment when someone points something out and going if it really something out and going if it really something out and going if it really hurts and it's upsetting it's usually hurts and it's upsetting it's usually hurts and it's upsetting it's usually because they're right and they found because they're right and they found because they're right and they found some soft tissue and they've pressed on some soft tissue and they've pressed on some soft tissue and they've pressed on it. So and I try to be open to learning it. So and I try to be open to learning it. So and I try to be open to learning and you know just acknowledging when and you know just acknowledging when and you know just acknowledging when I got it wrong. What do you think are I got it wrong. What do you think are I got it wrong. What do you think are the could be three, could be five, could the could be three, could be five, could the could be three, could be five, could be 10 things that all males should be 10 things that all males should be 10 things that all males should strive to check the boxes on in order to strive to check the boxes on in order to strive to check the boxes on in order to have a good life, not just to, you know, have a good life, not just to, you know, have a good life, not just to, you know, be great in some particular role, but be great in some particular role, but be great in some particular role, but like what are what are the like what are what are the like what are what are the macronutrients in your opinion of macronutrients in your opinion of macronutrients in your opinion of becoming a healthy, happy, fulfilled becoming a healthy, happy, fulfilled becoming a healthy, happy, fulfilled male? &gt;&gt; I think every person, not just every &gt;&gt; I think every person, not just every &gt;&gt; I think every person, not just every man, needs a code. And that is you're man, needs a code. And that is you're man, needs a code. And that is you're going to be faced with hundreds of going to be faced with hundreds of going to be faced with hundreds of decisions each day and you want to make decisions each day and you want to make decisions each day and you want to make generally speaking a higher proportion generally speaking a higher proportion generally speaking a higher proportion of good decisions than the peer group. of good decisions than the peer group. of good decisions than the peer group. Right? So what helps is a code. Some Right? So what helps is a code. Some Right? So what helps is a code. Some people get that code from religion, the people get that code from religion, the people get that code from religion, the military. There are really strong family military. There are really strong family military. There are really strong family connections. I actually got my first connections. I actually got my first connections. I actually got my first kind of code from my first job there. I kind of code from my first job there. I kind of code from my first job there. I worked at Morgan Stanley. There was just worked at Morgan Stanley. There was just worked at Morgan Stanley. There was just a certain level of professionalism. I a certain level of professionalism. I a certain level of professionalism. I got code from sports at UCLA. Uh but I got code from sports at UCLA. Uh but I got code from sports at UCLA. Uh but I wonder there's so many lost men right wonder there's so many lost men right wonder there's so many lost men right now. I wonder if masculinity can be a now. I wonder if masculinity can be a now. I wonder if masculinity can be a code or some sort of aspirational form code or some sort of aspirational form code or some sort of aspirational form of masculinity where people born as of masculinity where people born as of masculinity where people born as males might have an easier time leaning males might have an easier time leaning males might have an easier time leaning in. And I should also say that I don't in. And I should also say that I don't in. And I should also say that I don't think masculinity or femininity are think masculinity or femininity are think masculinity or femininity are sequestered to people born as males or sequestered to people born as males or sequestered to people born as males or females. I'm drawn to men who are more females. I'm drawn to men who are more females. I'm drawn to men who are more feminine as friends. My close friends feminine as friends. My close friends feminine as friends. My close friends kind of take care of me and are more kind of take care of me and are more kind of take care of me and are more nurturing. But I think for young men, if nurturing. But I think for young men, if nurturing. But I think for young men, if they feel like they can lean into some they feel like they can lean into some they feel like they can lean into some positive masculine attributes that it positive masculine attributes that it positive masculine attributes that it could serve as a code. So I loosely could serve as a code. So I loosely could serve as a code. So I loosely break it down into three very reductive break it down into three very reductive break it down into three very reductive qualities and that is the first is to be qualities and that is the first is to be qualities and that is the first is to be a provider. I'm not talking about the a provider. I'm not talking about the a provider. I'm not talking about the way the world is but the way the world way the world is but the way the world way the world is but the way the world should be. I think every young man should be. I think every young man should be. I think every young man should have a plan and have an should have a plan and have an should have a plan and have an assumption that at some point he will assumption that at some point he will assumption that at some point he will have to be the economic lead or provider have to be the economic lead or provider have to be the economic lead or provider for his family. Sometimes that means for his family. Sometimes that means for his family. Sometimes that means getting out of the way of your partner getting out of the way of your partner getting out of the way of your partner who's better at that whole money thing. who's better at that whole money thing. who's better at that whole money thing. Sometimes it means providing more Sometimes it means providing more Sometimes it means providing more domestic or emotional support and labor domestic or emotional support and labor domestic or emotional support and labor if your partner is accelerating if your partner is accelerating if your partner is accelerating economically. When my partner had a kid, economically. When my partner had a kid, economically. When my partner had a kid, she was working at Goldman Sachs. She she was working at Goldman Sachs. She she was working at Goldman Sachs. She was making more money than me. I was a was making more money than me. I was a was making more money than me. I was a new academic at NYU. I was making new academic at NYU. I was making new academic at NYU. I was making $160,000 living in New York, which is $160,000 living in New York, which is $160,000 living in New York, which is may sound like a lot of money, but it may sound like a lot of money, but it may sound like a lot of money, but it wasn't. And she was making substantially wasn't. And she was making substantially wasn't. And she was making substantially more. So, I tried to pick up slack and more. So, I tried to pick up slack and more. So, I tried to pick up slack and provide more labor at home and provide more labor at home and provide more labor at home and take charge of our finances. But I think take charge of our finances. But I think take charge of our finances. But I think at the outset, trying to find a plan to at the outset, trying to find a plan to at the outset, trying to find a plan to be economically relevant in a capitalist be economically relevant in a capitalist be economically relevant in a capitalist society is really important because society is really important because society is really important because whether we like to admit it or not, a whether we like to admit it or not, a whether we like to admit it or not, a male from a self-esteem standpoint, from male from a self-esteem standpoint, from male from a self-esteem standpoint, from a sexual currency standpoint, from the a sexual currency standpoint, from the a sexual currency standpoint, from the esteem of the tribe or the society is esteem of the tribe or the society is esteem of the tribe or the society is going to be disproportionately evaluated going to be disproportionately evaluated going to be disproportionately evaluated based on your economic viability. So based on your economic viability. So based on your economic viability. So from an early age, try and have a plan. from an early age, try and have a plan. from an early age, try and have a plan. You may not have to stick to that plan. You may not have to stick to that plan. You may not have to stick to that plan. I'm not saying you got to go to Harvard I'm not saying you got to go to Harvard I'm not saying you got to go to Harvard and go to work at Goldman Sachs, but and go to work at Goldman Sachs, but and go to work at Goldman Sachs, but maybe you're going to go to trade maybe you're going to go to trade maybe you're going to go to trade school, learn how to install energy school, learn how to install energy school, learn how to install energy efficient HVAC, but you just need a efficient HVAC, but you just need a efficient HVAC, but you just need a plan. You be moving towards something. plan. You be moving towards something. plan. You be moving towards something. The second is protector. If you think The second is protector. If you think The second is protector. If you think about the most masculine jobs, fireman, about the most masculine jobs, fireman, about the most masculine jobs, fireman, cop, military, the notion is you develop cop, military, the notion is you develop cop, military, the notion is you develop skills and strengths such you can skills and strengths such you can skills and strengths such you can protect others. And the most, if you protect others. And the most, if you protect others. And the most, if you will, manly, masculine, satisfied I ever will, manly, masculine, satisfied I ever will, manly, masculine, satisfied I ever feel is at night when I feel as if my feel is at night when I feel as if my feel is at night when I feel as if my family feels protected. The kids are family feels protected. The kids are family feels protected. The kids are asleep, my partner feels loved and asleep, my partner feels loved and asleep, my partner feels loved and supported, and I've been able to supported, and I've been able to supported, and I've been able to hopefully through partnership, through hopefully through partnership, through hopefully through partnership, through economic valuability, been able to economic valuability, been able to economic valuability, been able to provide a warm, comfortable life for provide a warm, comfortable life for provide a warm, comfortable life for them so they can focus on the things them so they can focus on the things them so they can focus on the things that are important to them. And I think that are important to them. And I think that are important to them. And I think unfortunately a lot of men that we unfortunately a lot of men that we unfortunately a lot of men that we should look up to, whether it's the should look up to, whether it's the should look up to, whether it's the president, I apologize for getting president, I apologize for getting president, I apologize for getting political, or the wealthiest man in the political, or the wealthiest man in the political, or the wealthiest man in the world who are naturally going to be seen world who are naturally going to be seen world who are naturally going to be seen as male role models, they seem to have as male role models, they seem to have as male role models, they seem to have skipped the protection part. that the skipped the protection part. that the skipped the protection part. that the whole shooting match, the whole reason whole shooting match, the whole reason whole shooting match, the whole reason you make money, that's the means, but you make money, that's the means, but you make money, that's the means, but the ends is such that you can protect the ends is such that you can protect the ends is such that you can protect others. I find that's the most rewarding others. I find that's the most rewarding others. I find that's the most rewarding thing in the world. And then finally, thing in the world. And then finally, thing in the world. And then finally, procreator, and that is uh I think we procreator, and that is uh I think we procreator, and that is uh I think we need to stop demonizing young men's need to stop demonizing young men's need to stop demonizing young men's desire for relationships and sexual desire for relationships and sexual desire for relationships and sexual desires. I think a young man wanting to desires. I think a young man wanting to desires. I think a young man wanting to have sex is can be a tremendous have sex is can be a tremendous have sex is can be a tremendous motivator to be a better man. It's like motivator to be a better man. It's like motivator to be a better man. It's like fire. It can be incredibly destructive, fire. It can be incredibly destructive, fire. It can be incredibly destructive, but if you put it in a steel casing with but if you put it in a steel casing with but if you put it in a steel casing with spark plugs, it can create tremendous spark plugs, it can create tremendous spark plugs, it can create tremendous progress. And the story I use is that I progress. And the story I use is that I progress. And the story I use is that I was at the Raleigh Hotel in Miami and I was at the Raleigh Hotel in Miami and I was at the Raleigh Hotel in Miami and I saw a very attractive woman. And it was saw a very attractive woman. And it was saw a very attractive woman. And it was the middle of the day and without the middle of the day and without the middle of the day and without the benefit of alcohol, I didn't have the benefit of alcohol, I didn't have the benefit of alcohol, I didn't have the confidence to approach her, but I confidence to approach her, but I confidence to approach her, but I promised myself I was going to approach promised myself I was going to approach promised myself I was going to approach her. And then I went out to get my car her. And then I went out to get my car her. And then I went out to get my car from the valet and was sitting in the from the valet and was sitting in the from the valet and was sitting in the car and I'm like, "God, you're such a car and I'm like, "God, you're such a car and I'm like, "God, you're such a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wimp." So I ran back in, went up [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wimp." So I ran back in, went up [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wimp." So I ran back in, went up to her and said, "Hi, I'm Scott. Where to her and said, "Hi, I'm Scott. Where to her and said, "Hi, I'm Scott. Where are you from?" Anyways, long story are you from?" Anyways, long story are you from?" Anyways, long story short, 18 months later, our son's middle short, 18 months later, our son's middle short, 18 months later, our son's middle name is uh born was Raleigh. And I name is uh born was Raleigh. And I name is uh born was Raleigh. And I didn't look at her, Andrew, and think didn't look at her, Andrew, and think didn't look at her, Andrew, and think I'd really like lower rates on auto I'd really like lower rates on auto I'd really like lower rates on auto insurance. I looked at her and thought, insurance. I looked at her and thought, insurance. I looked at her and thought, I'd really like to have sex with her. I'd really like to have sex with her. I'd really like to have sex with her. And I think young men's desire for And I think young men's desire for And I think young men's desire for relationships and sex, if channeled relationships and sex, if channeled relationships and sex, if channeled correctly, makes you want to be a better correctly, makes you want to be a better correctly, makes you want to be a better man. Have a kindness practice. man. Have a kindness practice. man. Have a kindness practice. Demonstrate excellence. Shower for God's Demonstrate excellence. Shower for God's Demonstrate excellence. Shower for God's sakes. Work out. Have a plan. Have sakes. Work out. Have a plan. Have sakes. Work out. Have a plan. Have resilience. Have perseverance. resilience. Have perseverance. resilience. Have perseverance. demonstrate excellence. So in some demonstrate excellence. So in some demonstrate excellence. So in some provider, protector, procreator, where I provider, protector, procreator, where I provider, protector, procreator, where I think I missed it in the book, and I'd think I missed it in the book, and I'd think I missed it in the book, and I'd love your response because I'm open to love your response because I'm open to love your response because I'm open to criticism here is one that's what work criticism here is one that's what work criticism here is one that's what work worked for me and I think a lot of worked for me and I think a lot of worked for me and I think a lot of younger people there's different forms younger people there's different forms younger people there's different forms of masculinity that don't necessarily of masculinity that don't necessarily of masculinity that don't necessarily involve being economically secure, involve being economically secure, involve being economically secure, finding a mate. And also the finding a mate. And also the finding a mate. And also the component I've really missed is service. component I've really missed is service. component I've really missed is service. And I think a great kind of one And I think a great kind of one And I think a great kind of one question or proxy for masculinity in question or proxy for masculinity in question or proxy for masculinity in terms of what you do every day is are terms of what you do every day is are terms of what you do every day is are you optimizing for attention or service? you optimizing for attention or service? you optimizing for attention or service? Right? And and then the litmus test that Right? And and then the litmus test that Right? And and then the litmus test that Richard Reeves kind of gave me uh who's Richard Reeves kind of gave me uh who's Richard Reeves kind of gave me uh who's sort of my Yoda on this stuff is this sort of my Yoda on this stuff is this sort of my Yoda on this stuff is this notion of surplus value that some men notion of surplus value that some men notion of surplus value that some men are born males but never they die never are born males but never they die never are born males but never they die never having become men. It's not about a having become men. It's not about a having become men. It's not about a religious ceremony and age or you know religious ceremony and age or you know religious ceremony and age or you know some sort of experience or ritual. It's some sort of experience or ritual. It's some sort of experience or ritual. It's about at some point can you honestly about at some point can you honestly about at some point can you honestly look in the mirror and say I add surplus look in the mirror and say I add surplus look in the mirror and say I add surplus value. I create more tax revenue in jobs value. I create more tax revenue in jobs value. I create more tax revenue in jobs than I absorb. Everyone absorbs tax than I absorb. Everyone absorbs tax than I absorb. Everyone absorbs tax revenue if you're in America. I listen revenue if you're in America. I listen revenue if you're in America. I listen to more people complain than I complain. to more people complain than I complain. to more people complain than I complain. Right? I love more people than love me. Right? I love more people than love me. Right? I love more people than love me. And I didn't get that. I don't think I And I didn't get that. I don't think I And I didn't get that. I don't think I really became a man well into my 40s really became a man well into my 40s really became a man well into my 40s because I was always I took a capitalist because I was always I took a capitalist because I was always I took a capitalist approach to relationships. approach to relationships. approach to relationships. I always wanted more. I wanted a I always wanted more. I wanted a I always wanted more. I wanted a girlfriend that was better to me than I girlfriend that was better to me than I girlfriend that was better to me than I was to her. I wanted a job where I was to her. I wanted a job where I was to her. I wanted a job where I was getting paid more maybe than I was getting paid more maybe than I was getting paid more maybe than I was contributing. And then what you realize contributing. And then what you realize contributing. And then what you realize as you get older is the whole shooting as you get older is the whole shooting as you get older is the whole shooting match is to create surplus value, match is to create surplus value, match is to create surplus value, provide, be a better friend, be a better provide, be a better friend, be a better provide, be a better friend, be a better partner. There's no way my kids will partner. There's no way my kids will partner. There's no way my kids will ever be able to return as much as I've ever be able to return as much as I've ever be able to return as much as I've invested in them. I mean, we have these, invested in them. I mean, we have these, invested in them. I mean, we have these, you know, the Hallmark Channel and you know, the Hallmark Channel and you know, the Hallmark Channel and insurance commercials will tell me that insurance commercials will tell me that insurance commercials will tell me that I'll have these moments, and I get I'll have these moments, and I get I'll have these moments, and I get those, but my kids are never up at 2 am those, but my kids are never up at 2 am those, but my kids are never up at 2 am worried about me. They just aren't, worried about me. They just aren't, worried about me. They just aren't, right? I' I'm spending a ton I always right? I' I'm spending a ton I always right? I' I'm spending a ton I always say to them, you're adding negative say to them, you're adding negative say to them, you're adding negative value. Just be clear, you go to these value. Just be clear, you go to these value. Just be clear, you go to these amazing schools, all these talented amazing schools, all these talented amazing schools, all these talented people, negative value. Me and your mom, people, negative value. Me and your mom, people, negative value. Me and your mom, we are constantly investing in you. This we are constantly investing in you. This we are constantly investing in you. This would be impossible for you to pass would be impossible for you to pass would be impossible for you to pass back. What I figured out is that's the back. What I figured out is that's the back. What I figured out is that's the whole shooting match is I'm finally whole shooting match is I'm finally whole shooting match is I'm finally Andrew finally at a place of surplus Andrew finally at a place of surplus Andrew finally at a place of surplus value. I apologize for the word salary value. I apologize for the word salary value. I apologize for the word salary provider, protector, procreator. Um are provider, protector, procreator. Um are provider, protector, procreator. Um are you are you optimizing for service not you are you optimizing for service not you are you optimizing for service not attention? And do you can you really say attention? And do you can you really say attention? And do you can you really say you add surplus value? you add surplus value? you add surplus value? &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, has 20 grams of protein, only 150 has 20 grams of protein, only 150 has 20 grams of protein, only 150 calories, and zero grams of sugar. I calories, and zero grams of sugar. I calories, and zero grams of sugar. I have to say, these are the best tasting have to say, these are the best tasting have to say, these are the best tasting protein bars I've ever had, and I've protein bars I've ever had, and I've protein bars I've ever had, and I've tried a lot of protein bars over the tried a lot of protein bars over the tried a lot of protein bars over the years. These New David bars have a years. These New David bars have a years. These New David bars have a marshmallow base and they're covered in marshmallow base and they're covered in marshmallow base and they're covered in chocolate coating and they're absolutely chocolate coating and they're absolutely chocolate coating and they're absolutely incredible. I of course eat regular incredible. I of course eat regular incredible. I of course eat regular whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I also make it a point to eat one or two also make it a point to eat one or two also make it a point to eat one or two David bars per day as a snack, which David bars per day as a snack, which David bars per day as a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goal of makes it easy to hit my protein goal of makes it easy to hit my protein goal of one gram of protein per pound of body one gram of protein per pound of body one gram of protein per pound of body weight. And that allows me to take in weight. And that allows me to take in weight. And that allows me to take in the protein I need without consuming the protein I need without consuming the protein I need without consuming excess calories. I love all the David excess calories. I love all the David excess calories. I love all the David Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie dough, caramel chocolate, double dough, caramel chocolate, double dough, caramel chocolate, double chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They all actually taste like candy bars. all actually taste like candy bars. all actually taste like candy bars. Again, they're amazing. But again, they Again, they're amazing. But again, they Again, they're amazing. But again, they have no sugar and they have 20 gram of have no sugar and they have 20 gram of have no sugar and they have 20 gram of protein with just 150 calories. If you'd protein with just 150 calories. If you'd protein with just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to like to try David, you can go to like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to davidproin.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Wealthfront. In today's financial Wealthfront. In today's financial Wealthfront. In today's financial landscape of constant market shifts and landscape of constant market shifts and landscape of constant market shifts and chaotic news, it's easy to feel chaotic news, it's easy to feel chaotic news, it's easy to feel uncertain about how to save and invest uncertain about how to save and invest uncertain about how to save and invest your money. Wealthfront is the solution your money. Wealthfront is the solution your money. Wealthfront is the solution that helps you take control of your that helps you take control of your that helps you take control of your money while managing risk. For nearly a money while managing risk. For nearly a money while managing risk. For nearly a decade, I've trusted Wealthfront to decade, I've trusted Wealthfront to decade, I've trusted Wealthfront to navigate this volatility. With the navigate this volatility. With the navigate this volatility. With the Wealthfront cash account, I can earn Wealthfront cash account, I can earn Wealthfront cash account, I can earn 3.3% annual percentage yield or APY on 3.3% annual percentage yield or APY on 3.3% annual percentage yield or APY on my cash from program banks. And I know my cash from program banks. And I know my cash from program banks. And I know my money is growing until I'm ready to my money is growing until I'm ready to my money is growing until I'm ready to spend it or invest it. One of the spend it or invest it. One of the spend it or invest it. One of the features I love about Wealthfront is features I love about Wealthfront is features I love about Wealthfront is that I have access to instant, no fee that I have access to instant, no fee that I have access to instant, no fee withdrawals to eligible accounts 247. withdrawals to eligible accounts 247. withdrawals to eligible accounts 247. That means I can move my money where I That means I can move my money where I That means I can move my money where I need it without waiting. And when I'm need it without waiting. And when I'm need it without waiting. And when I'm ready to transition from saving to ready to transition from saving to ready to transition from saving to investing, Wealthfront lets me investing, Wealthfront lets me investing, Wealthfront lets me seamlessly transfer my funds into one of seamlessly transfer my funds into one of seamlessly transfer my funds into one of their expert-built portfolios. For a their expert-built portfolios. For a their expert-built portfolios. For a limited time, Wealthfront is offering limited time, Wealthfront is offering limited time, Wealthfront is offering the Huberman Lab audience an exclusive the Huberman Lab audience an exclusive the Huberman Lab audience an exclusive 75% APY boost over the base rate for 3 75% APY boost over the base rate for 3 75% APY boost over the base rate for 3 months, meaning you can get up to 4.05% months, meaning you can get up to 4.05% months, meaning you can get up to 4.05% variable APY on up to $150,000 in variable APY on up to $150,000 in variable APY on up to $150,000 in deposits. Over 1 million people already deposits. Over 1 million people already deposits. Over 1 million people already trust Wealthfront to save more, earn trust Wealthfront to save more, earn trust Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and build long-term wealth with more, and build long-term wealth with more, and build long-term wealth with confidence. If you'd like to try confidence. If you'd like to try confidence. If you'd like to try Wealthfront, you can go to Wealthfront, you can go to Wealthfront, you can go to wealthfront.com/huberman to receive the boost offer and start to receive the boost offer and start to receive the boost offer and start earning 4.05% variable APY today. That's earning 4.05% variable APY today. That's earning 4.05% variable APY today. That's wealthfront.com/huberman to get started. This is a paid to get started. This is a paid to get started. This is a paid testimonial of Wealthfront. Client testimonial of Wealthfront. Client testimonial of Wealthfront. Client experiences will vary. Wealthfront experiences will vary. Wealthfront experiences will vary. Wealthfront brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is brokerage is not a bank. The base APY is as of January 30th, 2026 and subject to as of January 30th, 2026 and subject to as of January 30th, 2026 and subject to change. For more information, please see change. For more information, please see change. For more information, please see the episode description. I love all the episode description. I love all the episode description. I love all that. I don't have anything to add. I do that. I don't have anything to add. I do that. I don't have anything to add. I do have two questions and one reflection. have two questions and one reflection. have two questions and one reflection. The reflection is that what you started The reflection is that what you started The reflection is that what you started with that every day you're making with that every day you're making with that every day you're making decisions all day long. And you want decisions all day long. And you want decisions all day long. And you want more of those to be good decisions than more of those to be good decisions than more of those to be good decisions than bad decisions relative to your peers. I bad decisions relative to your peers. I bad decisions relative to your peers. I think that's a terrific way to think that's a terrific way to think that's a terrific way to think about striving and I've never heard it about striving and I've never heard it about striving and I've never heard it posed that way. So I really just want to posed that way. So I really just want to posed that way. So I really just want to bold underline and highlight that for bold underline and highlight that for bold underline and highlight that for everyone. For the eighth grader, for the everyone. For the eighth grader, for the everyone. For the eighth grader, for the 12th grader, for the college junior, the 12th grader, for the college junior, the 12th grader, for the college junior, the 40year-old man, 40year-old man, 40year-old man, make better decisions than the average make better decisions than the average make better decisions than the average around you. The problem I have, I guess around you. The problem I have, I guess around you. The problem I have, I guess I do have one caveat here, is um I do have one caveat here, is um I do have one caveat here, is um that most people won't remember this, that most people won't remember this, that most people won't remember this, but that show Jerry Springer I think was but that show Jerry Springer I think was but that show Jerry Springer I think was so popular because people like to focus so popular because people like to focus so popular because people like to focus on all the people doing worse than them on all the people doing worse than them on all the people doing worse than them because it makes it easy to stay right because it makes it easy to stay right because it makes it easy to stay right where you're at. where you're at. where you're at. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, who are the comparison points that &gt;&gt; So, who are the comparison points that &gt;&gt; So, who are the comparison points that one can keep in mind as they strive to one can keep in mind as they strive to one can keep in mind as they strive to make these better decisions each day? make these better decisions each day? make these better decisions each day? Because I think that first statement you Because I think that first statement you Because I think that first statement you made is touching into some serious made is touching into some serious made is touching into some serious wisdom. So, who is the comparison point wisdom. So, who is the comparison point wisdom. So, who is the comparison point and how do you keep that framed? because and how do you keep that framed? because and how do you keep that framed? because you study markets, you understand you study markets, you understand you study markets, you understand markets. What's the market comparison markets. What's the market comparison markets. What's the market comparison point in this? Make more better point in this? Make more better point in this? Make more better decisions than worse ones relative to decisions than worse ones relative to decisions than worse ones relative to the average as you progress through your the average as you progress through your the average as you progress through your day. &gt;&gt; I think it's really important, I mean, &gt;&gt; I think it's really important, I mean, &gt;&gt; I think it's really important, I mean, you're talking a little bit about role you're talking a little bit about role you're talking a little bit about role models and references. And so, first models and references. And so, first models and references. And so, first off, one myth I think we need to dispel off, one myth I think we need to dispel off, one myth I think we need to dispel is that success equals exploitation. is that success equals exploitation. is that success equals exploitation. There's a very unhealthy zeitgeist, There's a very unhealthy zeitgeist, There's a very unhealthy zeitgeist, especially from the far left, that especially from the far left, that especially from the far left, that anyone who's very successful is anyone who's very successful is anyone who's very successful is exploiting others. And I think we need exploiting others. And I think we need exploiting others. And I think we need to puncture that narrative and say you to puncture that narrative and say you to puncture that narrative and say you should strive to be successful. And should strive to be successful. And should strive to be successful. And success might mean certain things for success might mean certain things for success might mean certain things for other people. I didn't grow up with other people. I didn't grow up with other people. I didn't grow up with money. So for me, success for most of my money. So for me, success for most of my money. So for me, success for most of my life was trying to get economic life was trying to get economic life was trying to get economic security. I was anxiety plagued my mom security. I was anxiety plagued my mom security. I was anxiety plagued my mom and I, economic anxiety, and it was like and I, economic anxiety, and it was like and I, economic anxiety, and it was like a ghost following us around telling us a ghost following us around telling us a ghost following us around telling us we weren't worthy. So my role models we weren't worthy. So my role models we weren't worthy. So my role models were always people who had figured out were always people who had figured out were always people who had figured out economic success and people have to pick economic success and people have to pick economic success and people have to pick their own role models. I always thought their own role models. I always thought their own role models. I always thought masculinity was getting back in masculinity was getting back in masculinity was getting back in someone's face who wasn't didn't give me someone's face who wasn't didn't give me someone's face who wasn't didn't give me the respect I thought I deserved. I was the respect I thought I deserved. I was the respect I thought I deserved. I was that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that when someone cut me that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that when someone cut me that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that when someone cut me off in traffic felt like I needed to off in traffic felt like I needed to off in traffic felt like I needed to speed up and cut them off. That if the speed up and cut them off. That if the speed up and cut them off. That if the Delta ticket counter representative Delta ticket counter representative Delta ticket counter representative wasn't kind to me or was busy, I would wasn't kind to me or was busy, I would wasn't kind to me or was busy, I would get back in their face. It's like, well, get back in their face. It's like, well, get back in their face. It's like, well, do you realize I'm a 1K member? And do you realize I'm a 1K member? And do you realize I'm a 1K member? And then, you know, a decent reference point then, you know, a decent reference point then, you know, a decent reference point is just men you admire and they're is just men you admire and they're is just men you admire and they're everywhere that perhaps don't can take everywhere that perhaps don't can take everywhere that perhaps don't can take blows. They realize someone might be blows. They realize someone might be blows. They realize someone might be having a bad day. But you said something having a bad day. But you said something having a bad day. But you said something that inspired a thought in that inspired a thought in that inspired a thought in that what I just outlined is pretty meta. You what I just outlined is pretty meta. You what I just outlined is pretty meta. You know, kind of themes that sometimes know, kind of themes that sometimes know, kind of themes that sometimes aren't that actionable. So, I just want aren't that actionable. So, I just want aren't that actionable. So, I just want to bring it down one level. As we were to bring it down one level. As we were to bring it down one level. As we were talking about off mic, I try and mentor talking about off mic, I try and mentor talking about off mic, I try and mentor two or three young men at any given two or three young men at any given two or three young men at any given time. And these are young men that quite time. And these are young men that quite time. And these are young men that quite frankly need mentoring. They're frankly need mentoring. They're frankly need mentoring. They're struggling. Most of them might be still struggling. Most of them might be still struggling. Most of them might be still living at home. You know, they're not living at home. You know, they're not living at home. You know, they're not these aren't people who went to Brown these aren't people who went to Brown these aren't people who went to Brown and are working at Goldman Sachs. And and are working at Goldman Sachs. And and are working at Goldman Sachs. And so, some just some more tactical things so, some just some more tactical things so, some just some more tactical things that I think serve as a reference point that I think serve as a reference point that I think serve as a reference point for how you succeed or how you make for how you succeed or how you make for how you succeed or how you make progress. The first thing I do, the progress. The first thing I do, the progress. The first thing I do, the first hack is I say, "Unlock your first hack is I say, "Unlock your first hack is I say, "Unlock your phone." And I'm going to look at it. And phone." And I'm going to look at it. And phone." And I'm going to look at it. And there's a little bit of nervousness. So, there's a little bit of nervousness. So, there's a little bit of nervousness. So, what I do to loosen them up or lubricate what I do to loosen them up or lubricate what I do to loosen them up or lubricate it is I say, "Okay, let me tell you two it is I say, "Okay, let me tell you two it is I say, "Okay, let me tell you two things. First is I gamble. I don't things. First is I gamble. I don't things. First is I gamble. I don't gamble on FanDuel. I gamble with gamble on FanDuel. I gamble with gamble on FanDuel. I gamble with options. I know it's stupid. I know I'm options. I know it's stupid. I know I'm options. I know it's stupid. I know I'm going to lose money over the long term. going to lose money over the long term. going to lose money over the long term. I'm a smart guy. I love markets, but I'm a smart guy. I love markets, but I'm a smart guy. I love markets, but that dope a hit I get is too seductive. that dope a hit I get is too seductive. that dope a hit I get is too seductive. So, I sell calls and puts. Uh I So, I sell calls and puts. Uh I So, I sell calls and puts. Uh I consume porn. That's sort of not that's consume porn. That's sort of not that's consume porn. That's sort of not that's not a that's an embarrassing thing to not a that's an embarrassing thing to not a that's an embarrassing thing to say at 61, but yeah, I still consume say at 61, but yeah, I still consume say at 61, but yeah, I still consume porn. But I tell them that and it porn. But I tell them that and it porn. But I tell them that and it lubricates or it makes them more lubricates or it makes them more lubricates or it makes them more comfortable. I open their phone. comfortable. I open their phone. comfortable. I open their phone. Everyone has an advantage. Most young Everyone has an advantage. Most young Everyone has an advantage. Most young men who are not excelling, if you will, men who are not excelling, if you will, men who are not excelling, if you will, by traditional western capitalist by traditional western capitalist by traditional western capitalist standards, their advantage is capital. standards, their advantage is capital. standards, their advantage is capital. Specifically, their human capital. They Specifically, their human capital. They Specifically, their human capital. They have time. And within about 5 to 7 have time. And within about 5 to 7 have time. And within about 5 to 7 minutes, I can find eight hours of time minutes, I can find eight hours of time minutes, I can find eight hours of time from Tik Tok, from X, from porn, from Tik Tok, from X, from porn, from Tik Tok, from X, from porn, from gambling sites, from YouTube. I'm like, gambling sites, from YouTube. I'm like, gambling sites, from YouTube. I'm like, we're going to find eight hours. You we're going to find eight hours. You we're going to find eight hours. You tell me we're going to reduce this tell me we're going to reduce this tell me we're going to reduce this eight hours. Next week I'm going to eight hours. Next week I'm going to eight hours. Next week I'm going to check and we're going to reallocate that check and we're going to reallocate that check and we're going to reallocate that capital into three things. The first is capital into three things. The first is capital into three things. The first is we're going to get really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] we're going to get really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] we're going to get really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] strong. I just think the best strong. I just think the best strong. I just think the best anti-depressant is moving weights, anti-depressant is moving weights, anti-depressant is moving weights, building some bulk or running far. I' building some bulk or running far. I' building some bulk or running far. I' I've jokingly said every man under the I've jokingly said every man under the I've jokingly said every man under the age of 30 should aspire to be able to age of 30 should aspire to be able to age of 30 should aspire to be able to walk into any room and know if [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] got walk into any room and know if [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] got walk into any room and know if [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] got real they could kill and eat everybody real they could kill and eat everybody real they could kill and eat everybody or outrun them. Like there's different or outrun them. Like there's different or outrun them. Like there's different forms of fitness. You can be fast, you forms of fitness. You can be fast, you forms of fitness. You can be fast, you can be flexible, you can be strong, but can be flexible, you can be strong, but can be flexible, you can be strong, but there's no excuse. the male form is there's no excuse. the male form is there's no excuse. the male form is blessed with, you know, more bone blessed with, you know, more bone blessed with, you know, more bone density, double twitch muscle, all the density, double twitch muscle, all the density, double twitch muscle, all the things you talk about, this incredible things you talk about, this incredible things you talk about, this incredible substance that pours over called substance that pours over called substance that pours over called testosterone. You're going to look back testosterone. You're going to look back testosterone. You're going to look back when you're my age and think, why wasn't when you're my age and think, why wasn't when you're my age and think, why wasn't I just fast, sleek, a monster, just I just fast, sleek, a monster, just I just fast, sleek, a monster, just strong, so we're going to work out at strong, so we're going to work out at strong, so we're going to work out at least three times a week. The second least three times a week. The second least three times a week. The second thing is we got to make some money. And thing is we got to make some money. And thing is we got to make some money. And I want you to make money outside your I want you to make money outside your I want you to make money outside your house. You know, I don't care if you're house. You know, I don't care if you're house. You know, I don't care if you're a lift driver, task rabbiter, Panera is a lift driver, task rabbiter, Panera is a lift driver, task rabbiter, Panera is hiring people at 18 bucks an hour and hiring people at 18 bucks an hour and hiring people at 18 bucks an hour and only one out of 10 that accept a job only one out of 10 that accept a job only one out of 10 that accept a job actually owe up show up the first day. actually owe up show up the first day. actually owe up show up the first day. So, if you make if you really make the So, if you make if you really make the So, if you make if you really make the effort, you can make decent money. And effort, you can make decent money. And effort, you can make decent money. And the great thing about getting a taste the great thing about getting a taste the great thing about getting a taste for the flesh of money is you start for the flesh of money is you start for the flesh of money is you start learning how to make more money. If you learning how to make more money. If you learning how to make more money. If you want to make a lot of money, unless want to make a lot of money, unless want to make a lot of money, unless you're smart enough to be born to rich you're smart enough to be born to rich you're smart enough to be born to rich parents, start off by making a little parents, start off by making a little parents, start off by making a little bit of money and you'll start to figure bit of money and you'll start to figure bit of money and you'll start to figure out capitalism, right? And the final out capitalism, right? And the final out capitalism, right? And the final thing is at least three times a month thing is at least three times a month thing is at least three times a month we're going to put ourselves in a group we're going to put ourselves in a group we're going to put ourselves in a group sitting where we are trying to achieve sitting where we are trying to achieve sitting where we are trying to achieve something great in the agency of others. something great in the agency of others. something great in the agency of others. A nonprofit, a church group, a sports A nonprofit, a church group, a sports A nonprofit, a church group, a sports league, a writing club. And then the league, a writing club. And then the league, a writing club. And then the second phase of that is we're going to second phase of that is we're going to second phase of that is we're going to do something what I call the approach. do something what I call the approach. do something what I call the approach. Hey, hey man, do you want to go watch Hey, hey man, do you want to go watch Hey, hey man, do you want to go watch the Jets game? Right? An expression of the Jets game? Right? An expression of the Jets game? Right? An expression of friendship. And then if you're really friendship. And then if you're really friendship. And then if you're really comfortable, an expression of romantic comfortable, an expression of romantic comfortable, an expression of romantic interest while making them feel safe. interest while making them feel safe. interest while making them feel safe. would you like to grab a coffee would you like to grab a coffee would you like to grab a coffee sometime? And this is the goal. The goal sometime? And this is the goal. The goal sometime? And this is the goal. The goal is no because you're going to get nos. is no because you're going to get nos. is no because you're going to get nos. And then I'm going to call you after And then I'm going to call you after And then I'm going to call you after you've made the approach, you're going you've made the approach, you're going you've made the approach, you're going to text me, I did an approach. Did you to text me, I did an approach. Did you to text me, I did an approach. Did you get a no? Yeah, I got a no. That's get a no? Yeah, I got a no. That's get a no? Yeah, I got a no. That's exactly the point. That's the goal. Cuz exactly the point. That's the goal. Cuz exactly the point. That's the goal. Cuz everyone you admire, everyone you think everyone you admire, everyone you think everyone you admire, everyone you think has killed it. The only thing I can has killed it. The only thing I can has killed it. The only thing I can guarantee you is there were a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton guarantee you is there were a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton guarantee you is there were a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of nos in getting to one of the top 10 of nos in getting to one of the top 10 of nos in getting to one of the top 10 podcasts in the world. Getting to a podcasts in the world. Getting to a podcasts in the world. Getting to a person as a partner who's higher person as a partner who's higher person as a partner who's higher character and hotter than you, getting character and hotter than you, getting character and hotter than you, getting to make more money than you would have to make more money than you would have to make more money than you would have ever guessed that person would have ever guessed that person would have ever guessed that person would have made. The only thing that got them there made. The only thing that got them there made. The only thing that got them there was the willingness and the endurance to was the willingness and the endurance to was the willingness and the endurance to re to anticipate no. And unfortunately, re to anticipate no. And unfortunately, re to anticipate no. And unfortunately, big tech is setting up an algorithm that big tech is setting up an algorithm that big tech is setting up an algorithm that convinces you that a frictionless life convinces you that a frictionless life convinces you that a frictionless life is a good life and that you never need is a good life and that you never need is a good life and that you never need to endure no. And what you end up with to endure no. And what you end up with to endure no. And what you end up with is a lack of skills to p persevere, is a lack of skills to p persevere, is a lack of skills to p persevere, to realize you're okay. And that's what to realize you're okay. And that's what to realize you're okay. And that's what I ask the kids the next day. Are you I ask the kids the next day. Are you I ask the kids the next day. Are you okay? Yeah, I'm bummed out, but you're okay? Yeah, I'm bummed out, but you're okay? Yeah, I'm bummed out, but you're okay. If a man under the age of 30 works okay. If a man under the age of 30 works okay. If a man under the age of 30 works out three times a week, works 30 hours a out three times a week, works 30 hours a out three times a week, works 30 hours a week outside of the house, right? And is week outside of the house, right? And is week outside of the house, right? And is volunteering, that immediately puts him volunteering, that immediately puts him volunteering, that immediately puts him in the top 8% of all young men. And I in the top 8% of all young men. And I in the top 8% of all young men. And I apologize for the word salad here, but apologize for the word salad here, but apologize for the word salad here, but something I hate is the incel movement. something I hate is the incel movement. something I hate is the incel movement. involuntarily celibate. Right? involuntarily celibate. Right? involuntarily celibate. Right? Throughout history, 99% of men have been Throughout history, 99% of men have been Throughout history, 99% of men have been involuntarily celibate for most of their involuntarily celibate for most of their involuntarily celibate for most of their lives. There's few things young men lives. There's few things young men lives. There's few things young men would rather be doing than having sex. would rather be doing than having sex. would rather be doing than having sex. Only 40% of men have reproduced Only 40% of men have reproduced Only 40% of men have reproduced throughout history. 80% of women. So, no throughout history. 80% of women. So, no throughout history. 80% of women. So, no man has a birthight to reproduce. In the man has a birthight to reproduce. In the man has a birthight to reproduce. In the West, it's actually now 75%. So, young West, it's actually now 75%. So, young West, it's actually now 75%. So, young men have more agency than they ever men have more agency than they ever men have more agency than they ever have. Now, if you do those things right, have. Now, if you do those things right, have. Now, if you do those things right, just those three things, work outside of just those three things, work outside of just those three things, work outside of the house, work out, have a kindness the house, work out, have a kindness the house, work out, have a kindness practice, uh volunteer in the service of practice, uh volunteer in the service of practice, uh volunteer in the service of others, you're immediately going to put others, you're immediately going to put others, you're immediately going to put yourself in the top desile of young men. yourself in the top desile of young men. yourself in the top desile of young men. And if you're in the top desile of young And if you're in the top desile of young And if you're in the top desile of young men, I can guarantee you over time you men, I can guarantee you over time you men, I can guarantee you over time you will become voluntarily incelibate, will become voluntarily incelibate, will become voluntarily incelibate, which is awesome because you'll which is awesome because you'll which is awesome because you'll establish a relationship. And young men establish a relationship. And young men establish a relationship. And young men under the age of 30, a lot of the under the age of 30, a lot of the under the age of 30, a lot of the research shows, benefit more from a research shows, benefit more from a research shows, benefit more from a relationship than women. Yet only one in relationship than women. Yet only one in relationship than women. Yet only one in three men under the age of 30 is in a three men under the age of 30 is in a three men under the age of 30 is in a relationship. Whereas two in three women relationship. Whereas two in three women relationship. Whereas two in three women are in a relationship. And you think, are in a relationship. And you think, are in a relationship. And you think, well, Scott, that's mathematically well, Scott, that's mathematically well, Scott, that's mathematically impossible. It's not because women are impossible. It's not because women are impossible. It's not because women are dating older because they want more dating older because they want more dating older because they want more economically and emotionally viable men. economically and emotionally viable men. economically and emotionally viable men. So, I'll circle back to the more So, I'll circle back to the more So, I'll circle back to the more tactical recommendations. Get fit, start tactical recommendations. Get fit, start tactical recommendations. Get fit, start making some money, have a plan, and making some money, have a plan, and making some money, have a plan, and start doing things in the agency of start doing things in the agency of start doing things in the agency of others. I think the ultimate hack for others. I think the ultimate hack for others. I think the ultimate hack for depression or if you're feeling bad depression or if you're feeling bad depression or if you're feeling bad about yourself is to start helping about yourself is to start helping about yourself is to start helping others and to always keep in mind and others and to always keep in mind and others and to always keep in mind and this is the hard part that the this is the hard part that the this is the hard part that the antichrist of your progress as a young antichrist of your progress as a young antichrist of your progress as a young man the devil the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] enemy the man the devil the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] enemy the man the devil the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] enemy the villain here the bond villain with villain here the bond villain with villain here the bond villain with trillions of dollars is big tech. They trillions of dollars is big tech. They trillions of dollars is big tech. They are trying to figure out with AI a are trying to figure out with AI a are trying to figure out with AI a million times a second how to convince million times a second how to convince million times a second how to convince you to spend one more second a day on you to spend one more second a day on you to spend one more second a day on your phone sequestered from your phone sequestered from your phone sequestered from your relationships because they're a relationships because they're a relationships because they're a shareholder value. 40% of the S&amp;P is 10 shareholder value. 40% of the S&amp;P is 10 shareholder value. 40% of the S&amp;P is 10 companies whose sole mission is to companies whose sole mission is to companies whose sole mission is to monetize your time. And unfortunately monetize your time. And unfortunately monetize your time. And unfortunately they're not they're not bad people but they're not they're not bad people but they're not they're not bad people but what they're doing has resulted in a what they're doing has resulted in a what they're doing has resulted in a small group a cohort of men. It's not small group a cohort of men. It's not small group a cohort of men. It's not small. Millions of men who are evolving small. Millions of men who are evolving small. Millions of men who are evolving into a new species of asocial, asexual into a new species of asocial, asexual into a new species of asocial, asexual males, who wake up at the age of 30 males, who wake up at the age of 30 males, who wake up at the age of 30 thinking they've had a frictionless thinking they've had a frictionless thinking they've had a frictionless life, living at home, obese, anxious, life, living at home, obese, anxious, life, living at home, obese, anxious, and depressed, having never developed and depressed, having never developed and depressed, having never developed the skills that they need to do well the skills that they need to do well the skills that they need to do well professionally, personally. So big tech professionally, personally. So big tech professionally, personally. So big tech is not your friend. If you do not figure is not your friend. If you do not figure is not your friend. If you do not figure out how to modulate big tech products, out how to modulate big tech products, out how to modulate big tech products, whether it's Instagram or YouTube, you whether it's Instagram or YouTube, you whether it's Instagram or YouTube, you are falling into a trap of eventually are falling into a trap of eventually are falling into a trap of eventually being sequestered and not developing the being sequestered and not developing the being sequestered and not developing the skills to establish the most important skills to establish the most important skills to establish the most important thing in life and that is relationships. thing in life and that is relationships. thing in life and that is relationships. &gt;&gt; Two questions about big tech and I'll &gt;&gt; Two questions about big tech and I'll &gt;&gt; Two questions about big tech and I'll just push back a little bit on the big just push back a little bit on the big just push back a little bit on the big tech thing. Uh not because I'm afraid of tech thing. Uh not because I'm afraid of tech thing. Uh not because I'm afraid of big tech. I did grow up in Silicon big tech. I did grow up in Silicon big tech. I did grow up in Silicon Valley so I Valley so I Valley so I &gt;&gt; Well, you're at Stanford. &gt;&gt; Well, you're at Stanford. &gt;&gt; Well, you're at Stanford. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Invariably have a different &gt;&gt; Yeah. Invariably have a different &gt;&gt; Yeah. Invariably have a different relationship to it. And I uh I'm not um relationship to it. And I uh I'm not um relationship to it. And I uh I'm not um name dropping. I happen to be close with name dropping. I happen to be close with name dropping. I happen to be close with some of the people that run these some of the people that run these some of the people that run these companies or in number, you know, two or companies or in number, you know, two or companies or in number, you know, two or number four slots or, you know, in some number four slots or, you know, in some number four slots or, you know, in some cases who run the companies. One who cases who run the companies. One who cases who run the companies. One who I've never met, who I'll just raise I've never met, who I'll just raise I've never met, who I'll just raise first, um is who you referred to first, um is who you referred to first, um is who you referred to earlier, the richest man in the world is earlier, the richest man in the world is earlier, the richest man in the world is Elon Musk. Elon Musk. Elon Musk. &gt;&gt; And I was frankly a little bit surprised &gt;&gt; And I was frankly a little bit surprised &gt;&gt; And I was frankly a little bit surprised that you um called him out when that you um called him out when that you um called him out when discussing the importance of being a discussing the importance of being a discussing the importance of being a protector. I understand the political protector. I understand the political protector. I understand the political side. Well, let's just for the moment I side. Well, let's just for the moment I side. Well, let's just for the moment I will just set Trump aside. Um, very will just set Trump aside. Um, very will just set Trump aside. Um, very polarizing figure. polarizing figure. polarizing figure. &gt;&gt; Happy to go there if you want, but I &gt;&gt; Happy to go there if you want, but I &gt;&gt; Happy to go there if you want, but I know your stance on him. But the know your stance on him. But the know your stance on him. But the mention of Elon and as a nonp protector mention of Elon and as a nonp protector mention of Elon and as a nonp protector surprised me surprised me surprised me &gt;&gt; because I think of Elon as somebody who &gt;&gt; because I think of Elon as somebody who &gt;&gt; because I think of Elon as somebody who seems to love his children very much. seems to love his children very much. seems to love his children very much. Uh, he's organized family differently Uh, he's organized family differently Uh, he's organized family differently than most, but he certainly has the than most, but he certainly has the than most, but he certainly has the capacity to take care of them. Who is capacity to take care of them. Who is capacity to take care of them. Who is committed to big projects. Mhm. committed to big projects. Mhm. committed to big projects. Mhm. &gt;&gt; I mean, a superhuman level of &gt;&gt; I mean, a superhuman level of &gt;&gt; I mean, a superhuman level of output in terms of just neural link, the output in terms of just neural link, the output in terms of just neural link, the field that I'm closest to, right? field that I'm closest to, right? field that I'm closest to, right? Phenomenal progress. And that's just one Phenomenal progress. And that's just one Phenomenal progress. And that's just one of the SpaceX Neural Link, Tesla X, etc. of the SpaceX Neural Link, Tesla X, etc. of the SpaceX Neural Link, Tesla X, etc. So, I'm just curious what um motivated So, I'm just curious what um motivated So, I'm just curious what um motivated that. Do you that um makes you uh that. Do you that um makes you uh that. Do you that um makes you uh because I don't see him as a nonproctor. because I don't see him as a nonproctor. because I don't see him as a nonproctor. I don't know that I see him I don't know that I see him I don't know that I see him &gt;&gt; as a protector of a particular kind in &gt;&gt; as a protector of a particular kind in &gt;&gt; as a protector of a particular kind in his personal life, but I don't have his personal life, but I don't have his personal life, but I don't have access to that. But in terms of his access to that. But in terms of his access to that. But in terms of his motivation to pro protect our species, motivation to pro protect our species, motivation to pro protect our species, &gt;&gt; I personally believe his desire to get &gt;&gt; I personally believe his desire to get &gt;&gt; I personally believe his desire to get to Mars is a genuine one to Mars is a genuine one to Mars is a genuine one &gt;&gt; to have an option uh for humanity. So I &gt;&gt; to have an option uh for humanity. So I &gt;&gt; to have an option uh for humanity. So I see him as a protector. And I'll see him as a protector. And I'll see him as a protector. And I'll probably piss off a lot of people by probably piss off a lot of people by probably piss off a lot of people by saying this, but that doesn't mean I saying this, but that doesn't mean I saying this, but that doesn't mean I universally adopt everything he says and universally adopt everything he says and universally adopt everything he says and does, but I see him as kind of an does, but I see him as kind of an does, but I see him as kind of an awesome figure in our history who's awesome figure in our history who's awesome figure in our history who's like, "Let's get to Mars in case this like, "Let's get to Mars in case this like, "Let's get to Mars in case this Earth thing doesn't work out." And also, Earth thing doesn't work out." And also, Earth thing doesn't work out." And also, let's get to Mars cuz it's awesome. let's get to Mars cuz it's awesome. let's get to Mars cuz it's awesome. &gt;&gt; I think that's an entirely fair &gt;&gt; I think that's an entirely fair &gt;&gt; I think that's an entirely fair viewpoint. and you're adding nuance to viewpoint. and you're adding nuance to viewpoint. and you're adding nuance to it. So, let's talk about Elon Musk. If I it. So, let's talk about Elon Musk. If I it. So, let's talk about Elon Musk. If I had a red button that I could push and had a red button that I could push and had a red button that I could push and get rid of all of big tech or Elon Musk, get rid of all of big tech or Elon Musk, get rid of all of big tech or Elon Musk, somehow he could float away like a somehow he could float away like a somehow he could float away like a Gabriel Garcia Marquez Gabriel Garcia Marquez Gabriel Garcia Marquez uh character and not die, but just uh character and not die, but just uh character and not die, but just not have happened. I wouldn't press not have happened. I wouldn't press not have happened. I wouldn't press the button. I think big tech and Elon the button. I think big tech and Elon the button. I think big tech and Elon Musk are net goods for the world. Musk are net goods for the world. Musk are net goods for the world. &gt;&gt; We're going to get to EVs. We're going &gt;&gt; We're going to get to EVs. We're going &gt;&gt; We're going to get to EVs. We're going to get to Mars faster because of Elon to get to Mars faster because of Elon to get to Mars faster because of Elon Musk. He inspired the EV race, which is Musk. He inspired the EV race, which is Musk. He inspired the EV race, which is good for the world. The problem is with good for the world. The problem is with good for the world. The problem is with the word net. And as it relates to the word net. And as it relates to the word net. And as it relates to masculinity and as a role model for masculinity and as a role model for masculinity and as a role model for young men, he's probably one of the best young men, he's probably one of the best young men, he's probably one of the best role models in terms of being super role models in terms of being super role models in terms of being super aggressive, taking risks, ignoring the aggressive, taking risks, ignoring the aggressive, taking risks, ignoring the noise, and just being laser-like noise, and just being laser-like noise, and just being laser-like focused, telling an amazing story, focused, telling an amazing story, focused, telling an amazing story, garnering capital. I mean, there's just garnering capital. I mean, there's just garnering capital. I mean, there's just no getting around it. The guy's just an no getting around it. The guy's just an no getting around it. The guy's just an inspiration. I think the whole shooting inspiration. I think the whole shooting inspiration. I think the whole shooting match is if you become the richest man match is if you become the richest man match is if you become the richest man in the world, I think he moved to in the world, I think he moved to in the world, I think he moved to protection. I would argue that he's not protection. I would argue that he's not protection. I would argue that he's not a great role model and that he has not a great role model and that he has not a great role model and that he has not done a great job of convincing younger done a great job of convincing younger done a great job of convincing younger men that protection and taking care of men that protection and taking care of men that protection and taking care of others. I think the way he acquits others. I think the way he acquits others. I think the way he acquits himself online by punching down when he himself online by punching down when he himself online by punching down when he says something mean about somebody and I says something mean about somebody and I says something mean about somebody and I know this and I'm fine because I have I know this and I'm fine because I have I know this and I'm fine because I have I have money and I'm not dependent upon have money and I'm not dependent upon have money and I'm not dependent upon any one person's opinion of me. But if any one person's opinion of me. But if any one person's opinion of me. But if he says something negative about you and he says something negative about you and he says something negative about you and calls you names, his 120 million calls you names, his 120 million calls you names, his 120 million followers come for you. And I think as a followers come for you. And I think as a followers come for you. And I think as a general rule, and this is true for general rule, and this is true for general rule, and this is true for everybody, but especially for men, you everybody, but especially for men, you everybody, but especially for men, you never punch down. You just don't. never punch down. You just don't. never punch down. You just don't. anyone. I'm openly I make personal anyone. I'm openly I make personal anyone. I'm openly I make personal attacks on people. This is technically a attacks on people. This is technically a attacks on people. This is technically a personal attack on Elon Musk. To call personal attack on Elon Musk. To call personal attack on Elon Musk. To call someone not good a good role someone not good a good role someone not good a good role model, that's a personal attack. But I model, that's a personal attack. But I model, that's a personal attack. But I never make personal attacks of anyone never make personal attacks of anyone never make personal attacks of anyone who isn't marketkedly more powerful than who isn't marketkedly more powerful than who isn't marketkedly more powerful than me. And I find that a lot of these me. And I find that a lot of these me. And I find that a lot of these people, Donald Trump and Elon Musk, have people, Donald Trump and Elon Musk, have people, Donald Trump and Elon Musk, have no problem punching down. So again, it no problem punching down. So again, it no problem punching down. So again, it goes back to this. Is he a net good for goes back to this. Is he a net good for goes back to this. Is he a net good for the world? I acknowledge the point. And the world? I acknowledge the point. And the world? I acknowledge the point. And I would even argue, yeah, he is. But I would even argue, yeah, he is. But I would even argue, yeah, he is. But that doesn't he should also be held that doesn't he should also be held that doesn't he should also be held accountable for his blessings. I can't accountable for his blessings. I can't accountable for his blessings. I can't stand the fact that he should post stand the fact that he should post stand the fact that he should post America and the government. If you look America and the government. If you look America and the government. If you look at the most successful companies in the at the most successful companies in the at the most successful companies in the world, they're littered up and down the world, they're littered up and down the world, they're littered up and down the coast right now. Whether it's Qualcomm coast right now. Whether it's Qualcomm coast right now. Whether it's Qualcomm and San Diego, and San Diego, and San Diego, SpaceX and Snap here, head north to SpaceX and Snap here, head north to SpaceX and Snap here, head north to Salesforce and Meta and Google, keep Salesforce and Meta and Google, keep Salesforce and Meta and Google, keep going, you hit Amazon and Microsoft, and going, you hit Amazon and Microsoft, and going, you hit Amazon and Microsoft, and then it stops once you get to the then it stops once you get to the then it stops once you get to the Canadian border. And then you have to go Canadian border. And then you have to go Canadian border. And then you have to go all the way up to Lululemon to find a all the way up to Lululemon to find a all the way up to Lululemon to find a multi-billion dollar company. Come back multi-billion dollar company. Come back multi-billion dollar company. Come back down to where you teach at UC San Diego down to where you teach at UC San Diego down to where you teach at UC San Diego and those great companies and it stops and those great companies and it stops and those great companies and it stops and you got to go to another 7,000 and you got to go to another 7,000 and you got to go to another 7,000 kilometers to get the Marcato Libé and kilometers to get the Marcato Libé and kilometers to get the Marcato Libé and Buenosarees. There's something about Buenosarees. There's something about Buenosarees. There's something about America that creates unbelievable America that creates unbelievable America that creates unbelievable opportunity that creates the wealthiest opportunity that creates the wealthiest opportunity that creates the wealthiest men in the world. And I find that these men in the world. And I find that these men in the world. And I find that these tech brothers have a total lack of tech brothers have a total lack of tech brothers have a total lack of appreciation for the sacrifices in the appreciation for the sacrifices in the appreciation for the sacrifices in the system built in America and are the system built in America and are the system built in America and are the first to ship post the government and first to ship post the government and first to ship post the government and complain about regulation and things complain about regulation and things complain about regulation and things getting in the way. I find that getting in the way. I find that getting in the way. I find that especially obnoxious. But let me especially obnoxious. But let me especially obnoxious. But let me acknowledge the point. I think on the acknowledge the point. I think on the acknowledge the point. I think on the whole Elon Musk and big tech are a net whole Elon Musk and big tech are a net whole Elon Musk and big tech are a net good for the world, but that doesn't good for the world, but that doesn't good for the world, but that doesn't mean we shouldn't hold them accountable mean we shouldn't hold them accountable mean we shouldn't hold them accountable and ask why would you do these things and ask why would you do these things and ask why would you do these things when you're so blessed? when you're so blessed? when you're so blessed? So, this gets to the heart of something So, this gets to the heart of something So, this gets to the heart of something that I think is extremely important, that I think is extremely important, that I think is extremely important, which is we're living in the age of which is we're living in the age of which is we're living in the age of everything pretty much being public everything pretty much being public everything pretty much being public about public figures. Not everything, about public figures. Not everything, about public figures. Not everything, but many more facets of their lives than but many more facets of their lives than but many more facets of their lives than ever before in history. In part because ever before in history. In part because ever before in history. In part because they share many more facets of their they share many more facets of their they share many more facets of their lives. It's not just that stuff gets lives. It's not just that stuff gets lives. It's not just that stuff gets unearthed. It's like they're talking unearthed. It's like they're talking unearthed. It's like they're talking about their company. They're also in the about their company. They're also in the about their company. They're also in the role of arguing with their ex on role of arguing with their ex on role of arguing with their ex on sometimes online. And you know, you see sometimes online. And you know, you see sometimes online. And you know, you see that their kids sometimes will be that their kids sometimes will be that their kids sometimes will be apparent who they are. You know, it's apparent who they are. You know, it's apparent who they are. You know, it's interesting. My my dad, first generation interesting. My my dad, first generation interesting. My my dad, first generation immigrant who came here, became a immigrant who came here, became a immigrant who came here, became a scientist, and he he's from Argentina, scientist, and he he's from Argentina, scientist, and he he's from Argentina, and he along these lines, he always said and he along these lines, he always said and he along these lines, he always said it was funny to him that when you would it was funny to him that when you would it was funny to him that when you would go to somebody's office in the United go to somebody's office in the United go to somebody's office in the United States, a professor or a businessman or States, a professor or a businessman or States, a professor or a businessman or something, the picture of his family was something, the picture of his family was something, the picture of his family was facing out. facing out. facing out. &gt;&gt; He said that was so weird. He said, "In &gt;&gt; He said that was so weird. He said, "In &gt;&gt; He said that was so weird. He said, "In Argentina, your picture of your wife and Argentina, your picture of your wife and Argentina, your picture of your wife and your kids and your and your dog were your kids and your and your dog were your kids and your and your dog were facing in. That's yours. you don't share facing in. That's yours. you don't share facing in. That's yours. you don't share that with a person coming to your that with a person coming to your that with a person coming to your office. Like who would do that? This office. Like who would do that? This office. Like who would do that? This oversharing thing if it when you look oversharing thing if it when you look oversharing thing if it when you look back is a kind of a long-standing back is a kind of a long-standing back is a kind of a long-standing theme in American business and it theme in American business and it theme in American business and it shows up even more so of course online. shows up even more so of course online. shows up even more so of course online. So to me this idea of okay Elon for So to me this idea of okay Elon for So to me this idea of okay Elon for instance but very different um role instance but very different um role instance but very different um role model figure someone that I consider a model figure someone that I consider a model figure someone that I consider a close friend Joo Willink incredibly close friend Joo Willink incredibly close friend Joo Willink incredibly impressive &gt;&gt; true warrior &gt;&gt; true warrior &gt;&gt; true warrior &gt;&gt; great dad great husband I know his &gt;&gt; great dad great husband I know his &gt;&gt; great dad great husband I know his family amazing human being in so many family amazing human being in so many family amazing human being in so many ways and he's kind of like the tough ways and he's kind of like the tough ways and he's kind of like the tough football coach that a lot of guys didn't football coach that a lot of guys didn't football coach that a lot of guys didn't have that younger guys I think that's have that younger guys I think that's have that younger guys I think that's one of the reasons people gravitate one of the reasons people gravitate one of the reasons people gravitate towards him you don't wonder whether or towards him you don't wonder whether or towards him you don't wonder whether or not he really can do what he says you not he really can do what he says you not he really can do what he says you ought to do because he does it every day ought to do because he does it every day ought to do because he does it every day and he posts it on his watch. So Jaco is and he posts it on his watch. So Jaco is and he posts it on his watch. So Jaco is a really good example a really good example a really good example &gt;&gt; of somebody that people admire and I &gt;&gt; of somebody that people admire and I &gt;&gt; of somebody that people admire and I consider Jaco one example. So why not consider Jaco one example. So why not consider Jaco one example. So why not look at public figures look at public figures look at public figures &gt;&gt; you and perhaps even me for instance and &gt;&gt; you and perhaps even me for instance and &gt;&gt; you and perhaps even me for instance and just look at it these people as a buffet just look at it these people as a buffet just look at it these people as a buffet of options to adopt certain traits but of options to adopt certain traits but of options to adopt certain traits but not others be doing great things and not others be doing great things and not others be doing great things and assuming that the other things they're assuming that the other things they're assuming that the other things they're doing aren't you know truly atrocious doing aren't you know truly atrocious doing aren't you know truly atrocious right I mean criminal atrocious you know right I mean criminal atrocious you know right I mean criminal atrocious you know &gt;&gt; I don't know that we're asking the &gt;&gt; I don't know that we're asking the &gt;&gt; I don't know that we're asking the people who are role models leaders people who are role models leaders people who are role models leaders business leaders business leaders business leaders &gt;&gt; I don't think we're placing a reasonable &gt;&gt; I don't think we're placing a reasonable &gt;&gt; I don't think we're placing a reasonable expectation on them I don't say this for expectation on them I don't say this for expectation on them I don't say this for any personal reasons I I've known any personal reasons I I've known any personal reasons I I've known replete with flaws for the very long replete with flaws for the very long replete with flaws for the very long time. So I don't claim to not have them, time. So I don't claim to not have them, time. So I don't claim to not have them, never have. But then young guys are never have. But then young guys are never have. But then young guys are might be thinking, well, I have to be might be thinking, well, I have to be might be thinking, well, I have to be perfect, too. And if I'm not perfect and perfect, too. And if I'm not perfect and perfect, too. And if I'm not perfect and I don't have 150 million followers, I don't have 150 million followers, I don't have 150 million followers, I better have a fraternity of people to better have a fraternity of people to better have a fraternity of people to protect me. This is the kind of the protect me. This is the kind of the protect me. This is the kind of the underlying current that I think has underlying current that I think has underlying current that I think has driven the toxic end of the hate the driven the toxic end of the hate the driven the toxic end of the hate the word, the manosphere. I hate it because word, the manosphere. I hate it because word, the manosphere. I hate it because it's become too mishmashy. Mhm. it's become too mishmashy. Mhm. it's become too mishmashy. Mhm. &gt;&gt; It's not it's not even a continuum. It's &gt;&gt; It's not it's not even a continuum. It's &gt;&gt; It's not it's not even a continuum. It's just a mess. So, just a mess. So, just a mess. So, what do you have to say and think about what do you have to say and think about what do you have to say and think about the expectation that the leaders of the expectation that the leaders of the expectation that the leaders of the world, the role model world, the role model world, the role model not have these flaws? not have these flaws? not have these flaws? &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; At the same time, telling guys, hey, &gt;&gt; At the same time, telling guys, hey, &gt;&gt; At the same time, telling guys, hey, like ask and get told no. like ask and get told no. like ask and get told no. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I mean, you and I both know I don't know &gt;&gt; I mean, you and I both know I don't know &gt;&gt; I mean, you and I both know I don't know if it's real world data or if it's if it's real world data or if it's if it's real world data or if it's statistical data, but I have many women statistical data, but I have many women statistical data, but I have many women friends in my life and I have a sister. friends in my life and I have a sister. friends in my life and I have a sister. If an attractive guy rolls up on a woman If an attractive guy rolls up on a woman If an attractive guy rolls up on a woman and says, "Hey, you want to get coffee and says, "Hey, you want to get coffee and says, "Hey, you want to get coffee sometime?" &gt;&gt; It's romantic. &gt;&gt; It's romantic. &gt;&gt; It's romantic. &gt;&gt; It's romantic. If a guy that's not &gt;&gt; It's romantic. If a guy that's not &gt;&gt; It's romantic. If a guy that's not attractive does that, attractive does that, attractive does that, &gt;&gt; it's creepy. &gt;&gt; it's creepy. &gt;&gt; it's creepy. &gt;&gt; It's creepy. So, how do you tell a guy &gt;&gt; It's creepy. So, how do you tell a guy &gt;&gt; It's creepy. So, how do you tell a guy that isn't good-looking? that isn't good-looking? that isn't good-looking? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; To do that, and then not be called a &gt;&gt; To do that, and then not be called a &gt;&gt; To do that, and then not be called a creep. And not just be called a creep, creep. And not just be called a creep, creep. And not just be called a creep, but be called a creep on an app, which but be called a creep on an app, which but be called a creep on an app, which isn't just designed to prevent sexual isn't just designed to prevent sexual isn't just designed to prevent sexual assault, but is also designed to share assault, but is also designed to share assault, but is also designed to share information about who to date and not to information about who to date and not to information about who to date and not to date. And guys get black. I'm told by date. And guys get black. I'm told by date. And guys get black. I'm told by young guys, I'm not on dating apps, but young guys, I'm not on dating apps, but young guys, I'm not on dating apps, but that guys get blacklisted basically, that guys get blacklisted basically, that guys get blacklisted basically, &gt;&gt; not because of sexual assault, but &gt;&gt; not because of sexual assault, but &gt;&gt; not because of sexual assault, but because, you know, they get called out because, you know, they get called out because, you know, they get called out as like a bad kisser. He didn't smell so as like a bad kisser. He didn't smell so as like a bad kisser. He didn't smell so good or something. This is the stuff good or something. This is the stuff good or something. This is the stuff that used to be in private discussions that used to be in private discussions that used to be in private discussions among women. I know this cuz I have a among women. I know this cuz I have a among women. I know this cuz I have a sister, right? Women talk. I listen sister, right? Women talk. I listen sister, right? Women talk. I listen through the wall, right? What do they through the wall, right? What do they through the wall, right? What do they talk about? And talk about? And talk about? And &gt;&gt; now it's public. There's parallel &gt;&gt; now it's public. There's parallel &gt;&gt; now it's public. There's parallel construction here. I'm sure you're construction here. I'm sure you're construction here. I'm sure you're tracking it. But for everyone listening, tracking it. But for everyone listening, tracking it. But for everyone listening, it's like this is a serious problem. it's like this is a serious problem. it's like this is a serious problem. Mhm. &gt;&gt; I mean, can't we acknowledge that &gt;&gt; I mean, can't we acknowledge that &gt;&gt; I mean, can't we acknowledge that somebody like Elon, let's just stay on somebody like Elon, let's just stay on somebody like Elon, let's just stay on that example, is a is a phenom that example, is a is a phenom that example, is a is a phenom that probably has never existed inund at probably has never existed inund at probably has never existed inund at least a hundred years. least a hundred years. least a hundred years. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Has huge vision. Sure, he might have &gt;&gt; Has huge vision. Sure, he might have &gt;&gt; Has huge vision. Sure, he might have some like issues in his in his life that some like issues in his in his life that some like issues in his in his life that are none of my business. And yet he has are none of my business. And yet he has are none of my business. And yet he has a lot of good example to set for young a lot of good example to set for young a lot of good example to set for young men. I believe that. And it also gives men. I believe that. And it also gives men. I believe that. And it also gives permission to not be perfect permission to not be perfect permission to not be perfect without harming people. without harming people. without harming people. So, uh, acknowledge the point. There's a lot uh, acknowledge the point. There's a lot uh, acknowledge the point. There's a lot there, but I still think if someone is there, but I still think if someone is there, but I still think if someone is um constantly optimizing for attention um constantly optimizing for attention um constantly optimizing for attention to draw cheap capital to his firms and to draw cheap capital to his firms and to draw cheap capital to his firms and is very open and very critical of others is very open and very critical of others is very open and very critical of others and is probably the most dominant force and is probably the most dominant force and is probably the most dominant force in electing the next president, in electing the next president, in electing the next president, um that we should pay very close um that we should pay very close um that we should pay very close attention to his activities, whether attention to his activities, whether attention to his activities, whether it's a reported addiction to ketamine it's a reported addiction to ketamine it's a reported addiction to ketamine and sleeping with a loaded gun next and sleeping with a loaded gun next and sleeping with a loaded gun next to his bed and not living with any of to his bed and not living with any of to his bed and not living with any of his children, whether it's his children, whether it's his children, whether it's &gt;&gt; you think that should be public fair &gt;&gt; you think that should be public fair &gt;&gt; you think that should be public fair game. &gt;&gt; I think if he wants to put certain &gt;&gt; I think if he wants to put certain &gt;&gt; I think if he wants to put certain aspects of his life out there constantly aspects of his life out there constantly aspects of his life out there constantly for affirmation, that type of for affirmation, that type of for affirmation, that type of scrutiny is probably fair game. I also scrutiny is probably fair game. I also scrutiny is probably fair game. I also acknowledge the point that people are acknowledge the point that people are acknowledge the point that people are human and you need to have some grace human and you need to have some grace human and you need to have some grace and say, well, unless you're perfect, and say, well, unless you're perfect, and say, well, unless you're perfect, try and learn from people, try and try and learn from people, try and try and learn from people, try and understand them, and try and demonstrate understand them, and try and demonstrate understand them, and try and demonstrate some grace. The other thing going back some grace. The other thing going back some grace. The other thing going back to big tech is that we have connected um to big tech is that we have connected um to big tech is that we have connected um economic value to tearing down people. So you've value to tearing down people. So you've value to tearing down people. So you've had bestsellers. I've had bestsellers. had bestsellers. I've had bestsellers. had bestsellers. I've had bestsellers. &gt;&gt; I still my book hasn't come out yet. I &gt;&gt; I still my book hasn't come out yet. I &gt;&gt; I still my book hasn't come out yet. I hope for it to be a bestseller. hope for it to be a bestseller. hope for it to be a bestseller. &gt;&gt; You haven't? Do you have a book? &gt;&gt; You haven't? Do you have a book? &gt;&gt; You haven't? Do you have a book? &gt;&gt; No, it comes out in September. It's been &gt;&gt; No, it comes out in September. It's been &gt;&gt; No, it comes out in September. It's been delayed for a while, but I delayed for a while, but I delayed for a while, but I appreciate the appreciate the appreciate the &gt;&gt; I feel like I've already read it. &gt;&gt; I feel like I've already read it. &gt;&gt; I feel like I've already read it. &gt;&gt; No. Well, God willing as well. If it &gt;&gt; No. Well, God willing as well. If it &gt;&gt; No. Well, God willing as well. If it doesn't it doesn't it doesn't it doesn't &gt;&gt; Let me Let me prepare because I think &gt;&gt; Let me Let me prepare because I think &gt;&gt; Let me Let me prepare because I think you're actually my I don't know you you're actually my I don't know you you're actually my I don't know you well, but I do know you. I get the sense well, but I do know you. I get the sense well, but I do know you. I get the sense that like me a lot of the criticism that like me a lot of the criticism that like me a lot of the criticism doesn't just bounce right off you that doesn't just bounce right off you that doesn't just bounce right off you that you take the stuff to heart and you take the stuff to heart and you take the stuff to heart and sometimes it upsets you. I know it. sometimes it upsets you. I know it. sometimes it upsets you. I know it. Okay, I'll say it upsets me. Okay, I'll say it upsets me. Okay, I'll say it upsets me. &gt;&gt; Some of it does, but it's not the &gt;&gt; Some of it does, but it's not the &gt;&gt; Some of it does, but it's not the criticism that people think upsets me. criticism that people think upsets me. criticism that people think upsets me. That upsets me, but that's a different That upsets me, but that's a different That upsets me, but that's a different story. &gt;&gt; Your book will be a bestseller. You you &gt;&gt; Your book will be a bestseller. You you &gt;&gt; Your book will be a bestseller. You you could put out you could you could put could put out you could you could put could put out you could you could put out I don't know the script of out I don't know the script of out I don't know the script of The Sound of Music and it's going to be The Sound of Music and it's going to be The Sound of Music and it's going to be a bestseller. It'll be better than if I a bestseller. It'll be better than if I a bestseller. It'll be better than if I had done that, but not better than The had done that, but not better than The had done that, but not better than The Sound of Music. Sound of Music. Sound of Music. &gt;&gt; There you go. And this is what uh Tik &gt;&gt; There you go. And this is what uh Tik &gt;&gt; There you go. And this is what uh Tik Tok and YouTube, the algorithms, it Tok and YouTube, the algorithms, it Tok and YouTube, the algorithms, it someone will immediately say, "This is someone will immediately say, "This is someone will immediately say, "This is why Andrew Huberman's book is bullshit." why Andrew Huberman's book is bullshit." why Andrew Huberman's book is bullshit." Because if they put a well-known Because if they put a well-known Because if they put a well-known figure's name in front of a best-selling figure's name in front of a best-selling figure's name in front of a best-selling book and says [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and creates book and says [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and creates book and says [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and creates antagonism and comments, the algorithms antagonism and comments, the algorithms antagonism and comments, the algorithms pick up on that, optimize it, it'll get pick up on that, optimize it, it'll get pick up on that, optimize it, it'll get millions of views, which is more Nissan millions of views, which is more Nissan millions of views, which is more Nissan ads and more shareholder value. So there ads and more shareholder value. So there ads and more shareholder value. So there is not only a healthy check on people's is not only a healthy check on people's is not only a healthy check on people's power, more scrutiny. The president power, more scrutiny. The president power, more scrutiny. The president should get a lot of scrutiny. The should get a lot of scrutiny. The should get a lot of scrutiny. The president deserves to have his business president deserves to have his business president deserves to have his business and personal life uh to a certain extent and personal life uh to a certain extent and personal life uh to a certain extent at least where it demonstrates character at least where it demonstrates character at least where it demonstrates character looked into and examined and I think a looked into and examined and I think a looked into and examined and I think a certain amount of power and healthy certain amount of power and healthy certain amount of power and healthy check on power is probably a healthy check on power is probably a healthy check on power is probably a healthy thing. Unfortunately now there's thing. Unfortunately now there's thing. Unfortunately now there's economic incentive around tearing people economic incentive around tearing people economic incentive around tearing people down. Like I don't know about you I do down. Like I don't know about you I do down. Like I don't know about you I do have a real fear. I am highly imperfect have a real fear. I am highly imperfect have a real fear. I am highly imperfect professionally and personally. I've professionally and personally. I've professionally and personally. I've engaged in a lot of professional and engaged in a lot of professional and engaged in a lot of professional and personal behavior that I am not proud personal behavior that I am not proud personal behavior that I am not proud of. I've been divorced. I haven't been of. I've been divorced. I haven't been of. I've been divorced. I haven't been as kind to people that have worked for as kind to people that have worked for as kind to people that have worked for me as I should have been. And I'm me as I should have been. And I'm me as I should have been. And I'm worried it's all going to come crashing worried it's all going to come crashing worried it's all going to come crashing down. And a lot of times I feel like the down. And a lot of times I feel like the down. And a lot of times I feel like the stuff I'm saying on podcasts like this, stuff I'm saying on podcasts like this, stuff I'm saying on podcasts like this, I'm trying to portray myself as being I'm trying to portray myself as being I'm trying to portray myself as being better than I actually am. I have huge better than I actually am. I have huge better than I actually am. I have huge imposttor syndrome. And big tech has an imposttor syndrome. And big tech has an imposttor syndrome. And big tech has an economic incentive in trying to find as economic incentive in trying to find as economic incentive in trying to find as many guardians of gotcha pins as many guardians of gotcha pins as many guardians of gotcha pins as possible because if you get to a certain possible because if you get to a certain possible because if you get to a certain point of fame or credibility, there's point of fame or credibility, there's point of fame or credibility, there's just too much money in trying to find just too much money in trying to find just too much money in trying to find the soft tissue on you. So there's a the soft tissue on you. So there's a the soft tissue on you. So there's a very unhealthy attribute in our society very unhealthy attribute in our society very unhealthy attribute in our society where we're all just waiting for bad where we're all just waiting for bad where we're all just waiting for bad news and there's economic incentive to news and there's economic incentive to news and there's economic incentive to say, "Well, this person isn't perfect. say, "Well, this person isn't perfect. say, "Well, this person isn't perfect. Look what this person did." So I agree Look what this person did." So I agree Look what this person did." So I agree with you. We need to demonstrate a with you. We need to demonstrate a with you. We need to demonstrate a little bit more grace. Something I little bit more grace. Something I little bit more grace. Something I really hate about my party, I consider really hate about my party, I consider really hate about my party, I consider myself a proud progressive, is these myself a proud progressive, is these myself a proud progressive, is these purity tests, right? That Oh, you know, purity tests, right? That Oh, you know, purity tests, right? That Oh, you know, I put out a picture of me and a bunch I put out a picture of me and a bunch I put out a picture of me and a bunch of buddies that I went to UCLA with. of buddies that I went to UCLA with. of buddies that I went to UCLA with. One's a an aircraft carrier pilot, one's One's a an aircraft carrier pilot, one's One's a an aircraft carrier pilot, one's an opthalmologist. Like, it was a an opthalmologist. Like, it was a an opthalmologist. Like, it was a picture of all of us, and I've said, you picture of all of us, and I've said, you picture of all of us, and I've said, you know, find impressive men and know, find impressive men and know, find impressive men and befriend them. befriend them. befriend them. &gt;&gt; I think I saw that post. You were the &gt;&gt; I think I saw that post. You were the &gt;&gt; I think I saw that post. You were the one towering over the rest of them. one towering over the rest of them. one towering over the rest of them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think I shrunk. Huh. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think I shrunk. Huh. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think I shrunk. Huh. &gt;&gt; Isn't that weird? No, I don't think you &gt;&gt; Isn't that weird? No, I don't think you &gt;&gt; Isn't that weird? No, I don't think you know you now. know you now. know you now. &gt;&gt; I was 6'3 in college. I'm 61 and a half &gt;&gt; I was 6'3 in college. I'm 61 and a half &gt;&gt; I was 6'3 in college. I'm 61 and a half now. That's nice. I'm at an age where now. That's nice. I'm at an age where now. That's nice. I'm at an age where I'm shrinking anyways. And I knew I was I'm shrinking anyways. And I knew I was I'm shrinking anyways. And I knew I was just waiting for it. White privilege. just waiting for it. White privilege. just waiting for it. White privilege. What a douchebag. What, you know, just What a douchebag. What, you know, just What a douchebag. What, you know, just all the comments and all the sort of, all the comments and all the sort of, all the comments and all the sort of, you know, people coming after you know, people coming after you know, people coming after you, right? Or people who can't just you, right? Or people who can't just you, right? Or people who can't just say, "Oh, good for you. Well done." And say, "Oh, good for you. Well done." And say, "Oh, good for you. Well done." And that's just part of it. And that's a that's just part of it. And that's a that's just part of it. And that's a small price to pay for a certain level small price to pay for a certain level small price to pay for a certain level of success, but the algorithms of success, but the algorithms of success, but the algorithms immediately grab that and elevate it immediately grab that and elevate it immediately grab that and elevate it because there's money and antagonism. A because there's money and antagonism. A because there's money and antagonism. A thoughtful nuance conversation online thoughtful nuance conversation online thoughtful nuance conversation online and a positive reinforcing comment that and a positive reinforcing comment that and a positive reinforcing comment that doesn't tickle the sensors. If you that doesn't tickle the sensors. If you that doesn't tickle the sensors. If you can create a fight online, if you say can create a fight online, if you say can create a fight online, if you say mRNA vaccines alter your DNA, you're mRNA vaccines alter your DNA, you're mRNA vaccines alter your DNA, you're going to get a lot of comments and the going to get a lot of comments and the going to get a lot of comments and the algorithms love that and it'll elevate algorithms love that and it'll elevate algorithms love that and it'll elevate it. So unfortunately, we have attached it. So unfortunately, we have attached it. So unfortunately, we have attached 40% of the market value of the S&amp;P to 40% of the market value of the S&amp;P to 40% of the market value of the S&amp;P to incendiary content that tears us apart. incendiary content that tears us apart. incendiary content that tears us apart. And the result is people now don't And the result is people now don't And the result is people now don't believe that Russian troops pouring over believe that Russian troops pouring over believe that Russian troops pouring over the border in Ukraine is their enemy. the border in Ukraine is their enemy. the border in Ukraine is their enemy. They believe that their neighbor with a They believe that their neighbor with a They believe that their neighbor with a Trump sign is their real enemy. Or Trump sign is their real enemy. Or Trump sign is their real enemy. Or someone who doesn't believe your someone who doesn't believe your someone who doesn't believe your ideology around gender politics is your ideology around gender politics is your ideology around gender politics is your enemy. And unfortunately, it's being I enemy. And unfortunately, it's being I enemy. And unfortunately, it's being I believe, and I know this sounds believe, and I know this sounds believe, and I know this sounds paranoid, but doesn't mean I'm wrong. paranoid, but doesn't mean I'm wrong. paranoid, but doesn't mean I'm wrong. these poorest platforms that have an these poorest platforms that have an these poorest platforms that have an economic incentive and antagonistic economic incentive and antagonistic economic incentive and antagonistic content are being fueled content are being fueled content are being fueled uh by bad actors whether it's the GRU or uh by bad actors whether it's the GRU or uh by bad actors whether it's the GRU or the CCP who look at Americans say we the CCP who look at Americans say we the CCP who look at Americans say we can't beat them economically we can't beat them economically we can't beat them economically we can't beat them kinetically so let's get them beat them kinetically so let's get them beat them kinetically so let's get them to hate each other and that is Americans to hate each other and that is Americans to hate each other and that is Americans now perceive other Americans as the now perceive other Americans as the now perceive other Americans as the biggest threat so one it is healthy to biggest threat so one it is healthy to biggest threat so one it is healthy to look at powerful people that have huge look at powerful people that have huge look at powerful people that have huge influence such as you and to a lesser influence such as you and to a lesser influence such as you and to a lesser extent me and question their beliefs and extent me and question their beliefs and extent me and question their beliefs and critical articles of them. It crushed me critical articles of them. It crushed me critical articles of them. It crushed me when the I can't remember was the when the I can't remember was the when the I can't remember was the Atlantic or the New York or New Yorker Atlantic or the New York or New Yorker Atlantic or the New York or New Yorker came out with sort of a critical review came out with sort of a critical review came out with sort of a critical review of my book. It was really upsetting to of my book. It was really upsetting to of my book. It was really upsetting to me. And I think part of the thing that me. And I think part of the thing that me. And I think part of the thing that was so upsetting was when we were was so upsetting was when we were was so upsetting was when we were talking about this off mic, it meant talking about this off mic, it meant talking about this off mic, it meant some of it was true. That's healthy. some of it was true. That's healthy. some of it was true. That's healthy. It's healthy when there's thoughtful It's healthy when there's thoughtful It's healthy when there's thoughtful criticism around your book. But when I criticism around your book. But when I criticism around your book. But when I have hundreds of comments accusing me of have hundreds of comments accusing me of have hundreds of comments accusing me of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that never happened and then you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that never happened and then you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that never happened and then you look at it and it's dogm Wisconsin 331 look at it and it's dogm Wisconsin 331 look at it and it's dogm Wisconsin 331 with three followers, that's a bot. And with three followers, that's a bot. And with three followers, that's a bot. And the fact that these platforms choose not the fact that these platforms choose not the fact that these platforms choose not to screen out those bots because they to screen out those bots because they to screen out those bots because they know more incendiary comments that know more incendiary comments that know more incendiary comments that create more comments and more Nissan create more comments and more Nissan create more comments and more Nissan ads, I think that is tearing at the ads, I think that is tearing at the ads, I think that is tearing at the fabric of America. But I just want to fabric of America. But I just want to fabric of America. But I just want to acknowledge the point. I think maturity acknowledge the point. I think maturity acknowledge the point. I think maturity is realizing people aren't perfect. is realizing people aren't perfect. is realizing people aren't perfect. Learn from them what you can. But I do Learn from them what you can. But I do Learn from them what you can. But I do think the wealthiest man in the world think the wealthiest man in the world think the wealthiest man in the world and the president should be held to a and the president should be held to a and the president should be held to a higher standard. I think they have higher standard. I think they have higher standard. I think they have extraordinary blessings. I think their extraordinary blessings. I think their extraordinary blessings. I think their decisions matter and I think it's I decisions matter and I think it's I decisions matter and I think it's I think the scrutiny they come under is think the scrutiny they come under is think the scrutiny they come under is warranted. And I will say this, I think warranted. And I will say this, I think warranted. And I will say this, I think the president to a certain extent Elon the president to a certain extent Elon the president to a certain extent Elon Musk have created a lot of cloud cover Musk have created a lot of cloud cover Musk have created a lot of cloud cover for our imperfections. for our imperfections. for our imperfections. &gt;&gt; As many of you know, I've been taking &gt;&gt; As many of you know, I've been taking &gt;&gt; As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The been taking it every day since. The reason I started taking it, and the reason I started taking it, and the reason I started taking it, and the reason I still take it, is because AG1 reason I still take it, is because AG1 reason I still take it, is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality is, to my knowledge, the highest quality is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's easy to drink, and it tastes great. It's designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your fill any gaps you might have in your daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, daily nutrition. Now, of course, everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious everyone should strive to eat nutritious whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every whole foods. I certainly do that every day. But I'm often asked, if you could day. But I'm often asked, if you could day. But I'm often asked, if you could take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would take just one supplement, what would that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is that supplement be? And my answer is always AG1 because it has just been oh always AG1 because it has just been oh always AG1 because it has just been oh so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of so critical to supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and my physical health, mental health, and performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own performance. I know this from my own experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually experience with AG1, and I continually hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 hear this from other people who use AG1 daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you daily. If you would like to try AG1, you can go to drink a1.com/huberman can go to drink a1.com/huberman can go to drink a1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel time, AG1 is giving away six free travel packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin D3 packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin D3 packs of AG1 and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your subscription. Again, that's K2 with your subscription. Again, that's K2 with your subscription. Again, that's drink AG1 with the numeral drink AG1 with the numeral drink AG1 with the numeral one.com/huberman to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a to get six free travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your subscription. I disagree um vehemently subscription. I disagree um vehemently subscription. I disagree um vehemently with one point, which is that I'm more with one point, which is that I'm more with one point, which is that I'm more influential than you are. You're influential than you are. You're influential than you are. You're incredibly influential. In fact, a an incredibly influential. In fact, a an incredibly influential. In fact, a an ex-girlfriend's sisterh who went to NYU ex-girlfriend's sisterh who went to NYU ex-girlfriend's sisterh who went to NYU asked me if I knew who you were. I said, asked me if I knew who you were. I said, asked me if I knew who you were. I said, "Of course." And and she said her words, "Of course." And and she said her words, "Of course." And and she said her words, "For our generation, Scott is like a "For our generation, Scott is like a "For our generation, Scott is like a father to us." It's like, "We" and she father to us." It's like, "We" and she father to us." It's like, "We" and she happens to be in venture capital, but um happens to be in venture capital, but um happens to be in venture capital, but um so maybe there's a finance link there, so maybe there's a finance link there, so maybe there's a finance link there, too. And I but I pressed on that a too. And I but I pressed on that a too. And I but I pressed on that a little bit and just asked and little bit and just asked and little bit and just asked and she said, "Yeah, you know, we look up to she said, "Yeah, you know, we look up to she said, "Yeah, you know, we look up to him. We listen to him. He's he's very him. We listen to him. He's he's very him. We listen to him. He's he's very paternal to us." So, I thought you might paternal to us." So, I thought you might paternal to us." So, I thought you might appreciate that. Um appreciate that. Um appreciate that. Um &gt;&gt; I do appreciate that. Although I would &gt;&gt; I do appreciate that. Although I would &gt;&gt; I do appreciate that. Although I would have woman as well. have woman as well. have woman as well. &gt;&gt; I'd appreciate it more if she'd said &gt;&gt; I'd appreciate it more if she'd said &gt;&gt; I'd appreciate it more if she'd said older brother. older brother. older brother. &gt;&gt; I'm very conscious of my age now. But &gt;&gt; I'm very conscious of my age now. But &gt;&gt; I'm very conscious of my age now. But &gt;&gt; really, &gt;&gt; really, &gt;&gt; really, &gt;&gt; 100%. &gt;&gt; 100%. &gt;&gt; 100%. &gt;&gt; You're in your 60s, you're super fit, &gt;&gt; You're in your 60s, you're super fit, &gt;&gt; You're in your 60s, you're super fit, you got two healthy boys, you're in a you got two healthy boys, you're in a you got two healthy boys, you're in a happy relationship, you got huge reach, happy relationship, you got huge reach, happy relationship, you got huge reach, you I imagine your bank accounts are you I imagine your bank accounts are you I imagine your bank accounts are fine, and you're trying to and you're fine, and you're trying to and you're fine, and you're trying to and you're actively uh engaged in service. I in actively uh engaged in service. I in actively uh engaged in service. I in my eyes, you're doing great. my eyes, you're doing great. my eyes, you're doing great. &gt;&gt; I appreciate that, but I' I'd rather be &gt;&gt; I appreciate that, but I' I'd rather be &gt;&gt; I appreciate that, but I' I'd rather be doing I'd rather be in this spot at 40 doing I'd rather be in this spot at 40 doing I'd rather be in this spot at 40 at 41, not 61. I'm very I'm very at 41, not 61. I'm very I'm very at 41, not 61. I'm very I'm very self-conscious about my age. But I just self-conscious about my age. But I just self-conscious about my age. But I just want to go back to want to go back to want to go back to something I think that gets in the way something I think that gets in the way something I think that gets in the way of success of success of success and has been a huge unlock for me is and has been a huge unlock for me is and has been a huge unlock for me is it I mean it's not but your fear your it I mean it's not but your fear your it I mean it's not but your fear your fear of criticism. If you're going to be fear of criticism. If you're going to be fear of criticism. If you're going to be successful you're going to face successful you're going to face successful you're going to face criticism. Starting a business is criticism. Starting a business is criticism. Starting a business is subjecting yourself to public failure. I subjecting yourself to public failure. I subjecting yourself to public failure. I want to go back to something you said want to go back to something you said want to go back to something you said about approaching women and guys being about approaching women and guys being about approaching women and guys being afraid to be that guy. afraid to be that guy. afraid to be that guy. I think some of that is a little bit I think some of that is a little bit I think some of that is a little bit exaggerated &gt;&gt; and that most women if you are &gt;&gt; and that most women if you are &gt;&gt; and that most women if you are respectful, the vast majority of women, respectful, the vast majority of women, respectful, the vast majority of women, if you are respectful and approach a if you are respectful and approach a if you are respectful and approach a woman at a bar, hi, how are you? And woman at a bar, hi, how are you? And woman at a bar, hi, how are you? And she's not interested, you're going to be she's not interested, you're going to be she's not interested, you're going to be fine and you're both going to be fine. fine and you're both going to be fine. fine and you're both going to be fine. And just as I think there's two myths And just as I think there's two myths And just as I think there's two myths that are damaging to the mating market, that are damaging to the mating market, that are damaging to the mating market, which is really upsetting to me. One, which is really upsetting to me. One, which is really upsetting to me. One, that men think that all women are that men think that all women are that men think that all women are looking to or a lot of women are looking to or a lot of women are looking to or a lot of women are looking to embarrass them and they might get to embarrass them and they might get to embarrass them and they might get cancelled professionally. If you're cancelled professionally. If you're cancelled professionally. If you're respectful to a woman and approach her respectful to a woman and approach her respectful to a woman and approach her and make her feel safe and then if she's and make her feel safe and then if she's and make her feel safe and then if she's not interested, politely exit, you're not interested, politely exit, you're not interested, politely exit, you're going to be fine and so is she, and I going to be fine and so is she, and I going to be fine and so is she, and I don't buy that your career, you're don't buy that your career, you're don't buy that your career, you're taking your career in your hands, I taking your career in your hands, I taking your career in your hands, I think that's just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and an excuse think that's just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and an excuse think that's just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and an excuse to be an incel. I just don't buy it. And to be an incel. I just don't buy it. And to be an incel. I just don't buy it. And two, what really has been an enormous two, what really has been an enormous two, what really has been an enormous unlock for me is I believe in my unlock for me is I believe in my unlock for me is I believe in my atheism. I believe at some point I'm atheism. I believe at some point I'm atheism. I believe at some point I'm going to look into my kids' eyes and going to look into my kids' eyes and going to look into my kids' eyes and know our relationship is coming to an know our relationship is coming to an know our relationship is coming to an end. I was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] their age. You got a end. I was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] their age. You got a end. I was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] their age. You got a bunch of young dudes in here who look bunch of young dudes in here who look bunch of young dudes in here who look like former Abbercrombie and Fitch like former Abbercrombie and Fitch like former Abbercrombie and Fitch models. I remember they look like models. I remember they look like models. I remember they look like they're 25. They're probably 35. It was they're 25. They're probably 35. It was they're 25. They're probably 35. It was yesterday I was their age, which means yesterday I was their age, which means yesterday I was their age, which means just in an instant I'm going to be again just in an instant I'm going to be again just in an instant I'm going to be again at that moment where I know I don't have at that moment where I know I don't have at that moment where I know I don't have much time left. And in a 100 years, no much time left. And in a 100 years, no much time left. And in a 100 years, no one's going to give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what I said one's going to give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what I said one's going to give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what I said or thought or did or the mistakes I or thought or did or the mistakes I or thought or did or the mistakes I made. And embracing that and accepting made. And embracing that and accepting made. And embracing that and accepting that has given me so much courage, that has given me so much courage, that has given me so much courage, right, to start businesses, to make dumb right, to start businesses, to make dumb right, to start businesses, to make dumb investments that might be crazy, to tell investments that might be crazy, to tell investments that might be crazy, to tell to tell men in my life finally that I to tell men in my life finally that I to tell men in my life finally that I love them or I'm impressed with them. love them or I'm impressed with them. love them or I'm impressed with them. When I was their age, I had this weird When I was their age, I had this weird When I was their age, I had this weird sense of masculinity that if I said, sense of masculinity that if I said, sense of masculinity that if I said, "Oh, dude, look how handsome this dude "Oh, dude, look how handsome this dude "Oh, dude, look how handsome this dude is." That it took away from my prestige is." That it took away from my prestige is." That it took away from my prestige somehow that I couldn't tell people they somehow that I couldn't tell people they somehow that I couldn't tell people they were impressive. I couldn't tell a were impressive. I couldn't tell a were impressive. I couldn't tell a woman, "God, I'm just crazy about you woman, "God, I'm just crazy about you woman, "God, I'm just crazy about you and I'm I would give anything to spend and I'm I would give anything to spend and I'm I would give anything to spend more time with you because I was worried more time with you because I was worried more time with you because I was worried that she wouldn't return my affection that she wouldn't return my affection that she wouldn't return my affection and I would be just too hurt and I had and I would be just too hurt and I had and I would be just too hurt and I had to be cool and like not need her or not to be cool and like not need her or not to be cool and like not need her or not all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that got in the way of all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that got in the way of all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that got in the way of me really having a good life." And what me really having a good life." And what me really having a good life." And what I realized is every failure I've had, I realized is every failure I've had, I realized is every failure I've had, people go, "Oh, his business went people go, "Oh, his business went people go, "Oh, his business went bankrupt." Okay. And then they go back bankrupt." Okay. And then they go back bankrupt." Okay. And then they go back to thinking about themselves. So, to thinking about themselves. So, to thinking about themselves. So, everyone you're worried about really everyone you're worried about really everyone you're worried about really doesn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about you. And by doesn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about you. And by doesn't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about you. And by the way, the dude that's not very the way, the dude that's not very the way, the dude that's not very good-looking and is with a ridiculously good-looking and is with a ridiculously good-looking and is with a ridiculously like high character hot woman is one of like high character hot woman is one of like high character hot woman is one of two things. Has rich parents or two or two things. Has rich parents or two or two things. Has rich parents or two or two is willing to endure rejection. So, two is willing to endure rejection. So, two is willing to endure rejection. So, I just don't buy I you know I just don't buy I you know I just don't buy I you know that myth of the man risking his that myth of the man risking his that myth of the man risking his personal and professional reputation. I personal and professional reputation. I personal and professional reputation. I don't think that's true. On the other don't think that's true. On the other don't think that's true. On the other side, the myth I hate, I don't know if side, the myth I hate, I don't know if side, the myth I hate, I don't know if you've seen this on Tik Tok, a lot of you've seen this on Tik Tok, a lot of you've seen this on Tik Tok, a lot of women are saying, "I don't date because women are saying, "I don't date because women are saying, "I don't date because the risk of being unalived," which I the risk of being unalived," which I the risk of being unalived," which I guess is the woke version of saying guess is the woke version of saying guess is the woke version of saying murdered. &gt;&gt; I think it's cuz on social media &gt;&gt; I think it's cuz on social media &gt;&gt; I think it's cuz on social media platforms, if you say murder or suicide, platforms, if you say murder or suicide, platforms, if you say murder or suicide, &gt;&gt; oh, it goes ranked down. &gt;&gt; oh, it goes ranked down. &gt;&gt; oh, it goes ranked down. &gt;&gt; They I don't know if it actually does, &gt;&gt; They I don't know if it actually does, &gt;&gt; They I don't know if it actually does, but it's this idea that Yeah. that it's but it's this idea that Yeah. that it's but it's this idea that Yeah. that it's going to be uh ranked down. going to be uh ranked down. going to be uh ranked down. &gt;&gt; Here's the data. Okay. If 2500 women a &gt;&gt; Here's the data. Okay. If 2500 women a &gt;&gt; Here's the data. Okay. If 2500 women a year are murdered by men, that's way too year are murdered by men, that's way too year are murdered by men, that's way too many. It's a huge problem. Sexual many. It's a huge problem. Sexual many. It's a huge problem. Sexual assault is a bigger problem. The assault is a bigger problem. The assault is a bigger problem. The majority of women who are murdered are majority of women who are murdered are majority of women who are murdered are murdered by someone they know. So the murdered by someone they know. So the murdered by someone they know. So the reality is a small number of women are reality is a small number of women are reality is a small number of women are murdered on dates with strangers. It murdered on dates with strangers. It murdered on dates with strangers. It just doesn't happen that often. And just doesn't happen that often. And just doesn't happen that often. And 40,000 men a year kill themselves. So if 40,000 men a year kill themselves. So if 40,000 men a year kill themselves. So if you go on a date with a man, the man is you go on a date with a man, the man is you go on a date with a man, the man is 16 times more likely to go home and hurt 16 times more likely to go home and hurt 16 times more likely to go home and hurt himself than hurt you. So what I would himself than hurt you. So what I would himself than hurt you. So what I would say to men is make the approach, take say to men is make the approach, take say to men is make the approach, take the risk, and as long as you're the risk, and as long as you're the risk, and as long as you're respectful, you're going to be fine and respectful, you're going to be fine and respectful, you're going to be fine and so is she. and you are not taking your so is she. and you are not taking your so is she. and you are not taking your professional or personal reputation into professional or personal reputation into professional or personal reputation into your hands. And what I would say to your hands. And what I would say to your hands. And what I would say to women is if you go on a date with a guy women is if you go on a date with a guy women is if you go on a date with a guy that you met on an app, there's all that you met on an app, there's all that you met on an app, there's all sorts of digital breadcrumbs. And it's a sorts of digital breadcrumbs. And it's a sorts of digital breadcrumbs. And it's a lot you are and I can statistically lot you are and I can statistically lot you are and I can statistically prove this. The ride over an Uber, the prove this. The ride over an Uber, the prove this. The ride over an Uber, the Uber was a lot more dangerous than the Uber was a lot more dangerous than the Uber was a lot more dangerous than the date itself. And you are more likely to date itself. And you are more likely to date itself. And you are more likely to die of choking during dinner than to be die of choking during dinner than to be die of choking during dinner than to be hurt by that man. So, what I hate hurt by that man. So, what I hate hurt by that man. So, what I hate is that there's all this inflammatory is that there's all this inflammatory is that there's all this inflammatory content being boosted on online media content being boosted on online media content being boosted on online media that's getting in the way of the most that's getting in the way of the most that's getting in the way of the most rewarding thing in life, and that is to rewarding thing in life, and that is to rewarding thing in life, and that is to find someone who you are physically find someone who you are physically find someone who you are physically attracted to, who you sync up with attracted to, who you sync up with attracted to, who you sync up with spiritually, and you decide to build a spiritually, and you decide to build a spiritually, and you decide to build a life together. And not enough of that is life together. And not enough of that is life together. And not enough of that is happening. We're in a sex recession, happening. We're in a sex recession, happening. We're in a sex recession, right? And online is making it worse. right? And online is making it worse. right? And online is making it worse. The dating apps have an incentive in you The dating apps have an incentive in you The dating apps have an incentive in you finding a bigger, better deal. And the finding a bigger, better deal. And the finding a bigger, better deal. And the genders have done an amazing job of genders have done an amazing job of genders have done an amazing job of convincing each other it's the other's convincing each other it's the other's convincing each other it's the other's fault. And I think one of the big fosi fault. And I think one of the big fosi fault. And I think one of the big fosi that need to be really um pay more that need to be really um pay more that need to be really um pay more attention to is what I call renewal of attention to is what I call renewal of attention to is what I call renewal of alliances. I'd love to see a renewal of alliances. I'd love to see a renewal of alliances. I'd love to see a renewal of alliances between us and our great alliances between us and our great alliances between us and our great allies in Europe. Renewal of allies who allies in Europe. Renewal of allies who allies in Europe. Renewal of allies who are moderates. I know nothing about you. are moderates. I know nothing about you. are moderates. I know nothing about you. I just don't I just can't believe you're I just don't I just can't believe you're I just don't I just can't believe you're an extremist on the left or the right. I an extremist on the left or the right. I an extremist on the left or the right. I just don't. Bullseye. There needs to be just don't. Bullseye. There needs to be just don't. Bullseye. There needs to be a renewal of alliances between what I'll a renewal of alliances between what I'll a renewal of alliances between what I'll call moderate lefties like me and call moderate lefties like me and call moderate lefties like me and moderate conservatives that are moderate conservatives that are moderate conservatives that are everywhere. We're all Americans, but the everywhere. We're all Americans, but the everywhere. We're all Americans, but the most important alliance that needs re most important alliance that needs re most important alliance that needs re renewal is the greatest alliance in renewal is the greatest alliance in renewal is the greatest alliance in history, hands down, and it's the history, hands down, and it's the history, hands down, and it's the alliance between men and women. The alliance between men and women. The alliance between men and women. The integration of female and male energy, integration of female and male energy, integration of female and male energy, the ability to find someone you want to the ability to find someone you want to the ability to find someone you want to procreate with, to build something procreate with, to build something procreate with, to build something together, that is the most rewarding together, that is the most rewarding together, that is the most rewarding thing in life. And I can prove it's key thing in life. And I can prove it's key thing in life. And I can prove it's key to the species progress and existence. to the species progress and existence. to the species progress and existence. And men and women have been taught not And men and women have been taught not And men and women have been taught not to trust each other and to blame each to trust each other and to blame each to trust each other and to blame each other. I hate the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] manosphere and other. I hate the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] manosphere and other. I hate the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] manosphere and I hate the quite frankly some of the I hate the quite frankly some of the I hate the quite frankly some of the reactionary notion on the left where reactionary notion on the left where reactionary notion on the left where it's misandry cosplaying is social it's misandry cosplaying is social it's misandry cosplaying is social commentary. There's a lot of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] commentary. There's a lot of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] commentary. There's a lot of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] misandry online where you're assuming misandry online where you're assuming misandry online where you're assuming every young man is a predator and quite every young man is a predator and quite every young man is a predator and quite frankly that every billionaire is evil frankly that every billionaire is evil frankly that every billionaire is evil or that every white person is racist. or that every white person is racist. or that every white person is racist. But the alliance between men and women But the alliance between men and women But the alliance between men and women needs to be reformed. It's the greatest needs to be reformed. It's the greatest needs to be reformed. It's the greatest alliance in history. And online, it's alliance in history. And online, it's alliance in history. And online, it's teaching men to blame women for their teaching men to blame women for their teaching men to blame women for their problems. No. Women's as sense saved our problems. No. Women's as sense saved our problems. No. Women's as sense saved our ass. Women in the factory in World War ass. Women in the factory in World War ass. Women in the factory in World War II is the reason we won the war in four II is the reason we won the war in four II is the reason we won the war in four years, not in seven. Women going into years, not in seven. Women going into years, not in seven. Women going into the workforce in the 70s and 80s and the workforce in the 70s and 80s and the workforce in the 70s and 80s and protections of their rights for fair pay protections of their rights for fair pay protections of their rights for fair pay is the reason we're not a second tier is the reason we're not a second tier is the reason we're not a second tier power to China right now. If women power to China right now. If women power to China right now. If women hadn't ascended, we'd be really squarely hadn't ascended, we'd be really squarely hadn't ascended, we'd be really squarely and duly [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right? And their ascent and duly [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right? And their ascent and duly [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right? And their ascent is in no way inversely correlated or is in no way inversely correlated or is in no way inversely correlated or correlated to men's descent. Men have to correlated to men's descent. Men have to correlated to men's descent. Men have to stop that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] An immigrant didn't stop that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] An immigrant didn't stop that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] An immigrant didn't take your job. He made it such you could take your job. He made it such you could take your job. He made it such you could have lower rent, a meal for a reasonable have lower rent, a meal for a reasonable have lower rent, a meal for a reasonable price, and have someone take care of price, and have someone take care of price, and have someone take care of your mother when she's older. And at the your mother when she's older. And at the your mother when she's older. And at the same time, if you're having romantic same time, if you're having romantic same time, if you're having romantic problems, it's not her fault. Women are problems, it's not her fault. Women are problems, it's not her fault. Women are ascending and naturally they have higher ascending and naturally they have higher ascending and naturally they have higher standards because they're no longer standards because they're no longer standards because they're no longer economically dependent upon men, which economically dependent upon men, which economically dependent upon men, which should be a motivator for men to level should be a motivator for men to level should be a motivator for men to level up, not to start blaming women. And all up, not to start blaming women. And all up, not to start blaming women. And all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is being totally inflamed and this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is being totally inflamed and this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is being totally inflamed and taken totally out of proportion by taken totally out of proportion by taken totally out of proportion by online because it creates more online because it creates more online because it creates more attention. It's interesting. It's novel. attention. It's interesting. It's novel. attention. It's interesting. It's novel. And it creates more Nissan ads. But I And it creates more Nissan ads. But I And it creates more Nissan ads. But I I'm trying to figure out what is the I'm trying to figure out what is the I'm trying to figure out what is the economic incentive to try and figure out economic incentive to try and figure out economic incentive to try and figure out a way to get more men and women a way to get more men and women a way to get more men and women appreciating the other gender beyond appreciating the other gender beyond appreciating the other gender beyond just the basics, right? How do we renew just the basics, right? How do we renew just the basics, right? How do we renew that alliance? that alliance? that alliance? I love that statement. I saw somewhere I love that statement. I saw somewhere I love that statement. I saw somewhere of all places on X, you know, every once of all places on X, you know, every once of all places on X, you know, every once in a while you encounter something that in a while you encounter something that in a while you encounter something that really sticks with you. Every once in a really sticks with you. Every once in a really sticks with you. Every once in a while there's a gem that just falls while there's a gem that just falls while there's a gem that just falls through, really makes you think. And I through, really makes you think. And I through, really makes you think. And I don't know who this person was. This don't know who this person was. This don't know who this person was. This might have been an account with one might have been an account with one might have been an account with one follower and it landed in front of me follower and it landed in front of me follower and it landed in front of me and it said the way you destroy a and it said the way you destroy a and it said the way you destroy a society is to get the men and women to society is to get the men and women to society is to get the men and women to hate each other. And as a biologist hate each other. And as a biologist hate each other. And as a biologist first and foremost I thought, well that first and foremost I thought, well that first and foremost I thought, well that makes perfect sense, right? If you want makes perfect sense, right? If you want makes perfect sense, right? If you want to eradicate a population of any to eradicate a population of any to eradicate a population of any species, you get the males and the species, you get the males and the species, you get the males and the females to start hating each other. Not females to start hating each other. Not females to start hating each other. Not just because they don't mate, but just because they don't mate, but just because they don't mate, but because you throw off the mating because you throw off the mating because you throw off the mating dynamics in a way that then can create dynamics in a way that then can create dynamics in a way that then can create infighting among the males. We see that infighting among the males. We see that infighting among the males. We see that too. Infighting among the women. too. Infighting among the women. too. Infighting among the women. Although I don't know, I think that Although I don't know, I think that Although I don't know, I think that there's a lot to explore around this there's a lot to explore around this there's a lot to explore around this sort of what the standard is that we're sort of what the standard is that we're sort of what the standard is that we're holding the opposite sex to. It's an holding the opposite sex to. It's an holding the opposite sex to. It's an interesting question. I can't say interesting question. I can't say interesting question. I can't say I've really evolved my thinking around I've really evolved my thinking around I've really evolved my thinking around this enough to maybe dive into it, this enough to maybe dive into it, this enough to maybe dive into it, but I know you thought about this. I but I know you thought about this. I but I know you thought about this. I think a lot of males hide behind this think a lot of males hide behind this think a lot of males hide behind this notion that they have to be everything. notion that they have to be everything. notion that they have to be everything. They have to be tall. They have to be They have to be tall. They have to be They have to be tall. They have to be rich. They have to be jacked. They have rich. They have to be jacked. They have rich. They have to be jacked. They have to be kind. They have to be, you know, to be kind. They have to be, you know, to be kind. They have to be, you know, hopefully everyone's kind, but you know hopefully everyone's kind, but you know hopefully everyone's kind, but you know what I mean, that they uh they can't say what I mean, that they uh they can't say what I mean, that they uh they can't say the wrong thing even once, you know, so the wrong thing even once, you know, so the wrong thing even once, you know, so they're hiding behind that and if they they're hiding behind that and if they they're hiding behind that and if they go out and look, they'll get plenty of go out and look, they'll get plenty of go out and look, they'll get plenty of evidence for that, evidence for that, evidence for that, &gt;&gt; right? No men, no protectors, no this. &gt;&gt; right? No men, no protectors, no this. &gt;&gt; right? No men, no protectors, no this. Actually, I brought I did something I Actually, I brought I did something I Actually, I brought I did something I rarely do. rarely do. rarely do. &gt;&gt; Um, which is I brought my phone into &gt;&gt; Um, which is I brought my phone into &gt;&gt; Um, which is I brought my phone into this because right before I came in this because right before I came in this because right before I came in here, a woman that I've known for 20 here, a woman that I've known for 20 here, a woman that I've known for 20 years wrote, asked me if I would ask you years wrote, asked me if I would ask you years wrote, asked me if I would ask you a question. No, and it's directly a question. No, and it's directly a question. No, and it's directly related to this. So, I'm gonna do this. related to this. So, I'm gonna do this. related to this. So, I'm gonna do this. Of course, I'm not gonna say who this Of course, I'm not gonna say who this Of course, I'm not gonna say who this person is. And she said, cuz I'd person is. And she said, cuz I'd person is. And she said, cuz I'd mentioned that I'm speaking to you mentioned that I'm speaking to you mentioned that I'm speaking to you today, and she said, "Please tell Scott today, and she said, "Please tell Scott today, and she said, "Please tell Scott that I'd personally like to thank him that I'd personally like to thank him that I'd personally like to thank him for his efforts encouraging men to for his efforts encouraging men to for his efforts encouraging men to embrace their duties as protectors, embrace their duties as protectors, embrace their duties as protectors, providers, and generally just being providers, and generally just being providers, and generally just being accountable because we have a serious accountable because we have a serious accountable because we have a serious shortage among hetereroudes." She lives shortage among hetereroudes." She lives shortage among hetereroudes." She lives in San Francisco, particularly in the in San Francisco, particularly in the in San Francisco, particularly in the Bay Area. And I said, "We'll do, but can Bay Area. And I said, "We'll do, but can Bay Area. And I said, "We'll do, but can you tell me what you mean by you tell me what you mean by you tell me what you mean by accountable?" Serious question. I want accountable?" Serious question. I want accountable?" Serious question. I want to make sure I'm specific. She said, to make sure I'm specific. She said, to make sure I'm specific. She said, "When I say accountability, I'm "When I say accountability, I'm "When I say accountability, I'm referring to the fact that many times in referring to the fact that many times in referring to the fact that many times in romantic relationships, men seem to want romantic relationships, men seem to want romantic relationships, men seem to want to avoid feelings of shame and guilt to avoid feelings of shame and guilt to avoid feelings of shame and guilt to such a degree that they often respond to such a degree that they often respond to such a degree that they often respond to their partner's feelings towards them their partner's feelings towards them their partner's feelings towards them without empathy or accountability. without empathy or accountability. without empathy or accountability. I find that here in okay, San Francisco, I find that here in okay, San Francisco, I find that here in okay, San Francisco, there are many women in San Francisco. I there are many women in San Francisco. I there are many women in San Francisco. I don't think I outed her here. Or perhaps don't think I outed her here. Or perhaps don't think I outed her here. Or perhaps all major US metros, chivalry is dead. all major US metros, chivalry is dead. all major US metros, chivalry is dead. Men are afraid to assert their desires Men are afraid to assert their desires Men are afraid to assert their desires because they don't want the obligation because they don't want the obligation because they don't want the obligation that it might entail." Interesting. They that it might entail." Interesting. They that it might entail." Interesting. They give up when something requires internal give up when something requires internal give up when something requires internal growth or leveling up. They shy away growth or leveling up. They shy away growth or leveling up. They shy away from acting protective of their partners from acting protective of their partners from acting protective of their partners in favor of egalitarian dynamics, which in favor of egalitarian dynamics, which in favor of egalitarian dynamics, which is flawed since men's clear since men is flawed since men's clear since men is flawed since men's clear since men clearly have more physical strength. Oh clearly have more physical strength. Oh clearly have more physical strength. Oh my god, this goes on and on. my god, this goes on and on. my god, this goes on and on. &gt;&gt; This is almost overwhelming me, but I &gt;&gt; This is almost overwhelming me, but I &gt;&gt; This is almost overwhelming me, but I think I'm, you know, can grapple with think I'm, you know, can grapple with think I'm, you know, can grapple with it. Oh, thank you. I swear I didn't it. Oh, thank you. I swear I didn't it. Oh, thank you. I swear I didn't plant this. She said, none of this has plant this. She said, none of this has plant this. She said, none of this has ever applied to you in case you're ever applied to you in case you're ever applied to you in case you're serious. Thank you for that one, by the serious. Thank you for that one, by the serious. Thank you for that one, by the way. She says they're wimpy. They avoid way. She says they're wimpy. They avoid way. She says they're wimpy. They avoid relationships that require work and relationships that require work and relationships that require work and responsibility because they don't want responsibility because they don't want responsibility because they don't want to feel inadequate. They avoid difficult to feel inadequate. They avoid difficult to feel inadequate. They avoid difficult conversations and repair because they conversations and repair because they conversations and repair because they don't want to feel shame or guilt. They don't want to feel shame or guilt. They don't want to feel shame or guilt. They avoid asking for anything explicitly avoid asking for anything explicitly avoid asking for anything explicitly because they don't want to feel because they don't want to feel because they don't want to feel obligated or complimenting a woman or obligated or complimenting a woman or obligated or complimenting a woman or giving her flowers or romance. They're giving her flowers or romance. They're giving her flowers or romance. They're all scared to do it. It's so odd. all scared to do it. It's so odd. all scared to do it. It's so odd. Anyway, that's it. Anyway, that's it. Anyway, that's it. &gt;&gt; That's all. Huh. &gt;&gt; That's all. Huh. &gt;&gt; That's all. Huh. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I I'm reading I'm hearing that &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I I'm reading I'm hearing that &gt;&gt; Okay. So, I I'm reading I'm hearing that second part for the first time, the long second part for the first time, the long second part for the first time, the long part. And I have to say, if I were a part. And I have to say, if I were a part. And I have to say, if I were a 25-year-old guy now, I' like, 25-year-old guy now, I' like, 25-year-old guy now, I' like, &gt;&gt; whoa, &gt;&gt; whoa, &gt;&gt; whoa, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; right, &gt;&gt; that's a lot. Okay, there's something &gt;&gt; that's a lot. Okay, there's something &gt;&gt; that's a lot. Okay, there's something there. They want me to bring flowers, be there. They want me to bring flowers, be there. They want me to bring flowers, be romantic, be affectionate. Clearly, romantic, be affectionate. Clearly, romantic, be affectionate. Clearly, there's a there's a reference towards there's a there's a reference towards there's a there's a reference towards being sexually proactive there. And yet, being sexually proactive there. And yet, being sexually proactive there. And yet, assume responsibility, level up, be assume responsibility, level up, be assume responsibility, level up, be empathic. &gt;&gt; You know, I'm not trying to defend or &gt;&gt; You know, I'm not trying to defend or &gt;&gt; You know, I'm not trying to defend or attack this person who's I'm close to in attack this person who's I'm close to in attack this person who's I'm close to in my life, but that's a lot. That's a my life, but that's a lot. That's a my life, but that's a lot. That's a that's a that's a tall building right that's a that's a tall building right that's a that's a tall building right there to scale for a guy who's trying to there to scale for a guy who's trying to there to scale for a guy who's trying to figure out how to work out three times a figure out how to work out three times a figure out how to work out three times a week, get off point. Anyway, I thought week, get off point. Anyway, I thought week, get off point. Anyway, I thought I'd share that and just get your I'd share that and just get your I'd share that and just get your reflections. I think that first off I think that we all have a set of insecurities around we all have a set of insecurities around we all have a set of insecurities around not living up mostly because again I not living up mostly because again I not living up mostly because again I come I really do think big tech has had come I really do think big tech has had come I really do think big tech has had is while it's a net good incredible is while it's a net good incredible is while it's a net good incredible economic growth job growth I connect economic growth job growth I connect economic growth job growth I connect with my buddies from college I get to with my buddies from college I get to with my buddies from college I get to build a business and market it less build a business and market it less build a business and market it less expensively I can break through voices expensively I can break through voices expensively I can break through voices that can bubble up just based on their that can bubble up just based on their that can bubble up just based on their talent Teen suicide has skyrocketed since Teen suicide has skyrocketed since Teen suicide has skyrocketed since social one on mobile. It's not the only social one on mobile. It's not the only social one on mobile. It's not the only reason, but it's either number one or reason, but it's either number one or reason, but it's either number one or number two. According to my colleague number two. According to my colleague number two. According to my colleague Jonathan Height and Gene Twangi at San Jonathan Height and Gene Twangi at San Jonathan Height and Gene Twangi at San Diego State, I don't believe there's any Diego State, I don't believe there's any Diego State, I don't believe there's any reason that anyone under the age of 16 reason that anyone under the age of 16 reason that anyone under the age of 16 should be on social media where they should be on social media where they should be on social media where they encouraged young girls are encouraged to encouraged young girls are encouraged to encouraged young girls are encouraged to sexualize themselves. If they start sexualize themselves. If they start sexualize themselves. If they start having suicidal ideiation, they are sent having suicidal ideiation, they are sent having suicidal ideiation, they are sent an email that says verbatim, here are an email that says verbatim, here are an email that says verbatim, here are some images on suicide we might we some images on suicide we might we some images on suicide we might we thought you might find interesting. But thought you might find interesting. But thought you might find interesting. But also, it's created unreasonable also, it's created unreasonable also, it's created unreasonable expectations for a lot of young men and expectations for a lot of young men and expectations for a lot of young men and young women about what they need to look young women about what they need to look young women about what they need to look like. If they haven't made millions of like. If they haven't made millions of like. If they haven't made millions of dollars, if they aren't on a private jet dollars, if they aren't on a private jet dollars, if they aren't on a private jet going to Coachella, if they don't have a going to Coachella, if they don't have a going to Coachella, if they don't have a boyfriend with a six-pack, if they if boyfriend with a six-pack, if they if boyfriend with a six-pack, if they if they don't look just amazing all the they don't look just amazing all the they don't look just amazing all the time, I think it creates tremendous time, I think it creates tremendous time, I think it creates tremendous anxiety and unreasonable expectations. anxiety and unreasonable expectations. anxiety and unreasonable expectations. But I do, you know, so I would argue But I do, you know, so I would argue But I do, you know, so I would argue that who's Okay, so who's at fault? that who's Okay, so who's at fault? that who's Okay, so who's at fault? We're at fault. in that as we keep We're at fault. in that as we keep We're at fault. in that as we keep hoping or waiting for the better angels hoping or waiting for the better angels hoping or waiting for the better angels of tech CEOs to show up. That's not of tech CEOs to show up. That's not of tech CEOs to show up. That's not going to happen. I've been working my going to happen. I've been working my going to happen. I've been working my whole life with CEOs, they're going to whole life with CEOs, they're going to whole life with CEOs, they're going to make incremental decisions to do make incremental decisions to do make incremental decisions to do whatever moves the stock price up. whatever moves the stock price up. whatever moves the stock price up. That's their job. That's capitalism. That's their job. That's capitalism. That's their job. That's capitalism. Their job is to take a set of resources, Their job is to take a set of resources, Their job is to take a set of resources, figure out an offering where they get figure out an offering where they get figure out an offering where they get more than they paid to garner those more than they paid to garner those more than they paid to garner those resources and create shareholder value. resources and create shareholder value. resources and create shareholder value. They will do anything to do that. That's They will do anything to do that. That's They will do anything to do that. That's their job. And then we're supposed to their job. And then we're supposed to their job. And then we're supposed to tax them such that we can build our tax them such that we can build our tax them such that we can build our roads, take care of our veterans, and roads, take care of our veterans, and roads, take care of our veterans, and have a set of laws so they don't get out have a set of laws so they don't get out have a set of laws so they don't get out of control. So that they don't lie and of control. So that they don't lie and of control. So that they don't lie and say, "No, smoking is not addictive." And say, "No, smoking is not addictive." And say, "No, smoking is not addictive." And then our mothers, our sisters, and our then our mothers, our sisters, and our then our mothers, our sisters, and our dads start dying, right? We have dads start dying, right? We have dads start dying, right? We have regulation. We are net beneficiaries regulation. We are net beneficiaries regulation. We are net beneficiaries from fossil fuels and pesticides, but we from fossil fuels and pesticides, but we from fossil fuels and pesticides, but we still have an EPA and an FDA. There's still have an EPA and an FDA. There's still have an EPA and an FDA. There's absolutely no regulation on big tech. absolutely no regulation on big tech. absolutely no regulation on big tech. There's more regulation in this mic than There's more regulation in this mic than There's more regulation in this mic than there is on big tech because they have there is on big tech because they have there is on big tech because they have weaponized Washington and money and weaponized Washington and money and weaponized Washington and money and Citizens United. There are more Citizens United. There are more Citizens United. There are more full-time lobbyists living in Washington full-time lobbyists living in Washington full-time lobbyists living in Washington DC working for Amazon, one company, than DC working for Amazon, one company, than DC working for Amazon, one company, than there are sitting US senators. So, they there are sitting US senators. So, they there are sitting US senators. So, they have very effectively avoided all have very effectively avoided all have very effectively avoided all regulation to the point where they regulation to the point where they regulation to the point where they basically run unfettered, whether it's basically run unfettered, whether it's basically run unfettered, whether it's bots, whether it's harm to children, bots, whether it's harm to children, bots, whether it's harm to children, whether it's letting bad actors try and whether it's letting bad actors try and whether it's letting bad actors try and influence elections. and they in my influence elections. and they in my influence elections. and they in my opinion if your content can be reverse opinion if your content can be reverse opinion if your content can be reverse engineered to self harm among teens. If engineered to self harm among teens. If engineered to self harm among teens. If your podcast if we could prove your podcast if we could prove your podcast if we could prove statistically that your podcast was statistically that your podcast was statistically that your podcast was resulting in self harm among teenage resulting in self harm among teenage resulting in self harm among teenage girls, this podcast would be shut down. girls, this podcast would be shut down. girls, this podcast would be shut down. You would be sued and you would You would be sued and you would You would be sued and you would eventually decide to go out of business. eventually decide to go out of business. eventually decide to go out of business. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, if we were harming people &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, if we were harming people &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, if we were harming people appropriately so appropriately so appropriately so &gt;&gt; I would argue big tech does that and &gt;&gt; I would argue big tech does that and &gt;&gt; I would argue big tech does that and more every day. And these cases that more every day. And these cases that more every day. And these cases that just came down actually one in LA that just came down actually one in LA that just came down actually one in LA that found Google liable. Do you realize that found Google liable. Do you realize that found Google liable. Do you realize that the New Mexico attorney general, do you the New Mexico attorney general, do you the New Mexico attorney general, do you know what he did in his case? He created know what he did in his case? He created know what he did in his case? He created an account posing as a 12-year-old girl an account posing as a 12-year-old girl an account posing as a 12-year-old girl and within minutes he was getting and within minutes he was getting and within minutes he was getting messages and solicitations from known messages and solicitations from known messages and solicitations from known sexual abusers. That was their first sexual abusers. That was their first sexual abusers. That was their first piece of evidence that if you create an piece of evidence that if you create an piece of evidence that if you create an account and you say you're a 12-year-old account and you say you're a 12-year-old account and you say you're a 12-year-old girl, within hours they were getting girl, within hours they were getting girl, within hours they were getting overtures from known sexual predators. overtures from known sexual predators. overtures from known sexual predators. So, the fact that this company can So, the fact that this company can So, the fact that this company can target you and know that you're that I'm target you and know that you're that I'm target you and know that you're that I'm wearing WBY Parkers and start serving me wearing WBY Parkers and start serving me wearing WBY Parkers and start serving me ads by looking at the screen or know ads by looking at the screen or know ads by looking at the screen or know that I'm at Coachella listening to David that I'm at Coachella listening to David that I'm at Coachella listening to David Burn and start serving me albums of Burn and start serving me albums of Burn and start serving me albums of David Burn's greatest hits, then they David Burn's greatest hits, then they David Burn's greatest hits, then they can figure out that a 12-year-old girl can figure out that a 12-year-old girl can figure out that a 12-year-old girl shouldn't be getting overtures from shouldn't be getting overtures from shouldn't be getting overtures from 55-year-old men. I'll bracket that 55-year-old men. I'll bracket that 55-year-old men. I'll bracket that sentence, right? sentence, right? sentence, right? very fair and very important statement very fair and very important statement very fair and very important statement that if there were some balance of that if there were some balance of that if there were some balance of optimization towards uh real protections optimization towards uh real protections optimization towards uh real protections that is important that is important that is important &gt;&gt; but they made I think 11 billion last &gt;&gt; but they made I think 11 billion last &gt;&gt; but they made I think 11 billion last year from people under the age of 18 but year from people under the age of 18 but year from people under the age of 18 but you asked who's to blame we're to blame you asked who's to blame we're to blame you asked who's to blame we're to blame because we haven't elected people who because we haven't elected people who because we haven't elected people who are willing to hold these companies are willing to hold these companies are willing to hold these companies accountable and they are sole mission is accountable and they are sole mission is accountable and they are sole mission is to get reelected and in 97% of elections to get reelected and in 97% of elections to get reelected and in 97% of elections whoever raises the most money gets whoever raises the most money gets whoever raises the most money gets reelected and these companies are now reelected and these companies are now reelected and these companies are now the fastest growing expense line amongst the fastest growing expense line amongst the fastest growing expense line amongst big tech isn't AI as a percentage basis big tech isn't AI as a percentage basis big tech isn't AI as a percentage basis it isn't R&amp;D isn't capex it's lobbying it isn't R&amp;D isn't capex it's lobbying it isn't R&amp;D isn't capex it's lobbying because the greatest ROI in history because the greatest ROI in history because the greatest ROI in history is spending money on politicians I give is spending money on politicians I give is spending money on politicians I give money to politicians because I'm getting money to politicians because I'm getting money to politicians because I'm getting more politically active and it doesn't more politically active and it doesn't more politically active and it doesn't surprise me that they're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the most surprise me that they're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the most surprise me that they're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the most disappointing thing is what cheap [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] disappointing thing is what cheap [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] disappointing thing is what cheap [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they are if I get $50,000 with a senator they are if I get $50,000 with a senator they are if I get $50,000 with a senator he'll have dinner with me when he's in he'll have dinner with me when he's in he'll have dinner with me when he's in New York or she because they have to New York or she because they have to New York or she because they have to because the system is set up such that because the system is set up such that because the system is set up such that whoever raises the most money gets whoever raises the most money gets whoever raises the most money gets elected and big tech has figured that elected and big tech has figured that elected and big tech has figured that out. So until we have the judgment to out. So until we have the judgment to out. So until we have the judgment to elect people who are willing to stand up elect people who are willing to stand up elect people who are willing to stand up to big tech and actually implement safe to big tech and actually implement safe to big tech and actually implement safe and common sense regulation, I don't and common sense regulation, I don't and common sense regulation, I don't want them to go out of business. Let our want them to go out of business. Let our want them to go out of business. Let our thoroughbreds run. I actually believe thoroughbreds run. I actually believe thoroughbreds run. I actually believe the American model of less the American model of less the American model of less regulation versus more is one of the regulation versus more is one of the regulation versus more is one of the reasons we're much more successful than reasons we're much more successful than reasons we're much more successful than Europe, which hasn't grown in 20 years. Europe, which hasn't grown in 20 years. Europe, which hasn't grown in 20 years. But this has gotten to a point where we But this has gotten to a point where we But this has gotten to a point where we seem to have a total lack of regard for seem to have a total lack of regard for seem to have a total lack of regard for our children's well-being and the fact our children's well-being and the fact our children's well-being and the fact that Americans hate each other and that Americans hate each other and that Americans hate each other and that we're kind of eating ourselves from the we're kind of eating ourselves from the we're kind of eating ourselves from the inside out. So again, we need an EPA and inside out. So again, we need an EPA and inside out. So again, we need an EPA and an FDA or some sort of equivalent for an FDA or some sort of equivalent for an FDA or some sort of equivalent for big tech, especially with AI. But I want big tech, especially with AI. But I want big tech, especially with AI. But I want to acknowledge the point. None of this to acknowledge the point. None of this to acknowledge the point. None of this could have happened without fossil could have happened without fossil could have happened without fossil fuels. There is a trade-off here, right? fuels. There is a trade-off here, right? fuels. There is a trade-off here, right? Pesticides are important for our food Pesticides are important for our food Pesticides are important for our food safety, but there is an FDA. We have safety, but there is an FDA. We have safety, but there is an FDA. We have decided to just let big tech run decided to just let big tech run decided to just let big tech run unfettered. And I think it's been gotten unfettered. And I think it's been gotten unfettered. And I think it's been gotten to the point where it's pretty damaging to the point where it's pretty damaging to the point where it's pretty damaging for society. I think we've robbed kids. for society. I think we've robbed kids. for society. I think we've robbed kids. My kids are in the kill zone, 15 and 18. My kids are in the kill zone, 15 and 18. My kids are in the kill zone, 15 and 18. I think they've been robbed of a lot of I think they've been robbed of a lot of I think they've been robbed of a lot of their youth. I understand this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And their youth. I understand this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And their youth. I understand this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And I have a son who has device addiction I have a son who has device addiction I have a son who has device addiction who will lie, take his phone, say he who will lie, take his phone, say he who will lie, take his phone, say he doesn't feel well, take his phone into doesn't feel well, take his phone into doesn't feel well, take his phone into the bathroom for 45 minutes, and I have the bathroom for 45 minutes, and I have the bathroom for 45 minutes, and I have to bang on the door and jokingly scream, to bang on the door and jokingly scream, to bang on the door and jokingly scream, "Start masturbating." Because this kid "Start masturbating." Because this kid "Start masturbating." Because this kid is addicted to Tik Tok. what the British is addicted to Tik Tok. what the British is addicted to Tik Tok. what the British did to the Chinese in terms of getting did to the Chinese in terms of getting did to the Chinese in terms of getting them addicted to opium. I think that the them addicted to opium. I think that the them addicted to opium. I think that the Chinese via poor uh via poorest Chinese via poor uh via poorest Chinese via poor uh via poorest platforms that are shareholder driven in platforms that are shareholder driven in platforms that are shareholder driven in the GRU are addicting our youth and the GRU are addicting our youth and the GRU are addicting our youth and we're going to raise a generation of we're going to raise a generation of we're going to raise a generation of civic nonprofit and military leaders who civic nonprofit and military leaders who civic nonprofit and military leaders who [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hate America. We are teaching [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hate America. We are teaching [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hate America. We are teaching kids to hate each other, hate America, kids to hate each other, hate America, kids to hate each other, hate America, hate every special interest group, hate every special interest group, hate every special interest group, hate every ideology that doesn't fit their every ideology that doesn't fit their every ideology that doesn't fit their own. And there's no grace around what it own. And there's no grace around what it own. And there's no grace around what it means now fortunate are we to be means now fortunate are we to be means now fortunate are we to be American. And I think at the center of American. And I think at the center of American. And I think at the center of it is a total lack of regulation amongst it is a total lack of regulation amongst it is a total lack of regulation amongst these incredibly brilliant companies. these incredibly brilliant companies. these incredibly brilliant companies. The most technologically sophisticated, The most technologically sophisticated, The most technologically sophisticated, deepest pocketed companies in the world deepest pocketed companies in the world deepest pocketed companies in the world are trying to sequester our youth from are trying to sequester our youth from are trying to sequester our youth from us and they're stealing youth. The us and they're stealing youth. The us and they're stealing youth. The number of kids who see their number of kids who see their number of kids who see their friends every day has been cut in half friends every day has been cut in half friends every day has been cut in half the last 20 years. there. Men between the last 20 years. there. Men between the last 20 years. there. Men between the ages of 20 and 30 are spending less the ages of 20 and 30 are spending less the ages of 20 and 30 are spending less time outdoors, Andrew, than prison time outdoors, Andrew, than prison time outdoors, Andrew, than prison inmates. We are robbing youth because we inmates. We are robbing youth because we inmates. We are robbing youth because we refuse we refuse to um regulate these refuse we refuse to um regulate these refuse we refuse to um regulate these companies. So, do I want these companies companies. So, do I want these companies companies. So, do I want these companies to go away? Do I think they're bad to go away? Do I think they're bad to go away? Do I think they're bad people? No. But we have a system that people? No. But we have a system that people? No. But we have a system that values wealth and shareholder value values wealth and shareholder value values wealth and shareholder value above all. And so, tech CEOs and their above all. And so, tech CEOs and their above all. And so, tech CEOs and their boards will make a series of incremental boards will make a series of incremental boards will make a series of incremental decisions regardless of the damage decisions regardless of the damage decisions regardless of the damage to the public. and we have a set of to the public. and we have a set of to the public. and we have a set of elected leaders that don't do their job elected leaders that don't do their job elected leaders that don't do their job and that is they're there to prevent a and that is they're there to prevent a and that is they're there to prevent a tragedy to the commons and it's tragedy to the commons and it's tragedy to the commons and it's Democrats and Republicans. So, it comes Democrats and Republicans. So, it comes Democrats and Republicans. So, it comes down to very boring [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Unless we down to very boring [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Unless we down to very boring [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Unless we reform Citizens United, unless we reform Citizens United, unless we reform Citizens United, unless we dejerrymander uh the United States Congress, money is uh the United States Congress, money is uh the United States Congress, money is going to win. And these companies have going to win. And these companies have going to win. And these companies have more money. But no, I would push back. I more money. But no, I would push back. I more money. But no, I would push back. I think these companies are starting to do think these companies are starting to do think these companies are starting to do a lot of damage to our youth. I'm a lot of damage to our youth. I'm a lot of damage to our youth. I'm worried my kids are going to grow up so worried my kids are going to grow up so worried my kids are going to grow up so used to getting dopa so easily and used to getting dopa so easily and used to getting dopa so easily and squeezing it so fast and this is your squeezing it so fast and this is your squeezing it so fast and this is your field that we're flushing into society a field that we're flushing into society a field that we're flushing into society a series of young people who are so series of young people who are so series of young people who are so ready for addiction because they're so ready for addiction because they're so ready for addiction because they're so used to getting an automatic dopa by used to getting an automatic dopa by used to getting an automatic dopa by just flipping out their phone really just flipping out their phone really just flipping out their phone really fast. One thing that um I don't think fast. One thing that um I don't think fast. One thing that um I don't think I've emphasized enough on this podcast I've emphasized enough on this podcast I've emphasized enough on this podcast this and certainly not this but other this and certainly not this but other this and certainly not this but other episodes as well is um a kind of reframe episodes as well is um a kind of reframe episodes as well is um a kind of reframe around the dopamine and phones. I'm not around the dopamine and phones. I'm not around the dopamine and phones. I'm not trying to correct you here but I think trying to correct you here but I think trying to correct you here but I think it might be helpful for this discussion it might be helpful for this discussion it might be helpful for this discussion and for people listening to um we need and for people listening to um we need and for people listening to um we need to move our minds away from the idea to move our minds away from the idea to move our minds away from the idea that the phone is providing these that the phone is providing these that the phone is providing these dopamine hits because it's not. dopamine hits because it's not. dopamine hits because it's not. The behavior with The behavior with The behavior with social media, but phones generally is a social media, but phones generally is a social media, but phones generally is a lot more akin to true clinical grade lot more akin to true clinical grade lot more akin to true clinical grade obsessivecompulsive disorder. obsessivecompulsive disorder. obsessivecompulsive disorder. &gt;&gt; Colleagues of mine that work on &gt;&gt; Colleagues of mine that work on &gt;&gt; Colleagues of mine that work on obsessivempulsive disorder. I just want obsessivempulsive disorder. I just want obsessivempulsive disorder. I just want to give a shout out to the pioneer to give a shout out to the pioneer to give a shout out to the pioneer of this field was a woman I just of this field was a woman I just of this field was a woman I just adored, Judith Rapaort. She passed away adored, Judith Rapaort. She passed away adored, Judith Rapaort. She passed away recently. People can look up her obit. recently. People can look up her obit. recently. People can look up her obit. There's a really nice one in the times. There's a really nice one in the times. There's a really nice one in the times. Identified the brain structures Identified the brain structures Identified the brain structures associated with this thing that we call associated with this thing that we call associated with this thing that we call OCD, right? handashing, scratching, hair OCD, right? handashing, scratching, hair OCD, right? handashing, scratching, hair pulling, you know, all the variations of pulling, you know, all the variations of pulling, you know, all the variations of it. What defines obsessivecompulsive it. What defines obsessivecompulsive it. What defines obsessivecompulsive disorder is that the engagement in the disorder is that the engagement in the disorder is that the engagement in the behavior, the compulsion doesn't behavior, the compulsion doesn't behavior, the compulsion doesn't relieve the obsession. So to call relieve the obsession. So to call relieve the obsession. So to call someone OCD because they need everything someone OCD because they need everything someone OCD because they need everything perfect, but then when it's perfect, but then when it's perfect, but then when it's perfect, they're like, "Okay, I can relax." they're like, "Okay, I can relax." they're like, "Okay, I can relax." That's not OCD. OCD is when you engage That's not OCD. OCD is when you engage That's not OCD. OCD is when you engage in a compulsive behavior over and over in a compulsive behavior over and over in a compulsive behavior over and over again, and all it does is serve to again, and all it does is serve to again, and all it does is serve to reinforce the obsession. That to me more reinforce the obsession. That to me more reinforce the obsession. That to me more closely mimics what I see in terms of closely mimics what I see in terms of closely mimics what I see in terms of phone use phone use phone use &gt;&gt; than the idea that it's like no way this &gt;&gt; than the idea that it's like no way this &gt;&gt; than the idea that it's like no way this amazing thing on the phone that comes amazing thing on the phone that comes amazing thing on the phone that comes every once in a while. But after you've every once in a while. But after you've every once in a while. But after you've spent a day or so on social media or on spent a day or so on social media or on spent a day or so on social media or on YouTube, we are all engaging in a much YouTube, we are all engaging in a much YouTube, we are all engaging in a much more passive slow degradation kind of more passive slow degradation kind of more passive slow degradation kind of way that I'm sure impacts the dopamine way that I'm sure impacts the dopamine way that I'm sure impacts the dopamine pathway. In fact, OCD is directly tied pathway. In fact, OCD is directly tied pathway. In fact, OCD is directly tied to the dopamine pathway. So, I'm not to the dopamine pathway. So, I'm not to the dopamine pathway. So, I'm not divorcing it from dopamine, but I think divorcing it from dopamine, but I think divorcing it from dopamine, but I think if we started to look at our if we started to look at our if we started to look at our relationship to the phone as more of an relationship to the phone as more of an relationship to the phone as more of an induced obsessive compulsive disorder induced obsessive compulsive disorder induced obsessive compulsive disorder &gt;&gt; than an addiction, I actually think &gt;&gt; than an addiction, I actually think &gt;&gt; than an addiction, I actually think that's one of the potential ways out. that's one of the potential ways out. that's one of the potential ways out. Not just con because words matter and Not just con because words matter and Not just con because words matter and concepts matter, but because I think in concepts matter, but because I think in concepts matter, but because I think in order to get out of that loop, you have order to get out of that loop, you have order to get out of that loop, you have to see yourself from the outside and you to see yourself from the outside and you to see yourself from the outside and you have to realize that you're being have to realize that you're being have to realize that you're being hijacked. I think right now there's just hijacked. I think right now there's just hijacked. I think right now there's just so much incentive for being on it, for so much incentive for being on it, for so much incentive for being on it, for being in the bathroom, you looking at being in the bathroom, you looking at being in the bathroom, you looking at the phone. the phone. the phone. &gt;&gt; Look, I'm not addicted to my phone, but &gt;&gt; Look, I'm not addicted to my phone, but &gt;&gt; Look, I'm not addicted to my phone, but I will tell you there are days when I will tell you there are days when I will tell you there are days when I feel like I pick up that thing even feel like I pick up that thing even feel like I pick up that thing even though I don't want to. though I don't want to. though I don't want to. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And that's different than addiction. I &gt;&gt; And that's different than addiction. I &gt;&gt; And that's different than addiction. I know what addiction feels like. That's know what addiction feels like. That's know what addiction feels like. That's not addiction. That's happening just not addiction. That's happening just not addiction. That's happening just reflexively. People aren't even thinking reflexively. People aren't even thinking reflexively. People aren't even thinking about it. The lack of awareness is about it. The lack of awareness is about it. The lack of awareness is just not there. So, you know, forgive me just not there. So, you know, forgive me just not there. So, you know, forgive me for going on this on this tangent, but for going on this on this tangent, but for going on this on this tangent, but as you're saying everything today, I'm as you're saying everything today, I'm as you're saying everything today, I'm trying to think solutions and I trying to think solutions and I trying to think solutions and I know Mark. I actually am friendly know Mark. I actually am friendly know Mark. I actually am friendly with Mark. So, I think they care. I do with Mark. So, I think they care. I do with Mark. So, I think they care. I do think they care. I think they've created think they care. I think they've created think they care. I think they've created something so big that it's very hard to something so big that it's very hard to something so big that it's very hard to navigate and keep up with to navigate and keep up with to navigate and keep up with shareholders and all this stuff. But I shareholders and all this stuff. But I shareholders and all this stuff. But I would love to see the world's would love to see the world's would love to see the world's relationship to their phones and social relationship to their phones and social relationship to their phones and social media change so that it is more in our media change so that it is more in our media change so that it is more in our individual control, more uh benevolent, individual control, more uh benevolent, individual control, more uh benevolent, &gt;&gt; but that's against their economic &gt;&gt; but that's against their economic &gt;&gt; but that's against their economic interest and they'll fight that tooth interest and they'll fight that tooth interest and they'll fight that tooth and nail. and nail. and nail. &gt;&gt; But I wonder I wonder if there is a way &gt;&gt; But I wonder I wonder if there is a way &gt;&gt; But I wonder I wonder if there is a way to incentivize that. to incentivize that. to incentivize that. &gt;&gt; Well, let's talk about that. So, &gt;&gt; Well, let's talk about that. So, &gt;&gt; Well, let's talk about that. So, &gt;&gt; I'm trying to think of solutions. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I'm trying to think of solutions. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I'm trying to think of solutions. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, let's move to solutions. Um, one &gt;&gt; So, let's move to solutions. Um, one &gt;&gt; So, let's move to solutions. Um, one antitrust. I don't think I don't think antitrust. I don't think I don't think antitrust. I don't think I don't think Meta should have ever been allowed to Meta should have ever been allowed to Meta should have ever been allowed to buy Instagram. I think their ability, buy Instagram. I think their ability, buy Instagram. I think their ability, their scale of data suppresses any their scale of data suppresses any their scale of data suppresses any formidable competitor. Twothirds of all formidable competitor. Twothirds of all formidable competitor. Twothirds of all social media now goes to one company. social media now goes to one company. social media now goes to one company. And with a lack of competition, there's And with a lack of competition, there's And with a lack of competition, there's really no oxygen for a company that really no oxygen for a company that really no oxygen for a company that might say we're not going to allow might say we're not going to allow might say we're not going to allow 18-year-olds on here. Any content that's 18-year-olds on here. Any content that's 18-year-olds on here. Any content that's incendiary, anything that looks like incendiary, anything that looks like incendiary, anything that looks like it's been weaponized by bots or might be it's been weaponized by bots or might be it's been weaponized by bots or might be from a bad foreign actor, we're not from a bad foreign actor, we're not from a bad foreign actor, we're not going to allow it. I think there's a lot going to allow it. I think there's a lot going to allow it. I think there's a lot of parents and a lot of people that of parents and a lot of people that of parents and a lot of people that would like to be on that platform. The would like to be on that platform. The would like to be on that platform. The game's over. They've won. I don't game's over. They've won. I don't game's over. They've won. I don't think Google should have been allowed to think Google should have been allowed to think Google should have been allowed to buy YouTube. And people say, "Well, buy YouTube. And people say, "Well, buy YouTube. And people say, "Well, they're great companies." If YouTube was they're great companies." If YouTube was they're great companies." If YouTube was divested from Google, the next day divested from Google, the next day divested from Google, the next day YouTube would decide to start a basic YouTube would decide to start a basic YouTube would decide to start a basic search algorithm and Google would start search algorithm and Google would start search algorithm and Google would start another video platform and we'd have two another video platform and we'd have two another video platform and we'd have two competitors and there'd be lower rents competitors and there'd be lower rents competitors and there'd be lower rents on labor and on advertisers. Competition on labor and on advertisers. Competition on labor and on advertisers. Competition is an amazing thing. These companies are is an amazing thing. These companies are is an amazing thing. These companies are a set of distinct monopolies that a set of distinct monopolies that a set of distinct monopolies that extract rents from labor, from the extract rents from labor, from the extract rents from labor, from the consumer, and from the well-being of consumer, and from the well-being of consumer, and from the well-being of America. So antitrust, Senator America. So antitrust, Senator America. So antitrust, Senator Clolobashar has done great work here. Clolobashar has done great work here. Clolobashar has done great work here. Basically, she says, "I'm overrun." Basically, she says, "I'm overrun." Basically, she says, "I'm overrun." She's like, "I got a staff of 60 people. She's like, "I got a staff of 60 people. She's like, "I got a staff of 60 people. There are 200 lawyers hired by Meta and There are 200 lawyers hired by Meta and There are 200 lawyers hired by Meta and Facebook who are doing nothing but Facebook who are doing nothing but Facebook who are doing nothing but getting in the way of anything to do getting in the way of anything to do getting in the way of anything to do with antitrust and giving money to with antitrust and giving money to with antitrust and giving money to people who will delay and obuscate people who will delay and obuscate people who will delay and obuscate anything around antitrust. do removal of anything around antitrust. do removal of anything around antitrust. do removal of section 230 for algorithmically elevated section 230 for algorithmically elevated section 230 for algorithmically elevated content. Their basic premise is we're content. Their basic premise is we're content. Their basic premise is we're not in the we're not a media company. not in the we're not a media company. not in the we're not a media company. We're just a platform. We're just We're just a platform. We're just We're just a platform. We're just putting stuff on a board. Well, okay. putting stuff on a board. Well, okay. putting stuff on a board. Well, okay. But if you decide this content gets more But if you decide this content gets more But if you decide this content gets more views, they elevate it. They make the views, they elevate it. They make the views, they elevate it. They make the decision to elevate it. And sometimes decision to elevate it. And sometimes decision to elevate it. And sometimes the content they elevate is not good for the content they elevate is not good for the content they elevate is not good for the mental health of America. It tears the mental health of America. It tears the mental health of America. It tears of the fabric of America. I think if you of the fabric of America. I think if you of the fabric of America. I think if you al algorithmically elevate content, you al algorithmically elevate content, you al algorithmically elevate content, you should be subject to the same liability should be subject to the same liability should be subject to the same liability as say Newscore. When News Corp and Fox as say Newscore. When News Corp and Fox as say Newscore. When News Corp and Fox told its on-air anchors to repeat a lie told its on-air anchors to repeat a lie told its on-air anchors to repeat a lie that they knew was a lie that Smartmatic that they knew was a lie that Smartmatic that they knew was a lie that Smartmatic voting machines had been weaponized by voting machines had been weaponized by voting machines had been weaponized by Ugo Chavez and they knew it was a lie Ugo Chavez and they knew it was a lie Ugo Chavez and they knew it was a lie and then Smartmatic sues them and says and then Smartmatic sues them and says and then Smartmatic sues them and says you caused us economic harm. They had to you caused us economic harm. They had to you caused us economic harm. They had to pay $750 million fine. What happened on pay $750 million fine. What happened on pay $750 million fine. What happened on Fox was a dumpster fire compared to the Fox was a dumpster fire compared to the Fox was a dumpster fire compared to the nuclear mushroom cloud of what happened nuclear mushroom cloud of what happened nuclear mushroom cloud of what happened on Facebook that day. But these naent on Facebook that day. But these naent on Facebook that day. But these naent platforms which in 1997 we were trying platforms which in 1997 we were trying platforms which in 1997 we were trying to give them running room. Those to give them running room. Those to give them running room. Those protections are in place for tech protections are in place for tech protections are in place for tech platforms that are not in place for platforms that are not in place for platforms that are not in place for media companies. So if you media companies. So if you media companies. So if you algorithmically elevate content, you are algorithmically elevate content, you are algorithmically elevate content, you are now a media company. You should be now a media company. You should be now a media company. You should be subject to the same liability as every subject to the same liability as every subject to the same liability as every other media company. And then finally other media company. And then finally other media company. And then finally three, agegate this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] The downside three, agegate this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] The downside three, agegate this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] The downside of Instagram and YouTube for 15 year of Instagram and YouTube for 15 year of Instagram and YouTube for 15 year olds is way greater than the upside. And olds is way greater than the upside. And olds is way greater than the upside. And people who say to me, "Scott, this is people who say to me, "Scott, this is people who say to me, "Scott, this is about parenting." That's a tell for they about parenting." That's a tell for they about parenting." That's a tell for they don't have kids. This is where they get don't have kids. This is where they get don't have kids. This is where they get their homework. And my colleague at NYU, their homework. And my colleague at NYU, their homework. And my colleague at NYU, Adam Alter, who also has an appointment Adam Alter, who also has an appointment Adam Alter, who also has an appointment at the psychology department, said when at the psychology department, said when at the psychology department, said when you take kids off of screens totally, it you take kids off of screens totally, it you take kids off of screens totally, it actually is more damaging to their actually is more damaging to their actually is more damaging to their mental health because they're ostracized mental health because they're ostracized mental health because they're ostracized from all social activity. So, and what's from all social activity. So, and what's from all social activity. So, and what's happened, the greatest uptick in school happened, the greatest uptick in school happened, the greatest uptick in school scores in recent history is when they do scores in recent history is when they do scores in recent history is when they do what my buddy Jonathan Hyde suggests do, what my buddy Jonathan Hyde suggests do, what my buddy Jonathan Hyde suggests do, these schools do, and they ban their these schools do, and they ban their these schools do, and they ban their phones. So, I think there are common phones. So, I think there are common phones. So, I think there are common sense solutions that keep a lot of the sense solutions that keep a lot of the sense solutions that keep a lot of the good stuff these companies do while good stuff these companies do while good stuff these companies do while recognizing, well, maybe a 14-year-old recognizing, well, maybe a 14-year-old recognizing, well, maybe a 14-year-old shouldn't be spending seven hours a day shouldn't be spending seven hours a day shouldn't be spending seven hours a day on Tik Tok or Instagram while his or her on Tik Tok or Instagram while his or her on Tik Tok or Instagram while his or her single mother is at work and can't single mother is at work and can't single mother is at work and can't police it. So, I think there are common police it. So, I think there are common police it. So, I think there are common sense solutions and a meeting of the sense solutions and a meeting of the sense solutions and a meeting of the minds here, but everything I propose, minds here, but everything I propose, minds here, but everything I propose, they will spend tens if not hundreds of they will spend tens if not hundreds of they will spend tens if not hundreds of millions of dollars to get in the way of millions of dollars to get in the way of millions of dollars to get in the way of and make sure it never happens again. and make sure it never happens again. and make sure it never happens again. &gt;&gt; I really appreciate your answer. I &gt;&gt; I really appreciate your answer. I &gt;&gt; I really appreciate your answer. I like to think that they are listening, like to think that they are listening, like to think that they are listening, especially in the wake of these recent especially in the wake of these recent especially in the wake of these recent lawsuits um where they had to pay out, lawsuits um where they had to pay out, lawsuits um where they had to pay out, granted a drop in the ocean compared to granted a drop in the ocean compared to granted a drop in the ocean compared to their total revenue. But those were very their total revenue. But those were very their total revenue. But those were very public cases and maybe I'm overly public cases and maybe I'm overly public cases and maybe I'm overly optimistic. I like to think that they optimistic. I like to think that they optimistic. I like to think that they care enough to pay attention. I mean, care enough to pay attention. I mean, care enough to pay attention. I mean, look, many of those guys, it's mostly look, many of those guys, it's mostly look, many of those guys, it's mostly guys running those companies. Now, guys running those companies. Now, guys running those companies. Now, YouTube used to be a woman, but now most YouTube used to be a woman, but now most YouTube used to be a woman, but now most all of them are run by guys. They have all of them are run by guys. They have all of them are run by guys. They have kids. I can guarantee their kids don't kids. I can guarantee their kids don't kids. I can guarantee their kids don't spend a ton of time on their phones that spend a ton of time on their phones that spend a ton of time on their phones that they're &gt;&gt; they send them to schools that are not &gt;&gt; they send them to schools that are not &gt;&gt; they send them to schools that are not allowed to be on screens, allowed to be on screens, allowed to be on screens, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; They're doing their job. We're not doing &gt;&gt; They're doing their job. We're not doing &gt;&gt; They're doing their job. We're not doing ours. I don't even kind of resent them. ours. I don't even kind of resent them. ours. I don't even kind of resent them. I think Mark Zuckerberg has been I think Mark Zuckerberg has been I think Mark Zuckerberg has been especially damaging, but they're doing especially damaging, but they're doing especially damaging, but they're doing their job. Capitalist society has to their job. Capitalist society has to their job. Capitalist society has to have for-profit companies that within have for-profit companies that within have for-profit companies that within the bounds of law make a lot of money. the bounds of law make a lot of money. the bounds of law make a lot of money. Look, you can't you can't have a navy. Look, you can't you can't have a navy. Look, you can't you can't have a navy. You can't have innovation. You can't You can't have innovation. You can't You can't have innovation. You can't have, you know, parks unless you have have, you know, parks unless you have have, you know, parks unless you have the tax revenue to support this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the tax revenue to support this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the tax revenue to support this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] So, we need our thoroughbreds to run. So, we need our thoroughbreds to run. So, we need our thoroughbreds to run. They're great companies, but there's They're great companies, but there's They're great companies, but there's basic common sense regulation that basic common sense regulation that basic common sense regulation that should be applied that they've managed should be applied that they've managed should be applied that they've managed to delay and opuscate and ensure it to delay and opuscate and ensure it to delay and opuscate and ensure it never happens to them. never happens to them. never happens to them. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives insights into your heart health, hormone insights into your heart health, hormone insights into your heart health, hormone health, autoimmune function, nutrient health, autoimmune function, nutrient health, autoimmune function, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also levels, and much more. They've also levels, and much more. They've also recently added access to advanced MRI recently added access to advanced MRI recently added access to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function not only provides and CT scans. Function not only provides and CT scans. Function not only provides testing of over 160 biomarkers key to testing of over 160 biomarkers key to testing of over 160 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, it also your physical and mental health, it also your physical and mental health, it also analyzes these results and provides analyzes these results and provides analyzes these results and provides recommendations for improving your recommendations for improving your recommendations for improving your health from top doctors. For example, in health from top doctors. For example, in health from top doctors. For example, in a recent test with function, I learned a recent test with function, I learned a recent test with function, I learned that some of my blood lipids were that some of my blood lipids were that some of my blood lipids were slightly out of range. As a result, I slightly out of range. As a result, I slightly out of range. As a result, I decided to start supplementing with decided to start supplementing with decided to start supplementing with nattokinise, which can naturally help nattokinise, which can naturally help nattokinise, which can naturally help reduce LDL cholesterol. And it did. In a reduce LDL cholesterol. And it did. In a reduce LDL cholesterol. And it did. In a follow-up test, I could confirm that follow-up test, I could confirm that follow-up test, I could confirm that this strategy worked. My blood lipids this strategy worked. My blood lipids this strategy worked. My blood lipids are now back where I want them in range. are now back where I want them in range. are now back where I want them in range. Comprehensive lab testing of the sort Comprehensive lab testing of the sort Comprehensive lab testing of the sort that Function offers is so important for that Function offers is so important for that Function offers is so important for health. And while I've been doing it for health. And while I've been doing it for health. And while I've been doing it for years, it's always been overly years, it's always been overly years, it's always been overly complicated and expensive. But now with complicated and expensive. But now with complicated and expensive. But now with Function, it's extremely easy and Function, it's extremely easy and Function, it's extremely easy and affordable. To learn more, visit affordable. To learn more, visit affordable. To learn more, visit functionhealth.com/huberman and use the code hubman for a $50 credit and use the code hubman for a $50 credit and use the code hubman for a $50 credit towards your membership. towards your membership. towards your membership. &gt;&gt; Glad you mentioned the Navy. Recently, I &gt;&gt; Glad you mentioned the Navy. Recently, I &gt;&gt; Glad you mentioned the Navy. Recently, I w was invited out to the Naval Academy w was invited out to the Naval Academy w was invited out to the Naval Academy in Annapolis, and was had the privilege in Annapolis, and was had the privilege in Annapolis, and was had the privilege of giving a talk to 4,000 midshipmen, of giving a talk to 4,000 midshipmen, of giving a talk to 4,000 midshipmen, which includes both young men and women. which includes both young men and women. which includes both young men and women. &gt;&gt; It was an amazing experience. I'll tell &gt;&gt; It was an amazing experience. I'll tell &gt;&gt; It was an amazing experience. I'll tell you this, a guy who's been a guest on you this, a guy who's been a guest on you this, a guy who's been a guest on this podcast was the one that organized this podcast was the one that organized this podcast was the one that organized this. Coleman Ruiz has amazing life this. Coleman Ruiz has amazing life this. Coleman Ruiz has amazing life story. He's not particularly public story. He's not particularly public story. He's not particularly public facing, but amazing story um of his own facing, but amazing story um of his own facing, but amazing story um of his own life. Um and okay, so you go there and life. Um and okay, so you go there and life. Um and okay, so you go there and all these young men and women are of all these young men and women are of all these young men and women are of course &gt;&gt; in their, you know, cadet fatigues and &gt;&gt; in their, you know, cadet fatigues and &gt;&gt; in their, you know, cadet fatigues and going about they live two to a dorm going about they live two to a dorm going about they live two to a dorm room. Um they do PT, physical activity room. Um they do PT, physical activity room. Um they do PT, physical activity every morning at 5:00 a.m. Lunch was the every morning at 5:00 a.m. Lunch was the every morning at 5:00 a.m. Lunch was the most incredible experience. most incredible experience. most incredible experience. &gt;&gt; You walk into a dining hall with &gt;&gt; You walk into a dining hall with &gt;&gt; You walk into a dining hall with thousands of men and women. Tons of thousands of men and women. Tons of thousands of men and women. Tons of noise. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; A bell goes off. Everyone's quiet. &gt;&gt; A bell goes off. Everyone's quiet. &gt;&gt; A bell goes off. Everyone's quiet. Everyone sits down. A bell goes off. Everyone sits down. A bell goes off. Everyone sits down. A bell goes off. Everyone starts eating. 15 minutes Everyone starts eating. 15 minutes Everyone starts eating. 15 minutes later, bell goes off. Everyone stands up later, bell goes off. Everyone stands up later, bell goes off. Everyone stands up and walks out. Everyone has to play and walks out. Everyone has to play and walks out. Everyone has to play a sport competitively. a sport competitively. a sport competitively. Everyone there is forbidden from using Everyone there is forbidden from using Everyone there is forbidden from using their phone their phone their phone &gt;&gt; most all of the day and night. One &gt;&gt; most all of the day and night. One &gt;&gt; most all of the day and night. One member of this dormer might be studying member of this dormer might be studying member of this dormer might be studying while their roommate is sleeping. Every while their roommate is sleeping. Every while their roommate is sleeping. Every single question was about how to be a single question was about how to be a single question was about how to be a better human being physically, mentally, better human being physically, mentally, better human being physically, mentally, emotionally. Um, and this visit was emotionally. Um, and this visit was emotionally. Um, and this visit was right in the like early days of the right in the like early days of the right in the like early days of the recent uh war with Iran. So, they have a recent uh war with Iran. So, they have a recent uh war with Iran. So, they have a lot to worry about and they're very lot to worry about and they're very lot to worry about and they're very close to all these things. A young woman close to all these things. A young woman close to all these things. A young woman came up to me and told me that she's came up to me and told me that she's came up to me and told me that she's part of the uh you know the space part of the uh you know the space part of the uh you know the space program now, the military space program. program now, the military space program. program now, the military space program. &gt;&gt; Amazing. Like just a complete contrast &gt;&gt; Amazing. Like just a complete contrast &gt;&gt; Amazing. Like just a complete contrast to everything that we're talking about. to everything that we're talking about. to everything that we're talking about. &gt;&gt; I thought to myself like goodness like &gt;&gt; I thought to myself like goodness like &gt;&gt; I thought to myself like goodness like these people, young people like this these people, young people like this these people, young people like this still exist. still exist. still exist. &gt;&gt; Yeah. All firm handshakes, all eye &gt;&gt; Yeah. All firm handshakes, all eye &gt;&gt; Yeah. All firm handshakes, all eye contact, and by the way, every color you contact, and by the way, every color you contact, and by the way, every color you could possibly imagine. Every color you could possibly imagine. Every color you could possibly imagine. Every color you could possibly imagine, you know, um, could possibly imagine, you know, um, could possibly imagine, you know, um, every stature you could possibly every stature you could possibly every stature you could possibly imagine. Every income class I would ask imagine. Every income class I would ask imagine. Every income class I would ask people, where are you from? You know, people, where are you from? You know, people, where are you from? You know, part of the meet and greet. The problem part of the meet and greet. The problem part of the meet and greet. The problem was they were like, you know, my problem was they were like, you know, my problem was they were like, you know, my problem is I actually want to know about is I actually want to know about is I actually want to know about &gt;&gt; uh what where people are from, what &gt;&gt; uh what where people are from, what &gt;&gt; uh what where people are from, what their name is, what they're interested their name is, what they're interested their name is, what they're interested in, that it can just take days, right? in, that it can just take days, right? in, that it can just take days, right? But it was incredible. But it was incredible. But it was incredible. &gt;&gt; And I thought to myself, okay, there's &gt;&gt; And I thought to myself, okay, there's &gt;&gt; And I thought to myself, okay, there's hope. Like we came out of there, our hope. Like we came out of there, our hope. Like we came out of there, our team was like, "Yeah, like there's team was like, "Yeah, like there's team was like, "Yeah, like there's hope." Okay, it's associated with the hope." Okay, it's associated with the hope." Okay, it's associated with the military. I'm sure people will military. I'm sure people will military. I'm sure people will scratch at that point, but scratch at that point, but scratch at that point, but &gt;&gt; like thank God that these kids and this &gt;&gt; like thank God that these kids and this &gt;&gt; like thank God that these kids and this thing that we call the Navy exists. thing that we call the Navy exists. thing that we call the Navy exists. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Because it gives it was so inspiring. I &gt;&gt; Because it gives it was so inspiring. I &gt;&gt; Because it gives it was so inspiring. I It made me level up as a 50-year-old man It made me level up as a 50-year-old man It made me level up as a 50-year-old man who thinks these guys [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mostly who thinks these guys [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mostly who thinks these guys [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mostly together. Emphasis on mostly. I was together. Emphasis on mostly. I was together. Emphasis on mostly. I was like, "Whoa, I like step it up." Now, like, "Whoa, I like step it up." Now, like, "Whoa, I like step it up." Now, probably their only quote unquote flaw probably their only quote unquote flaw probably their only quote unquote flaw was I did a poll. There were a lot of was I did a poll. There were a lot of was I did a poll. There were a lot of questions about nicotine questions about nicotine questions about nicotine &gt;&gt; and I asked approximately what &gt;&gt; and I asked approximately what &gt;&gt; and I asked approximately what percentage of the room takes nicotine percentage of the room takes nicotine percentage of the room takes nicotine every day and I would say about 20 to every day and I would say about 20 to every day and I would say about 20 to 30% of the hands in the room went up. 30% of the hands in the room went up. 30% of the hands in the room went up. Nicotine is in major use in young people Nicotine is in major use in young people Nicotine is in major use in young people &gt;&gt; using the &gt;&gt; using the &gt;&gt; using the &gt;&gt; the oral nicotines. Yeah. Which by the &gt;&gt; the oral nicotines. Yeah. Which by the &gt;&gt; the oral nicotines. Yeah. Which by the way don't cause cancer but yes is very way don't cause cancer but yes is very way don't cause cancer but yes is very addictive. Raise blood pressure and you addictive. Raise blood pressure and you addictive. Raise blood pressure and you know I I'm not encouraging people to do know I I'm not encouraging people to do know I I'm not encouraging people to do it. But this brings me around to a it. But this brings me around to a it. But this brings me around to a separate point. I just wanted to kind of separate point. I just wanted to kind of separate point. I just wanted to kind of paint that picture but to a separate paint that picture but to a separate paint that picture but to a separate point. You and I have never had a public point. You and I have never had a public point. You and I have never had a public argument, nor are we going to now, about argument, nor are we going to now, about argument, nor are we going to now, about alcohol or about cannabis, but you and I alcohol or about cannabis, but you and I alcohol or about cannabis, but you and I share somewhat different views on share somewhat different views on share somewhat different views on alcohol. I've been alcohol. I've been alcohol. I've been &gt;&gt; very uh vocal. Um, and perhaps our most &gt;&gt; very uh vocal. Um, and perhaps our most &gt;&gt; very uh vocal. Um, and perhaps our most popular episode ever was an episode on popular episode ever was an episode on popular episode ever was an episode on alcohol. I didn't foresee that, but alcohol. I didn't foresee that, but alcohol. I didn't foresee that, but &gt;&gt; um, and the deal is zero is better than &gt;&gt; um, and the deal is zero is better than &gt;&gt; um, and the deal is zero is better than any if we're strictly looking at health. any if we're strictly looking at health. any if we're strictly looking at health. Two per week is probably fine. If you're Two per week is probably fine. If you're Two per week is probably fine. If you're going to drink more, you should probably going to drink more, you should probably going to drink more, you should probably do a bunch of other things to reduce do a bunch of other things to reduce do a bunch of other things to reduce inflammation and offset it and get good inflammation and offset it and get good inflammation and offset it and get good sleep and etc., etc. sleep and etc., etc. sleep and etc., etc. &gt;&gt; I'm not telling people what to do. They &gt;&gt; I'm not telling people what to do. They &gt;&gt; I'm not telling people what to do. They should just know what they're doing. should just know what they're doing. should just know what they're doing. &gt;&gt; You've made the argument quite aptly &gt;&gt; You've made the argument quite aptly &gt;&gt; You've made the argument quite aptly that alcohol can be an important social that alcohol can be an important social that alcohol can be an important social lubricant for lubricant for lubricant for &gt;&gt; young and older people &gt;&gt; young and older people &gt;&gt; young and older people &gt;&gt; so that they can socialize and have a &gt;&gt; so that they can socialize and have a &gt;&gt; so that they can socialize and have a life. &gt;&gt; I worry that if young people now drink &gt;&gt; I worry that if young people now drink &gt;&gt; I worry that if young people now drink more, they're going to end up drinking more, they're going to end up drinking more, they're going to end up drinking alone. They're gonna end up alone. They're gonna end up alone. They're gonna end up &gt;&gt; masturbating into porn more alone. &gt;&gt; masturbating into porn more alone. &gt;&gt; masturbating into porn more alone. &gt;&gt; They're gonna end up with more hangovers &gt;&gt; They're gonna end up with more hangovers &gt;&gt; They're gonna end up with more hangovers after all their alone behavior. I think after all their alone behavior. I think after all their alone behavior. I think what you've argued for is the notion of what you've argued for is the notion of what you've argued for is the notion of healthy fraternity, healthy fraternity, healthy fraternity, healthy &gt;&gt; dating and &gt;&gt; dating and &gt;&gt; dating and &gt;&gt; socializing. You've mentioned bars a &gt;&gt; socializing. You've mentioned bars a &gt;&gt; socializing. You've mentioned bars a couple times, alcohol as something that couple times, alcohol as something that couple times, alcohol as something that can bring people together in a positive can bring people together in a positive can bring people together in a positive way. Mhm. way. Mhm. way. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um, if you don't mind, if you could &gt;&gt; Um, if you don't mind, if you could &gt;&gt; Um, if you don't mind, if you could elaborate on that and maybe I'll just elaborate on that and maybe I'll just elaborate on that and maybe I'll just toss out cannabis as another one toss out cannabis as another one toss out cannabis as another one because cannabis has problems and I I'll because cannabis has problems and I I'll because cannabis has problems and I I'll acknowledge benefits of its own. acknowledge benefits of its own. acknowledge benefits of its own. &gt;&gt; So, I want to go to the first thing &gt;&gt; So, I want to go to the first thing &gt;&gt; So, I want to go to the first thing first is uh I want to talk just touch on first is uh I want to talk just touch on first is uh I want to talk just touch on Navy. I went to Annapolis when I was 17. Navy. I went to Annapolis when I was 17. Navy. I went to Annapolis when I was 17. And it was because my dad was looking to And it was because my dad was looking to And it was because my dad was looking to get out of paying for college and get out of paying for college and get out of paying for college and decided I should go to Annapolis and he decided I should go to Annapolis and he decided I should go to Annapolis and he took me and we did a tour and it you took me and we did a tour and it you took me and we did a tour and it you know we weren't very sophisticated and know we weren't very sophisticated and know we weren't very sophisticated and it became so clear so fast that I was it became so clear so fast that I was it became so clear so fast that I was totally unqualified for Annapolis. Like totally unqualified for Annapolis. Like totally unqualified for Annapolis. Like the kids the average SAT these are these the kids the average SAT these are these the kids the average SAT these are these are the finest young men and women in are the finest young men and women in are the finest young men and women in the world and also we you have to the world and also we you have to the world and also we you have to get a recommendation from a senator and get a recommendation from a senator and get a recommendation from a senator and it was just so ridiculous that we were it was just so ridiculous that we were it was just so ridiculous that we were even there. I was just not of that even there. I was just not of that even there. I was just not of that quality and that standard. But my dad quality and that standard. But my dad quality and that standard. But my dad was in the Royal Navy and decided go to was in the Royal Navy and decided go to was in the Royal Navy and decided go to Annapolis because we don't have to pay Annapolis because we don't have to pay Annapolis because we don't have to pay for it. Anyways, but that was the last for it. Anyways, but that was the last for it. Anyways, but that was the last time I was at Annapolis. But if I could time I was at Annapolis. But if I could time I was at Annapolis. But if I could have one policy, so I'm advising a lot have one policy, so I'm advising a lot have one policy, so I'm advising a lot of Democrats running for president, of Democrats running for president, of Democrats running for president, which is like 40 of them right now who which is like 40 of them right now who which is like 40 of them right now who all claim they're not running. They're all claim they're not running. They're all claim they're not running. They're all running. If you call me and say all running. If you call me and say all running. If you call me and say you're really interested in my you're really interested in my you're really interested in my viewpoint, it means you want my money viewpoint, it means you want my money viewpoint, it means you want my money and you're running for president. And I and you're running for president. And I and you're running for president. And I just say, "Look, that's fine. Come on just say, "Look, that's fine. Come on just say, "Look, that's fine. Come on the podcast and I'll write you a check." the podcast and I'll write you a check." the podcast and I'll write you a check." If I could have one policy, one blanket, If I could have one policy, one blanket, If I could have one policy, one blanket, if I had a magic one, one policy, it'd if I had a magic one, one policy, it'd if I had a magic one, one policy, it'd be mandatory national service. If you be mandatory national service. If you be mandatory national service. If you look at the lowest levels of young adult look at the lowest levels of young adult look at the lowest levels of young adult depression in the West, it's two depression in the West, it's two depression in the West, it's two countries. It's Israel and Singapore. countries. It's Israel and Singapore. countries. It's Israel and Singapore. And despite all the existential threats And despite all the existential threats And despite all the existential threats facing Israel, uh they what does facing Israel, uh they what does facing Israel, uh they what does man mandatory national service do? It man mandatory national service do? It man mandatory national service do? It gives you the sense that you're serving gives you the sense that you're serving gives you the sense that you're serving the agency of something bigger than the agency of something bigger than the agency of something bigger than yourself. It gives you purpose. You're yourself. It gives you purpose. You're yourself. It gives you purpose. You're handling dangerous equipment. It's the handling dangerous equipment. It's the handling dangerous equipment. It's the great equalizer. You don't care that great equalizer. You don't care that great equalizer. You don't care that this gay kid is totally different than this gay kid is totally different than this gay kid is totally different than you. You respond to his or her you. You respond to his or her you. You respond to his or her character and competence because if character and competence because if character and competence because if you're getting fired on, you don't give you're getting fired on, you don't give you're getting fired on, you don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] how rich their father is. All you a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] how rich their father is. All you a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] how rich their father is. All you want to know is, is this person good at want to know is, is this person good at want to know is, is this person good at what they do? And you put people's lives what they do? And you put people's lives what they do? And you put people's lives in your hands and they put their life in your hands and they put their life in your hands and they put their life in your hands. And you're serving in the in your hands. And you're serving in the in your hands. And you're serving in the in the agency of something bigger than the agency of something bigger than the agency of something bigger than yourself. I spent time with an IDF yourself. I spent time with an IDF yourself. I spent time with an IDF battalion um in Israel and had the same kind of um in Israel and had the same kind of um in Israel and had the same kind of experience it sounds like you had at experience it sounds like you had at experience it sounds like you had at Annapolis. These are young, beautiful, Annapolis. These are young, beautiful, Annapolis. These are young, beautiful, fit people outside all day meeting fit people outside all day meeting fit people outside all day meeting friends, mentors, and mates. In friends, mentors, and mates. In friends, mentors, and mates. In Singapore, the president there, who's Singapore, the president there, who's Singapore, the president there, who's arguably one of the greatest leaders of arguably one of the greatest leaders of arguably one of the greatest leaders of the last century, said, "This is the last century, said, "This is the last century, said, "This is the most religiously diverse society in the most religiously diverse society in the most religiously diverse society in the world. We're going to have ethnic world. We're going to have ethnic world. We're going to have ethnic violence. There'll be a strong man who violence. There'll be a strong man who violence. There'll be a strong man who will weaponize this diversity and get will weaponize this diversity and get will weaponize this diversity and get people to turn against each other. So, people to turn against each other. So, people to turn against each other. So, we need a different religion, and it's we need a different religion, and it's we need a different religion, and it's going to be the flag. And we need to we going to be the flag. And we need to we going to be the flag. And we need to we need to get people praying to the flag need to get people praying to the flag need to get people praying to the flag again." And if you look at the great again." And if you look at the great again." And if you look at the great legislation in America in the 60s and legislation in America in the 60s and legislation in America in the 60s and 70s, which was probably the most 70s, which was probably the most 70s, which was probably the most productive, unified time in America, productive, unified time in America, productive, unified time in America, it's because many of our elected leaders it's because many of our elected leaders it's because many of our elected leaders had all served in the same uniform. And had all served in the same uniform. And had all served in the same uniform. And they saw themselves as Americans before they saw themselves as Americans before they saw themselves as Americans before they saw themselves as Republicans or they saw themselves as Republicans or they saw themselves as Republicans or Democrats. And I'm not just saying Democrats. And I'm not just saying Democrats. And I'm not just saying military service, senior care, donating military service, senior care, donating military service, senior care, donating time at a no-kill animal shelter, being time at a no-kill animal shelter, being time at a no-kill animal shelter, being a smoke jumper. There's a lot of ways to a smoke jumper. There's a lot of ways to a smoke jumper. There's a lot of ways to serve, but I think young Americans would serve, but I think young Americans would serve, but I think young Americans would benefit so enormously from getting benefit so enormously from getting benefit so enormously from getting outside of their own circle and seeing outside of their own circle and seeing outside of their own circle and seeing just how wonderful America and Americans just how wonderful America and Americans just how wonderful America and Americans are and having a chance. And not are and having a chance. And not are and having a chance. And not only that, people say, "Well, it's easy only that, people say, "Well, it's easy only that, people say, "Well, it's easy for you to say you've aged out." I can for you to say you've aged out." I can for you to say you've aged out." I can tell you as a father of boys, if we set tell you as a father of boys, if we set tell you as a father of boys, if we set it up well and invested in it, I think it up well and invested in it, I think it up well and invested in it, I think they would really enjoy a rotation they would really enjoy a rotation they would really enjoy a rotation through different parts of America and through different parts of America and through different parts of America and different opportunities to serve. So the different opportunities to serve. So the different opportunities to serve. So the one thing I would do going back to one thing I would do going back to one thing I would do going back to Annapolis and the IDF and what they do Annapolis and the IDF and what they do Annapolis and the IDF and what they do in Singapore is mandatory national in Singapore is mandatory national in Singapore is mandatory national service on drinking. service on drinking. service on drinking. First, my acknowledgement as it relates First, my acknowledgement as it relates First, my acknowledgement as it relates to the intake of any substance. If it's to the intake of any substance. If it's to the intake of any substance. If it's Andrew Huberman or Scott Galloway, defer Andrew Huberman or Scott Galloway, defer Andrew Huberman or Scott Galloway, defer to Andrew Huberman's advice. I just want to Andrew Huberman's advice. I just want to Andrew Huberman's advice. I just want to say that upfront. You just have the to say that upfront. You just have the to say that upfront. You just have the qualifications and the domain expertise qualifications and the domain expertise qualifications and the domain expertise here. I think personally the risks to a here. I think personally the risks to a here. I think personally the risks to a 25-year-old liver are dwarfed by the 25-year-old liver are dwarfed by the 25-year-old liver are dwarfed by the risks of social isolation. risks of social isolation. risks of social isolation. And I worry that with 40% fewer pubs now And I worry that with 40% fewer pubs now And I worry that with 40% fewer pubs now postco in Britain and a lack of mating postco in Britain and a lack of mating postco in Britain and a lack of mating and a lack of connection that the and a lack of connection that the and a lack of connection that the data I've seen and correct me if I'm data I've seen and correct me if I'm data I've seen and correct me if I'm wrong that 95% of people are able to wrong that 95% of people are able to wrong that 95% of people are able to integrate alcohol and drugs into their integrate alcohol and drugs into their integrate alcohol and drugs into their life without serious consequences. If life without serious consequences. If life without serious consequences. If you have a history of addiction, if you have a history of addiction, if you have a history of addiction, if you uh for whatever reason don't enjoy it, uh for whatever reason don't enjoy it, uh for whatever reason don't enjoy it, then by all means avoid it. If people then by all means avoid it. If people then by all means avoid it. If people are telling you that you're having an are telling you that you're having an are telling you that you're having an issue or a problem or it's getting in issue or a problem or it's getting in issue or a problem or it's getting in the way of your work life or you're one the way of your work life or you're one the way of your work life or you're one of those people that gets violent or of those people that gets violent or of those people that gets violent or mean under the influence, then for God's mean under the influence, then for God's mean under the influence, then for God's sakes, tone it down. But what I ask sakes, tone it down. But what I ask sakes, tone it down. But what I ask people is to look back on their younger people is to look back on their younger people is to look back on their younger days and say, "What is the most days and say, "What is the most days and say, "What is the most important thing in your life? important thing in your life? important thing in your life? Relationships, friendships, finding Relationships, friendships, finding Relationships, friendships, finding someone to mate with." And I ask them, someone to mate with." And I ask them, someone to mate with." And I ask them, "Did alcohol play a role?" You know, "Did alcohol play a role?" You know, "Did alcohol play a role?" You know, it's not easy to come in and lean in for it's not easy to come in and lean in for it's not easy to come in and lean in for a kiss without a glass of wine. Or let a kiss without a glass of wine. Or let a kiss without a glass of wine. Or let me put it this way, it is easier with a me put it this way, it is easier with a me put it this way, it is easier with a glass of wine. It's a lot of fun. I glass of wine. It's a lot of fun. I glass of wine. It's a lot of fun. I smoked a lot of pot and I drank a lot of smoked a lot of pot and I drank a lot of smoked a lot of pot and I drank a lot of alcohol in my 20s and in college and it alcohol in my 20s and in college and it alcohol in my 20s and in college and it created a lot of wonderful bonding created a lot of wonderful bonding created a lot of wonderful bonding moments. And so what I'm saying there's moments. And so what I'm saying there's moments. And so what I'm saying there's a balance and a tradeoff. And what I a balance and a tradeoff. And what I a balance and a tradeoff. And what I would suggest is that everyone needs to would suggest is that everyone needs to would suggest is that everyone needs to make their own decision. But what scares make their own decision. But what scares make their own decision. But what scares me is the anti-alcohol movement in me is the anti-alcohol movement in me is the anti-alcohol movement in remote work has led to a level of remote work has led to a level of remote work has led to a level of isolation and fewer moments where people isolation and fewer moments where people isolation and fewer moments where people can bond, where people are willing to can bond, where people are willing to can bond, where people are willing to take a risk and go up to a strange take a risk and go up to a strange take a risk and go up to a strange person and say, "Hey, what's going on?" person and say, "Hey, what's going on?" person and say, "Hey, what's going on?" So, I worry that the anti-alcohol So, I worry that the anti-alcohol So, I worry that the anti-alcohol movement, what I see among young people movement, what I see among young people movement, what I see among young people is that while they've demonized alcohol, is that while they've demonized alcohol, is that while they've demonized alcohol, it's not that they're not getting high, it's not that they're not getting high, it's not that they're not getting high, they're just doing a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of drugs. they're just doing a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of drugs. they're just doing a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of drugs. And the thing I don't like about many of And the thing I don't like about many of And the thing I don't like about many of these drugs is that they're more solo these drugs is that they're more solo these drugs is that they're more solo activity or small group activity. I activity or small group activity. I activity or small group activity. I think alcohol is a group of people, I think alcohol is a group of people, I think alcohol is a group of people, I like to think, meeting new strangers. like to think, meeting new strangers. like to think, meeting new strangers. Whereas when I was in college, all the Whereas when I was in college, all the Whereas when I was in college, all the dudes who were doing cocaine were it was dudes who were doing cocaine were it was dudes who were doing cocaine were it was because they had no sexual currency and because they had no sexual currency and because they had no sexual currency and they would sequester a woman who liked they would sequester a woman who liked they would sequester a woman who liked cocaine and go into a bathroom. cocaine and go into a bathroom. cocaine and go into a bathroom. &gt;&gt; That's creepy as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] &gt;&gt; That's creepy as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] &gt;&gt; That's creepy as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] &gt;&gt; Totally creepy as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And eventually &gt;&gt; Totally creepy as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And eventually &gt;&gt; Totally creepy as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And eventually everyone's like, if a dude's into everyone's like, if a dude's into everyone's like, if a dude's into cocaine, it means he has no game. I find cocaine, it means he has no game. I find cocaine, it means he has no game. I find with people when they do drugs, it's a with people when they do drugs, it's a with people when they do drugs, it's a small group of people and they sequester small group of people and they sequester small group of people and they sequester and it's isolating. Whereas with alcohol and it's isolating. Whereas with alcohol and it's isolating. Whereas with alcohol and to a certain extent with marijuana, and to a certain extent with marijuana, and to a certain extent with marijuana, I found it's more social and more I found it's more social and more I found it's more social and more bonding. So absolutely be cognizant of bonding. So absolutely be cognizant of bonding. So absolutely be cognizant of your addiction history. Absolutely. Be your addiction history. Absolutely. Be your addiction history. Absolutely. Be mindful of that or any other substance mindful of that or any other substance mindful of that or any other substance you're addicted to. But I believe, and you're addicted to. But I believe, and you're addicted to. But I believe, and I've said this, I've said this on Bill I've said this, I've said this on Bill I've said this, I've said this on Bill Mer a bunch and I've gotten some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Mer a bunch and I've gotten some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Mer a bunch and I've gotten some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but I think there's some truth here. I but I think there's some truth here. I but I think there's some truth here. I think young people need to drink more, think young people need to drink more, think young people need to drink more, go out, and make a series of bad go out, and make a series of bad go out, and make a series of bad decisions that might pay off. I don't decisions that might pay off. I don't decisions that might pay off. I don't think there's anything wrong with some think there's anything wrong with some think there's anything wrong with some alcohol. I worry that the risks of alcohol. I worry that the risks of alcohol. I worry that the risks of loneliness far outweigh the risks of alcohol and far outweigh the risks of alcohol and far outweigh the risks of alcohol and that alcohol has been demonized as that alcohol has been demonized as that alcohol has been demonized as something that if you take one trip of something that if you take one trip of something that if you take one trip of alcohol, drink of alcohol, you're going alcohol, drink of alcohol, you're going alcohol, drink of alcohol, you're going to get cancer or you're going to become to get cancer or you're going to become to get cancer or you're going to become an addict. And I don't think the data is an addict. And I don't think the data is an addict. And I don't think the data is there to support that. there to support that. there to support that. &gt;&gt; I really appreciate the candid um &gt;&gt; I really appreciate the candid um &gt;&gt; I really appreciate the candid um expression of where you stand. I agree expression of where you stand. I agree expression of where you stand. I agree that isolation is worse than alcohol and that isolation is worse than alcohol and that isolation is worse than alcohol and it's compounded by alcohol. So to make it's compounded by alcohol. So to make it's compounded by alcohol. So to make that uh point clear, I went to UC Santa that uh point clear, I went to UC Santa that uh point clear, I went to UC Santa Barbara. We majored. Barbara. We majored. Barbara. We majored. &gt;&gt; Speaking of alcohol, &gt;&gt; Speaking of alcohol, &gt;&gt; Speaking of alcohol, &gt;&gt; it was like it was part of the general &gt;&gt; it was like it was part of the general &gt;&gt; it was like it was part of the general education. &gt;&gt; I remember they had sand in the dorms. &gt;&gt; I remember they had sand in the dorms. &gt;&gt; I remember they had sand in the dorms. I'm like, why didn't I go to school I'm like, why didn't I go to school I'm like, why didn't I go to school here? &gt;&gt; Well, you know, it did select for &gt;&gt; Well, you know, it did select for &gt;&gt; Well, you know, it did select for alcoholism if people had that alcoholism if people had that alcoholism if people had that predisposition. And you had to be predisposition. And you had to be predisposition. And you had to be disciplined to get your work done. You disciplined to get your work done. You disciplined to get your work done. You know, my messaging around alcohol was um know, my messaging around alcohol was um know, my messaging around alcohol was um it was intended to land in three places. it was intended to land in three places. it was intended to land in three places. One, people who don't like drinking but One, people who don't like drinking but One, people who don't like drinking but felt that they had to got a great reason felt that they had to got a great reason felt that they had to got a great reason to not drink. Many, many people wrote to not drink. Many, many people wrote to not drink. Many, many people wrote to me and said, "Thank you. I always feel me and said, "Thank you. I always feel me and said, "Thank you. I always feel like garbage after drinking. I don't like garbage after drinking. I don't like garbage after drinking. I don't want to drink. Now I understand why want to drink. Now I understand why want to drink. Now I understand why I feel like garbage. I feel like garbage. I feel like garbage. &gt;&gt; It's not that I was casting it toward a &gt;&gt; It's not that I was casting it toward a &gt;&gt; It's not that I was casting it toward a particular age group, but there are many particular age group, but there are many particular age group, but there are many people who hit their 40s or 50s and people who hit their 40s or 50s and people who hit their 40s or 50s and they're like, "God, I'm aging fast and I they're like, "God, I'm aging fast and I they're like, "God, I'm aging fast and I look like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I sleep like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and look like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I sleep like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and look like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I sleep like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and my workouts are no good." And my workouts are no good." And my workouts are no good." And &gt;&gt; you might be drinking too much, right? &gt;&gt; you might be drinking too much, right? &gt;&gt; you might be drinking too much, right? &gt;&gt; And then there are the optimizers. There &gt;&gt; And then there are the optimizers. There &gt;&gt; And then there are the optimizers. There are people that are really just going are people that are really just going are people that are really just going for maximum vitality. not just for maximum vitality. not just for maximum vitality. not just longevity, but maximum vitality, which longevity, but maximum vitality, which longevity, but maximum vitality, which is to me one of the most important is to me one of the most important is to me one of the most important things. In any case, people should do as things. In any case, people should do as things. In any case, people should do as they wish, but know what they're doing, they wish, but know what they're doing, they wish, but know what they're doing, provided they're not harming anyone provided they're not harming anyone provided they're not harming anyone else. There's one thing that I want to else. There's one thing that I want to else. There's one thing that I want to &gt;&gt; kind of, you know, lump in with this &gt;&gt; kind of, you know, lump in with this &gt;&gt; kind of, you know, lump in with this discussion about alcohol and your discussion about alcohol and your discussion about alcohol and your statement, which on the top contour I statement, which on the top contour I statement, which on the top contour I totally agree with. Go out, drink, and totally agree with. Go out, drink, and totally agree with. Go out, drink, and make a few bad decisions and probably make a few bad decisions and probably make a few bad decisions and probably some good ones, but uh badish. some good ones, but uh badish. some good ones, but uh badish. &gt;&gt; Badish. Right. So, this is the thing. &gt;&gt; Badish. Right. So, this is the thing. &gt;&gt; Badish. Right. So, this is the thing. Phones. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Somebody says the wrong thing, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Somebody says the wrong thing, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Somebody says the wrong thing, they loosen up too much. Now it's not a they loosen up too much. Now it's not a they loosen up too much. Now it's not a problem. Three years ago, you might be problem. Three years ago, you might be problem. Three years ago, you might be sitting in front of HR. sitting in front of HR. sitting in front of HR. &gt;&gt; You might, your classmates might isolate &gt;&gt; You might, your classmates might isolate &gt;&gt; You might, your classmates might isolate you, right? You were in a fraternity. I you, right? You were in a fraternity. I you, right? You were in a fraternity. I was in a fraternity. I grew up in the was in a fraternity. I grew up in the was in a fraternity. I grew up in the fraternity of skateboarding, punk rock fraternity of skateboarding, punk rock fraternity of skateboarding, punk rock music, and just the fraternity of Y music, and just the fraternity of Y music, and just the fraternity of Y chromosomes. Guys drink, they start chromosomes. Guys drink, they start chromosomes. Guys drink, they start saying stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] saying stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] saying stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] &gt;&gt; With phones around, stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is &gt;&gt; With phones around, stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is &gt;&gt; With phones around, stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is recorded. &gt;&gt; When stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is recorded, it can be &gt;&gt; When stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is recorded, it can be &gt;&gt; When stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is recorded, it can be very harmful. Mhm. very harmful. Mhm. very harmful. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And when you're drinking, you make less &gt;&gt; And when you're drinking, you make less &gt;&gt; And when you're drinking, you make less filtered decisions about what to say filtered decisions about what to say filtered decisions about what to say &gt;&gt; than when you're not drinking. So, I'm &gt;&gt; than when you're not drinking. So, I'm &gt;&gt; than when you're not drinking. So, I'm not pushing back in that sense, but I not pushing back in that sense, but I not pushing back in that sense, but I could understand why a guy in his 20s or could understand why a guy in his 20s or could understand why a guy in his 20s or 30s would be afraid. A guy that would 30s would be afraid. A guy that would 30s would be afraid. A guy that would never ever push himself on a woman, never ever push himself on a woman, never ever push himself on a woman, let alone something far worse, would let alone something far worse, would let alone something far worse, would never ever drug somebody or anything. never ever drug somebody or anything. never ever drug somebody or anything. So, I'm not talking about the Bill Cosby So, I'm not talking about the Bill Cosby So, I'm not talking about the Bill Cosby examples or this. I'm talking about the examples or this. I'm talking about the examples or this. I'm talking about the fear that exists in a lot of young the fear that exists in a lot of young the fear that exists in a lot of young guys and probably should exist in a lot guys and probably should exist in a lot guys and probably should exist in a lot of young women too nowadays based on of young women too nowadays based on of young women too nowadays based on what we've observed in cancel culture in what we've observed in cancel culture in what we've observed in cancel culture in particular. I'm just going to say a lot particular. I'm just going to say a lot particular. I'm just going to say a lot of white women are afraid of the Karen of white women are afraid of the Karen of white women are afraid of the Karen movement. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Right. That if they say anything I think &gt;&gt; Right. That if they say anything I think &gt;&gt; Right. That if they say anything I think even beloved Billy Isish whose music I even beloved Billy Isish whose music I even beloved Billy Isish whose music I love was called out for something. She love was called out for something. She love was called out for something. She she did a sort of impersonation of a she did a sort of impersonation of a she did a sort of impersonation of a Asian person to famous people, right? Asian person to famous people, right? Asian person to famous people, right? Okay. Always going to happen, right? But Okay. Always going to happen, right? But Okay. Always going to happen, right? But people see famous people get into these people see famous people get into these people see famous people get into these situations, they go, "Oh my gosh." So, situations, they go, "Oh my gosh." So, situations, they go, "Oh my gosh." So, do I think Billy Isish is a No. And I do I think Billy Isish is a No. And I do I think Billy Isish is a No. And I love her music. And she was mortified. love her music. And she was mortified. love her music. And she was mortified. And she apologized. And she apologized. And she apologized. &gt;&gt; But it's enough to make people go &gt;&gt; But it's enough to make people go &gt;&gt; But it's enough to make people go &gt;&gt; 100%. &gt;&gt; 100%. &gt;&gt; 100%. &gt;&gt; And like maybe I just stay in my room &gt;&gt; And like maybe I just stay in my room &gt;&gt; And like maybe I just stay in my room and like scroll on Instagram, you know? and like scroll on Instagram, you know? and like scroll on Instagram, you know? So, you can kind of get why the fear So, you can kind of get why the fear So, you can kind of get why the fear of drinking might also compound some of drinking might also compound some of drinking might also compound some of this, you know, social media stuff that this, you know, social media stuff that this, you know, social media stuff that we're talking about. we're talking about. we're talking about. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I want to acknowledge the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I want to acknowledge the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I want to acknowledge the point. I would like to say or I hope point. I would like to say or I hope point. I would like to say or I hope that at some point I'm really glad a that at some point I'm really glad a that at some point I'm really glad a camera wasn't following me around 24 by7 camera wasn't following me around 24 by7 camera wasn't following me around 24 by7 when I was 18. I can't imagine when I was 18. I can't imagine when I was 18. I can't imagine &gt;&gt; that one time you said that one dumb &gt;&gt; that one time you said that one dumb &gt;&gt; that one time you said that one dumb thing, right? I thing, right? I thing, right? I &gt;&gt; I just can't imagine. What I do think we &gt;&gt; I just can't imagine. What I do think we &gt;&gt; I just can't imagine. What I do think we are headed to though, I'd like to think are headed to though, I'd like to think are headed to though, I'd like to think is that in an era of social media and is that in an era of social media and is that in an era of social media and phones that slowly but surely we're phones that slowly but surely we're phones that slowly but surely we're heading to a point of more grace where heading to a point of more grace where heading to a point of more grace where we forgive people, especially young we forgive people, especially young we forgive people, especially young people. So there, and there's been a people. So there, and there's been a people. So there, and there's been a bunch of movements where a lot of young bunch of movements where a lot of young bunch of movements where a lot of young people did things I really disagreed people did things I really disagreed people did things I really disagreed with on campus after October the 7th. I with on campus after October the 7th. I with on campus after October the 7th. I was less angry at them than some of the was less angry at them than some of the was less angry at them than some of the faculty cuz I'm like, I cut an faculty cuz I'm like, I cut an faculty cuz I'm like, I cut an 18-year-old a lot of grace, right? Or I 18-year-old a lot of grace, right? Or I 18-year-old a lot of grace, right? Or I try to. The thing I would push back on try to. The thing I would push back on try to. The thing I would push back on is that I think there's certain looking is that I think there's certain looking is that I think there's certain looking glasses in people's soul. glasses in people's soul. glasses in people's soul. And one of like how they treat their And one of like how they treat their And one of like how they treat their pets and how they behave when they're pets and how they behave when they're pets and how they behave when they're drunk. And what I find is for people who drunk. And what I find is for people who drunk. And what I find is for people who for every person who would say something for every person who would say something for every person who would say something stupid, there's more people when they stupid, there's more people when they stupid, there's more people when they get drunk who say, you know, I just get drunk who say, you know, I just get drunk who say, you know, I just think you're wonderful. I'm so impressed think you're wonderful. I'm so impressed think you're wonderful. I'm so impressed by you. Or walk up to a woman and say, I by you. Or walk up to a woman and say, I by you. Or walk up to a woman and say, I just love your dress. Or, God, you have just love your dress. Or, God, you have just love your dress. Or, God, you have such a beautiful smile. Or just walk up such a beautiful smile. Or just walk up such a beautiful smile. Or just walk up to her to begin with and say, and to her to begin with and say, and to her to begin with and say, and express interest. Expressing interest to express interest. Expressing interest to express interest. Expressing interest to someone is a wonderful thing. someone is a wonderful thing. someone is a wonderful thing. &gt;&gt; Or do you want to dance? &gt;&gt; Or do you want to dance? &gt;&gt; Or do you want to dance? &gt;&gt; Yeah. It says I It says I saw you and by &gt;&gt; Yeah. It says I It says I saw you and by &gt;&gt; Yeah. It says I It says I saw you and by the way you move and the way you smile I the way you move and the way you smile I the way you move and the way you smile I want you. I'm interested in you. I want you. I'm interested in you. I want you. I'm interested in you. That's a wonderful [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing. And so That's a wonderful [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing. And so That's a wonderful [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing. And so my sense is that for every negative my sense is that for every negative my sense is that for every negative thing, it may of course increase thing, it may of course increase thing, it may of course increase someone's if someone's bad judgment is revealed if someone's bad judgment is revealed if someone's bad judgment is revealed in an awful way, they got bigger in an awful way, they got bigger in an awful way, they got bigger problems in alcohol. What it also does problems in alcohol. What it also does problems in alcohol. What it also does is lower inhibitions. And I generally is lower inhibitions. And I generally is lower inhibitions. And I generally think the majority of people are good think the majority of people are good think the majority of people are good people. And I have found that the people. And I have found that the people. And I have found that the majority of my friends and the majority of my friends and the majority of my friends and the majority of people I'm with of people I'm with of people I'm with when they have a little bit of alcohol, when they have a little bit of alcohol, when they have a little bit of alcohol, it lowers their inhibitions and they're it lowers their inhibitions and they're it lowers their inhibitions and they're more likely to hug you and they're more likely to hug you and they're more likely to hug you and they're more likely to say how much they appreciate likely to say how much they appreciate likely to say how much they appreciate the friendship. You know, the friendship. You know, the friendship. You know, when I when I was younger, I don't know when I when I was younger, I don't know when I when I was younger, I don't know if you ever did this, when I had a few if you ever did this, when I had a few if you ever did this, when I had a few drinks, I used to call my mom, you know, drinks, I used to call my mom, you know, drinks, I used to call my mom, you know, and tell her how much she meant to me. and tell her how much she meant to me. and tell her how much she meant to me. &gt;&gt; Don't let my mom hear that, please. I &gt;&gt; Don't let my mom hear that, please. I &gt;&gt; Don't let my mom hear that, please. I didn't. But I think that alcohol to a didn't. But I think that alcohol to a didn't. But I think that alcohol to a certain extent without getting into certain extent without getting into certain extent without getting into issues of abuse which are much bigger issues of abuse which are much bigger issues of abuse which are much bigger lowers your inhibitions but you get to lowers your inhibitions but you get to lowers your inhibitions but you get to see to a certain extent that real person see to a certain extent that real person see to a certain extent that real person and I know a lot of people will say well and I know a lot of people will say well and I know a lot of people will say well that's pathetic that you have to be the that's pathetic that you have to be the that's pathetic that you have to be the real you under the influence but I think real you under the influence but I think real you under the influence but I think a lot of people reveal some wonderful a lot of people reveal some wonderful a lot of people reveal some wonderful things about themselves and also have things about themselves and also have things about themselves and also have the courage to reveal those things to the courage to reveal those things to the courage to reveal those things to other people and I worry that there's so other people and I worry that there's so other people and I worry that there's so many barriers now that people young many barriers now that people young many barriers now that people young people just aren't connecting. So I just people just aren't connecting. So I just people just aren't connecting. So I just want to acknowledge the point. I think want to acknowledge the point. I think want to acknowledge the point. I think you have to be really cognizant. It's you have to be really cognizant. It's you have to be really cognizant. It's not a great idea unless you know you can not a great idea unless you know you can not a great idea unless you know you can handle alcohol to drink at work at a at handle alcohol to drink at work at a at handle alcohol to drink at work at a at a professional function. It can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up a professional function. It can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up a professional function. It can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up your whole career. Oh, I mean one thing your whole career. Oh, I mean one thing your whole career. Oh, I mean one thing that I observed coming up through the that I observed coming up through the that I observed coming up through the academic ranks and that just I could not academic ranks and that just I could not academic ranks and that just I could not believe it that at every gathering where believe it that at every gathering where believe it that at every gathering where you have graduate students and faculty you have graduate students and faculty you have graduate students and faculty members and postocs they it was like the members and postocs they it was like the members and postocs they it was like the happy hour was like sort of the happy hour was like sort of the happy hour was like sort of the highlight of the meeting for many people highlight of the meeting for many people highlight of the meeting for many people and it became the place where lot you in and it became the place where lot you in and it became the place where lot you in theory everyone meets at the bar to talk theory everyone meets at the bar to talk theory everyone meets at the bar to talk about the data from the day right like about the data from the day right like about the data from the day right like at these meetings in reality at these meetings in reality at these meetings in reality 90% of the problems that existed between 90% of the problems that existed between 90% of the problems that existed between faculty and students and postocs and faculty and students and postocs and faculty and students and postocs and faculty and faculty that were faculty and faculty that were faculty and faculty that were independently married and all that independently married and all that independently married and all that stuff. Alcohol facilitated that. I stuff. Alcohol facilitated that. I stuff. Alcohol facilitated that. I really believe that. I saw it over and really believe that. I saw it over and really believe that. I saw it over and over and overs caused an immense number over and overs caused an immense number over and overs caused an immense number of problems and it was funded by grants. of problems and it was funded by grants. of problems and it was funded by grants. I mean, I'm not like I'm a big I mean, I'm not like I'm a big I mean, I'm not like I'm a big proponent of trying to and I proponent of trying to and I proponent of trying to and I &gt;&gt; have worked very hard on the phone &gt;&gt; have worked very hard on the phone &gt;&gt; have worked very hard on the phone to try and keep NIH funding at least to try and keep NIH funding at least to try and keep NIH funding at least from to not getting cut and it looks from to not getting cut and it looks from to not getting cut and it looks like it hasn't to not get the indirects like it hasn't to not get the indirects like it hasn't to not get the indirects cut. This is a kind of academic, you cut. This is a kind of academic, you cut. This is a kind of academic, you know, inside ball stuff, but looks like, know, inside ball stuff, but looks like, know, inside ball stuff, but looks like, you know, it could be far better, but, you know, it could be far better, but, you know, it could be far better, but, you know, at least the cuts that were you know, at least the cuts that were you know, at least the cuts that were going to happen didn't happen. So, I going to happen didn't happen. So, I going to happen didn't happen. So, I the NIH funded my career. I wouldn't be the NIH funded my career. I wouldn't be the NIH funded my career. I wouldn't be here if it wasn't for the NIH. I had here if it wasn't for the NIH. I had here if it wasn't for the NIH. I had grants, reviewed grants, etc. But the grants, reviewed grants, etc. But the grants, reviewed grants, etc. But the idea that you could spend money on idea that you could spend money on idea that you could spend money on alcohol, right, back way back when and alcohol, right, back way back when and alcohol, right, back way back when and then people were gathering around then people were gathering around then people were gathering around alcohol, it created a lot of problems. alcohol, it created a lot of problems. alcohol, it created a lot of problems. Now, students drinking with other Now, students drinking with other Now, students drinking with other students, less of an issue. students, less of an issue. students, less of an issue. &gt;&gt; Well, let me let me propose some &gt;&gt; Well, let me let me propose some &gt;&gt; Well, let me let me propose some negative reaction. negative reaction. negative reaction. I think they should study and I think they should study and I think they should study and thoughtfully consider lowering the thoughtfully consider lowering the thoughtfully consider lowering the drinking age back to 18. I live in the drinking age back to 18. I live in the drinking age back to 18. I live in the UK and see by your face where this is UK and see by your face where this is UK and see by your face where this is going. I live in the UK. going. I live in the UK. going. I live in the UK. &gt;&gt; Military drinking age 18. I mean, I like &gt;&gt; Military drinking age 18. I mean, I like &gt;&gt; Military drinking age 18. I mean, I like some of the things. some of the things. some of the things. &gt;&gt; Well, if you're in the military, you can &gt;&gt; Well, if you're in the military, you can &gt;&gt; Well, if you're in the military, you can drink under the age of 21 because the drink under the age of 21 because the drink under the age of 21 because the idea is that if you're going to die for idea is that if you're going to die for idea is that if you're going to die for your country, you should be able you're your country, you should be able you're your country, you should be able you're adult enough to order a drink. So, adult enough to order a drink. So, adult enough to order a drink. So, &gt;&gt; at least the logic is there. &gt;&gt; at least the logic is there. &gt;&gt; at least the logic is there. &gt;&gt; That makes sense, right? But in the UK, &gt;&gt; That makes sense, right? But in the UK, &gt;&gt; That makes sense, right? But in the UK, if you're with an adult at a meal, you if you're with an adult at a meal, you if you're with an adult at a meal, you can order a beer at 17. And even without can order a beer at 17. And even without can order a beer at 17. And even without an adult at the age of 18 in a pub, you an adult at the age of 18 in a pub, you an adult at the age of 18 in a pub, you can order a beer. And when my son comes can order a beer. And when my son comes can order a beer. And when my son comes home, he doesn't do it as often as I home, he doesn't do it as often as I home, he doesn't do it as often as I would like, but when my son comes home would like, but when my son comes home would like, but when my son comes home on the weekends from boarding school, I on the weekends from boarding school, I on the weekends from boarding school, I like to take him to a local pub and we like to take him to a local pub and we like to take him to a local pub and we have a beer. And I found out that after have a beer. And I found out that after have a beer. And I found out that after one beer, he's more inclined to tell me one beer, he's more inclined to tell me one beer, he's more inclined to tell me a little bit about what's going on with a little bit about what's going on with a little bit about what's going on with him. And as a father, all you really him. And as a father, all you really him. And as a father, all you really want, you just really want conversation want, you just really want conversation want, you just really want conversation with your kids. You want to know what's with your kids. You want to know what's with your kids. You want to know what's going on with them. And so he doesn't going on with them. And so he doesn't going on with them. And so he doesn't get drunk. He He's not into alcohol. He get drunk. He He's not into alcohol. He get drunk. He He's not into alcohol. He listens to you. He listens to other listens to you. He listens to other listens to you. He listens to other people. is very wary of it. But I find people. is very wary of it. But I find people. is very wary of it. But I find that easing young men and young women that easing young men and young women that easing young men and young women into alcohol into alcohol into alcohol as opposed to 21 and then they kind of as opposed to 21 and then they kind of as opposed to 21 and then they kind of go, I don't know. I wonder if I wonder go, I don't know. I wonder if I wonder go, I don't know. I wonder if I wonder if we should be lowering the drinking if we should be lowering the drinking if we should be lowering the drinking age. And the reason we raised it was age. And the reason we raised it was age. And the reason we raised it was Mothers Against Drunk Driving were very Mothers Against Drunk Driving were very Mothers Against Drunk Driving were very effective and very on point because of effective and very on point because of effective and very on point because of all the young people who were dying in all the young people who were dying in all the young people who were dying in automobile accidents. automobile accidents. automobile accidents. &gt;&gt; Remember that era? &gt;&gt; Remember that era? &gt;&gt; Remember that era? &gt;&gt; I think it's gone way down because of &gt;&gt; I think it's gone way down because of &gt;&gt; I think it's gone way down because of Uber and because of airbags. So, I'm Uber and because of airbags. So, I'm Uber and because of airbags. So, I'm proposing, would it make sense to do a proposing, would it make sense to do a proposing, would it make sense to do a study on whether you'd have more social study on whether you'd have more social study on whether you'd have more social connection and perhaps less alcoholism connection and perhaps less alcoholism connection and perhaps less alcoholism later in life if you let kids ease into later in life if you let kids ease into later in life if you let kids ease into it at the age of 18? And if they can be it at the age of 18? And if they can be it at the age of 18? And if they can be drafted, we're now trying to get, you drafted, we're now trying to get, you drafted, we're now trying to get, you know, the administration is proposing know, the administration is proposing know, the administration is proposing they be drafted. So, if a kid can be they be drafted. So, if a kid can be they be drafted. So, if a kid can be drafted, shouldn't he or she have the drafted, shouldn't he or she have the drafted, shouldn't he or she have the judgment to know when they can order a judgment to know when they can order a judgment to know when they can order a beer or not? beer or not? beer or not? &gt;&gt; All great arguments. I didn't know we &gt;&gt; All great arguments. I didn't know we &gt;&gt; All great arguments. I didn't know we were going to end up with were going to end up with were going to end up with &gt;&gt; Well, when you talk about cannabis, I &gt;&gt; Well, when you talk about cannabis, I &gt;&gt; Well, when you talk about cannabis, I want to get your view. want to get your view. want to get your view. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I smoked a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of pot in &gt;&gt; Yeah. I smoked a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of pot in &gt;&gt; Yeah. I smoked a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of pot in college. I can make a bong out of any college. I can make a bong out of any college. I can make a bong out of any household item. I learned every line household item. I learned every line household item. I learned every line from planet. from planet. from planet. &gt;&gt; Got to make a pipe out of an apple. &gt;&gt; Got to make a pipe out of an apple. &gt;&gt; Got to make a pipe out of an apple. That's a very That's like a 90s trick, That's a very That's like a 90s trick, That's a very That's like a 90s trick, &gt;&gt; dude. That's sophomore. I can I &gt;&gt; dude. That's sophomore. I can I &gt;&gt; dude. That's sophomore. I can I can I can go much better than that. can I can go much better than that. can I can go much better than that. Anyways, but then 22, got a job at Anyways, but then 22, got a job at Anyways, but then 22, got a job at Morgan Stanley, got very focused on Morgan Stanley, got very focused on Morgan Stanley, got very focused on getting my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] together, and I getting my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] together, and I getting my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] together, and I basically didn't smoke for 20 or 25 basically didn't smoke for 20 or 25 basically didn't smoke for 20 or 25 years now. I have trouble sleeping. I years now. I have trouble sleeping. I years now. I have trouble sleeping. I have trouble winding my brain down. And have trouble winding my brain down. And have trouble winding my brain down. And I take edibles. I do edibles probably I take edibles. I do edibles probably I take edibles. I do edibles probably twice a week. If I'm amped or think I'm twice a week. If I'm amped or think I'm twice a week. If I'm amped or think I'm going to have a tough time sleeping, going to have a tough time sleeping, going to have a tough time sleeping, I'll take a 5 milligram edible. The I'll take a 5 milligram edible. The I'll take a 5 milligram edible. The stuff that takes you down, I forget stuff that takes you down, I forget stuff that takes you down, I forget which one that is. And it's been an which one that is. And it's been an which one that is. And it's been an enhancement to my life. But I'm reading enhancement to my life. But I'm reading enhancement to my life. But I'm reading a lot of stuff about potential psychosis a lot of stuff about potential psychosis a lot of stuff about potential psychosis or whatever. or whatever. or whatever. &gt;&gt; Not for you. You're like the psychosis &gt;&gt; Not for you. You're like the psychosis &gt;&gt; Not for you. You're like the psychosis predisposition doesn't apply. You would predisposition doesn't apply. You would predisposition doesn't apply. You would already know. You'd be psychotic by now. already know. You'd be psychotic by now. already know. You'd be psychotic by now. &gt;&gt; There you go. Or I just haven't &gt;&gt; There you go. Or I just haven't &gt;&gt; There you go. Or I just haven't acknowledged it. But it's been accretive acknowledged it. But it's been accretive acknowledged it. But it's been accretive to my life. I really enjoy THC and I to my life. I really enjoy THC and I to my life. I really enjoy THC and I do it packaged so I know where it's come do it packaged so I know where it's come do it packaged so I know where it's come from. I like edibles because I like come from. I like edibles because I like come from. I like edibles because I like the dosing of it. But I would argue that the dosing of it. But I would argue that the dosing of it. But I would argue that THC is um something when my mom had THC is um something when my mom had THC is um something when my mom had stomach cancer. Um I was living with her stomach cancer. Um I was living with her stomach cancer. Um I was living with her and the only thing that worked for her and the only thing that worked for her and the only thing that worked for her nausea was marijuana. And I found nausea was marijuana. And I found nausea was marijuana. And I found myself literally Andrew on the streets myself literally Andrew on the streets myself literally Andrew on the streets of downtown Las Vegas trying to score of downtown Las Vegas trying to score of downtown Las Vegas trying to score marijuana cuz I was too scared to travel marijuana cuz I was too scared to travel marijuana cuz I was too scared to travel with it. And this was 20 July of 2004. with it. And this was 20 July of 2004. with it. And this was 20 July of 2004. And I thought, Jesus Christ, here I am And I thought, Jesus Christ, here I am And I thought, Jesus Christ, here I am on a street corner in this weird place on a street corner in this weird place on a street corner in this weird place in Vegas trying to score marijuana for in Vegas trying to score marijuana for in Vegas trying to score marijuana for my mom who has stomach cancer. So, you my mom who has stomach cancer. So, you my mom who has stomach cancer. So, you know, I think there's some benefits know, I think there's some benefits know, I think there's some benefits to Well, I'll stop there, but THC usage to Well, I'll stop there, but THC usage to Well, I'll stop there, but THC usage I enjoy. I think it's been additive to I enjoy. I think it's been additive to I enjoy. I think it's been additive to my life. my life. my life. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration, can diminish your cognitive dehydration, can diminish your cognitive dehydration, can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for magnesium, and potassium, are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think with THC, it's highly &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think with THC, it's highly &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think with THC, it's highly individual. uh young males in particular individual. uh young males in particular individual. uh young males in particular who have a predisposition genetic who have a predisposition genetic who have a predisposition genetic predisposition to psychosis or bipolar predisposition to psychosis or bipolar predisposition to psychosis or bipolar disorder need to be really careful disorder need to be really careful disorder need to be really careful especially with high concentration THC especially with high concentration THC especially with high concentration THC not just the edibles but they do need to not just the edibles but they do need to not just the edibles but they do need to be careful I think that um young again be careful I think that um young again be careful I think that um young again mostly young men who are challenged with mostly young men who are challenged with mostly young men who are challenged with um apathy obesity self-loathing porn um apathy obesity self-loathing porn um apathy obesity self-loathing porn masturbation addiction shouldn't be masturbation addiction shouldn't be masturbation addiction shouldn't be using THC I think using THC I think using THC I think high agency, that seems to be the term high agency, that seems to be the term high agency, that seems to be the term nowadays, right? Work the guys that nowadays, right? Work the guys that nowadays, right? Work the guys that you mentor, you know, a year in who are you mentor, you know, a year in who are you mentor, you know, a year in who are um working out three times a week and um working out three times a week and um working out three times a week and they're they have a goal and they're they have a goal and they're they have a goal and they're hopefully seeking or in a relationship. hopefully seeking or in a relationship. hopefully seeking or in a relationship. They have a different self view of They have a different self view of They have a different self view of themselves. And um yeah, I don't see themselves. And um yeah, I don't see themselves. And um yeah, I don't see why that couldn't be a part of their why that couldn't be a part of their why that couldn't be a part of their week. It'll nuke their REM sleep, you week. It'll nuke their REM sleep, you week. It'll nuke their REM sleep, you know, to be specific. If they come off, know, to be specific. If they come off, know, to be specific. If they come off, their dreams are going to be wild their dreams are going to be wild their dreams are going to be wild because they'll get more REM sleep. But because they'll get more REM sleep. But because they'll get more REM sleep. But creatives, there are a number of creatives, there are a number of creatives, there are a number of creatives who can use it uh creatives who can use it uh creatives who can use it uh appropriately to increase focus, get appropriately to increase focus, get appropriately to increase focus, get them out of anxiety or get them to cope them out of anxiety or get them to cope them out of anxiety or get them to cope with anxiety. And then there just as with anxiety. And then there just as with anxiety. And then there just as many people that take it and it makes many people that take it and it makes many people that take it and it makes them incredibly anxious. them incredibly anxious. them incredibly anxious. &gt;&gt; So I think it's sort of on what &gt;&gt; So I think it's sort of on what &gt;&gt; So I think it's sort of on what backdrop. And I think the alcohol thing backdrop. And I think the alcohol thing backdrop. And I think the alcohol thing also is on what backdrop. If somebody's also is on what backdrop. If somebody's also is on what backdrop. If somebody's overweight, not working out, you know, a overweight, not working out, you know, a overweight, not working out, you know, a guy in their 20s or 30s that's dealing a guy in their 20s or 30s that's dealing a guy in their 20s or 30s that's dealing with, let's just paint a picture here. with, let's just paint a picture here. with, let's just paint a picture here. He's like playing video games. He's not He's like playing video games. He's not He's like playing video games. He's not like morbidly obese or anything, but like morbidly obese or anything, but like morbidly obese or anything, but he's like kind of overweight and he's like kind of overweight and he's like kind of overweight and he's kind of feels like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] He shouldn't be kind of feels like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] He shouldn't be kind of feels like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] He shouldn't be drinking and smoking weed. He should be drinking and smoking weed. He should be drinking and smoking weed. He should be going to the gym and get himself in going to the gym and get himself in going to the gym and get himself in shape and then maybe have a couple beers shape and then maybe have a couple beers shape and then maybe have a couple beers a week with his buddies. So, the context a week with his buddies. So, the context a week with his buddies. So, the context really matters. really matters. really matters. &gt;&gt; Well, I would argue never do substances &gt;&gt; Well, I would argue never do substances &gt;&gt; Well, I would argue never do substances alone &gt;&gt; and during the week, try not to do &gt;&gt; and during the week, try not to do &gt;&gt; and during the week, try not to do substances if you got to be on point the substances if you got to be on point the substances if you got to be on point the next day. that it's something to be, you next day. that it's something to be, you next day. that it's something to be, you know, it's a recreation. The thing I'm know, it's a recreation. The thing I'm know, it's a recreation. The thing I'm curious to get your take on is one of curious to get your take on is one of curious to get your take on is one of the things I'm working with some young the things I'm working with some young the things I'm working with some young men on is um I think the most men on is um I think the most men on is um I think the most underressearched addiction is porn. And underressearched addiction is porn. And underressearched addiction is porn. And my fear is that my fear is that my fear is that I mean, if you look at what again I go I mean, if you look at what again I go I mean, if you look at what again I go back to big tech, big tech's trying to back to big tech, big tech's trying to back to big tech, big tech's trying to convince young men, why go through the convince young men, why go through the convince young men, why go through the pecking order and the effort of trying pecking order and the effort of trying pecking order and the effort of trying to develop a friend group when you have to develop a friend group when you have to develop a friend group when you have Reddit and Discord? Why go through the Reddit and Discord? Why go through the Reddit and Discord? Why go through the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] of putting on a tie and trying [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] of putting on a tie and trying [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] of putting on a tie and trying to go into the office and make a good to go into the office and make a good to go into the office and make a good living and navigate the corporate world living and navigate the corporate world living and navigate the corporate world when you think you can make money when you think you can make money when you think you can make money trading stocks or crypto on Robin Hood trading stocks or crypto on Robin Hood trading stocks or crypto on Robin Hood or Coinbase? And why would you go or Coinbase? And why would you go or Coinbase? And why would you go through the effort, the expense, the through the effort, the expense, the through the effort, the expense, the potential rejection of trying to have a potential rejection of trying to have a potential rejection of trying to have a kindness practice, look good, work out, kindness practice, look good, work out, kindness practice, look good, work out, endure rejection, all the expenditures endure rejection, all the expenditures endure rejection, all the expenditures of going out and trying to get a date of going out and trying to get a date of going out and trying to get a date when you have lifelike porn. And I'll when you have lifelike porn. And I'll when you have lifelike porn. And I'll use myself as an example. When I was at use myself as an example. When I was at use myself as an example. When I was at UCLA, I graduated from UCLA with a 2.27 GPA, I graduated from UCLA with a 2.27 GPA, I graduated from UCLA with a 2.27 GPA, which isn't easy because it means you which isn't easy because it means you which isn't easy because it means you almost I failed nine classes, right? And almost I failed nine classes, right? And almost I failed nine classes, right? And I still graduated. And by the way, talk I still graduated. And by the way, talk I still graduated. And by the way, talk about a different age. We were both about a different age. We were both about a different age. We were both children of the University of children of the University of children of the University of California, UC San Diego. Talk about how California, UC San Diego. Talk about how California, UC San Diego. Talk about how blessed we are. Talk about how just what blessed we are. Talk about how just what blessed we are. Talk about how just what winds hurricane like winds we had in our winds hurricane like winds we had in our winds hurricane like winds we had in our sales of prosperity. When I applied to sales of prosperity. When I applied to sales of prosperity. When I applied to UCLA, admissions rate was 74%. Now it's UCLA, admissions rate was 74%. Now it's UCLA, admissions rate was 74%. Now it's nine. Graduated with a 2.27. You know nine. Graduated with a 2.27. You know nine. Graduated with a 2.27. You know what happened? Berkeley let me into what happened? Berkeley let me into what happened? Berkeley let me into graduate school with a 2.27 GPA. But graduate school with a 2.27 GPA. But graduate school with a 2.27 GPA. But anyways, back to UCLA. One of my anyways, back to UCLA. One of my anyways, back to UCLA. One of my motivators for going on campus was that motivators for going on campus was that motivators for going on campus was that I there was a non-zero probability that I there was a non-zero probability that I there was a non-zero probability that I might meet a woman, establish contact I might meet a woman, establish contact I might meet a woman, establish contact with her, see my buddies, maybe get her with her, see my buddies, maybe get her with her, see my buddies, maybe get her to a fraternity party, or get her to go to a fraternity party, or get her to go to a fraternity party, or get her to go on a date with me, and maybe at some on a date with me, and maybe at some on a date with me, and maybe at some point be physical with her. That was an point be physical with her. That was an point be physical with her. That was an enormous motivator for me. If I had enormous motivator for me. If I had enormous motivator for me. If I had lifelike porn on my phone on my computer lifelike porn on my phone on my computer lifelike porn on my phone on my computer screen 24 by7, I don't know if I would screen 24 by7, I don't know if I would screen 24 by7, I don't know if I would have been as motivated to go on campus have been as motivated to go on campus have been as motivated to go on campus as much and I there was little margin as much and I there was little margin as much and I there was little margin for error in terms of going on campus a for error in terms of going on campus a for error in terms of going on campus a few less times. And I worry that few less times. And I worry that few less times. And I worry that mojo, that desire to quite frankly go mojo, that desire to quite frankly go mojo, that desire to quite frankly go out and make your own bad porn is being out and make your own bad porn is being out and make your own bad porn is being reduced so much with lifelike porn that reduced so much with lifelike porn that reduced so much with lifelike porn that men aren't evolving into risk-taking, men aren't evolving into risk-taking, men aren't evolving into risk-taking, aggressive in a positive way men who are aggressive in a positive way men who are aggressive in a positive way men who are motivated to dress well, to work out, to motivated to dress well, to work out, to motivated to dress well, to work out, to approach strange women, to go through I approach strange women, to go through I approach strange women, to go through I mean, it is hard. It is hard to find a mean, it is hard. It is hard to find a mean, it is hard. It is hard to find a partner. And what I say to these men is partner. And what I say to these men is partner. And what I say to these men is welcome to the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] work week. It's welcome to the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] work week. It's welcome to the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] work week. It's been hard forever. That's the whole been hard forever. That's the whole been hard forever. That's the whole point. Women are choosier than men. And point. Women are choosier than men. And point. Women are choosier than men. And there's a reason, right? We're trying to there's a reason, right? We're trying to there's a reason, right? We're trying to spread our seat to the four corners of spread our seat to the four corners of spread our seat to the four corners of the earth. They put up a much finer the earth. They put up a much finer the earth. They put up a much finer screen to pick the smartest, fastest, screen to pick the smartest, fastest, screen to pick the smartest, fastest, and strongest seat. And that's the and strongest seat. And that's the and strongest seat. And that's the reason why our kids are going to be reason why our kids are going to be reason why our kids are going to be smarter and taller than us. That's the smarter and taller than us. That's the smarter and taller than us. That's the way of the world. But when you reduce way of the world. But when you reduce way of the world. But when you reduce that desire, it's going to get in the that desire, it's going to get in the that desire, it's going to get in the way of not only you finding a mate, but way of not only you finding a mate, but way of not only you finding a mate, but developing the skills to be successful developing the skills to be successful developing the skills to be successful in all other parts of your life. So, in all other parts of your life. So, in all other parts of your life. So, back to the basic premise, I wonder and back to the basic premise, I wonder and back to the basic premise, I wonder and worry if porn is the most underresarched worry if porn is the most underresarched worry if porn is the most underresarched addiction and the damage it's having on addiction and the damage it's having on addiction and the damage it's having on young men because what I see amongst my young men because what I see amongst my young men because what I see amongst my colleagues and I'd be curious if I colleagues and I'd be curious if I colleagues and I'd be curious if I actually spoke to a really thoughtful actually spoke to a really thoughtful actually spoke to a really thoughtful woman about this who's an addiction woman about this who's an addiction woman about this who's an addiction professor at Stanford. I'm sure you know professor at Stanford. I'm sure you know professor at Stanford. I'm sure you know her. I forget her name. her. I forget her name. her. I forget her name. &gt;&gt; Analym. &gt;&gt; Analym. &gt;&gt; Analym. &gt;&gt; Yeah. She runs our dual diagnosis. &gt;&gt; Yeah. She runs our dual diagnosis. &gt;&gt; Yeah. She runs our dual diagnosis. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. &gt;&gt; Amazing woman. Amazing human being. &gt;&gt; Amazing woman. Amazing human being. &gt;&gt; Amazing woman. Amazing human being. immediately when we got off the podcast immediately when we got off the podcast immediately when we got off the podcast said to me, "If your marijuana ever said to me, "If your marijuana ever said to me, "If your marijuana ever becomes a problem, just call me." And becomes a problem, just call me." And becomes a problem, just call me." And she was sincere. And I'm like, "That's she was sincere. And I'm like, "That's she was sincere. And I'm like, "That's totally, &gt;&gt; do you sense it?" Immediately, &gt;&gt; do you sense it?" Immediately, &gt;&gt; do you sense it?" Immediately, &gt;&gt; she's the real deal. &gt;&gt; she's the real deal. &gt;&gt; she's the real deal. &gt;&gt; I'm like, "Do you sense it's a problem?" &gt;&gt; I'm like, "Do you sense it's a problem?" &gt;&gt; I'm like, "Do you sense it's a problem?" I'm like, "Hold me, Anna." Anyways, but I'm like, "Hold me, Anna." Anyways, but I'm like, "Hold me, Anna." Anyways, but I don't think there's enough really good I don't think there's enough really good I don't think there's enough really good research out there on porn because I research out there on porn because I research out there on porn because I don't think people want to be known as don't think people want to be known as don't think people want to be known as the porn professor. And so, I worry that the porn professor. And so, I worry that the porn professor. And so, I worry that we really don't know the impact. And we really don't know the impact. And we really don't know the impact. And what I see anecdotally is that I see a what I see anecdotally is that I see a what I see anecdotally is that I see a lot of young men who don't have that lot of young men who don't have that lot of young men who don't have that healthy fire because they think that healthy fire because they think that healthy fire because they think that they can just they think oh it's like in they can just they think oh it's like in they can just they think oh it's like in the in the last 20 years the guys who the in the last 20 years the guys who the in the last 20 years the guys who didn't have their own game or didn't have their own game or didn't have their own game or didn't want to be that successful they would go want to be that successful they would go want to be that successful they would go to some low-income country and basically to some low-income country and basically to some low-income country and basically become sex. This has become I think a become sex. This has become I think a become sex. This has become I think a much broader version of that rather much broader version of that rather much broader version of that rather than level up you'd rather just sit home than level up you'd rather just sit home than level up you'd rather just sit home and get a reasonable faximile of a and get a reasonable faximile of a and get a reasonable faximile of a relationship or sex with porn. I wonder relationship or sex with porn. I wonder relationship or sex with porn. I wonder if that is more damaging than if that is more damaging than if that is more damaging than people than uh people estimate right people than uh people estimate right people than uh people estimate right now. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a really important topic &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a really important topic &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a really important topic and it's one that people contact me and it's one that people contact me and it's one that people contact me about all the time. Your analogy of about all the time. Your analogy of about all the time. Your analogy of what's happening with porn to sex. We what's happening with porn to sex. We what's happening with porn to sex. We should probably explain what expats are should probably explain what expats are should probably explain what expats are people that leave the United States. I'm people that leave the United States. I'm people that leave the United States. I'm not sure everyone's going to follow that not sure everyone's going to follow that not sure everyone's going to follow that one. Sex expats are the it's a this one. Sex expats are the it's a this one. Sex expats are the it's a this community of people that what I think community of people that what I think community of people that what I think they go to Southeast Asia or something they go to Southeast Asia or something they go to Southeast Asia or something and um and um and um &gt;&gt; where they can or South America where &gt;&gt; where they can or South America where &gt;&gt; where they can or South America where they can essentially buy whatever they can essentially buy whatever they can essentially buy whatever experience they want experience they want experience they want &gt;&gt; in general. I have to assume I've truly &gt;&gt; in general. I have to assume I've truly &gt;&gt; in general. I have to assume I've truly never done this and nor do I have any never done this and nor do I have any never done this and nor do I have any interest, but I have to assume that interest, but I have to assume that interest, but I have to assume that these are men who just basically figure these are men who just basically figure these are men who just basically figure well that's low effort once they have well that's low effort once they have well that's low effort once they have the money and real dating, real the money and real dating, real the money and real dating, real sex, if I may, you know, um is it takes sex, if I may, you know, um is it takes sex, if I may, you know, um is it takes some work. It takes some learning and some work. It takes some learning and some work. It takes some learning and you know, especially if you want to be you know, especially if you want to be you know, especially if you want to be told genuinely good job and uh and told genuinely good job and uh and told genuinely good job and uh and know that it's true. It's going to take know that it's true. It's going to take know that it's true. It's going to take you're going to you have to get some you're going to you have to get some you're going to you have to get some reps in there. reps in there. reps in there. &gt;&gt; So, um put your ego on the line. um &gt;&gt; So, um put your ego on the line. um &gt;&gt; So, um put your ego on the line. um learn to communicate, learn to listen, learn to communicate, learn to listen, learn to communicate, learn to listen, all that stuff. all that stuff. all that stuff. &gt;&gt; The idea that porn is the much &gt;&gt; The idea that porn is the much &gt;&gt; The idea that porn is the much broader and more destructive um broader and more destructive um broader and more destructive um analogous thing I think is bullseye. analogous thing I think is bullseye. analogous thing I think is bullseye. The moment you said like I think people The moment you said like I think people The moment you said like I think people need to hear that. Do you want to be need to hear that. Do you want to be need to hear that. Do you want to be that guy? I think I think with any that guy? I think I think with any that guy? I think I think with any behavioral change, you know, the behavioral change, you know, the behavioral change, you know, the neuroscientist in me says, okay, we have neuroscientist in me says, okay, we have neuroscientist in me says, okay, we have circuits for kind of like things that circuits for kind of like things that circuits for kind of like things that are aversive to us. Like you have to are aversive to us. Like you have to are aversive to us. Like you have to engage the aversion and you have to engage the aversion and you have to engage the aversion and you have to engage the appetitive aspect, right? engage the appetitive aspect, right? engage the appetitive aspect, right? Right. Like so that there's a win and Right. Like so that there's a win and Right. Like so that there's a win and then there's something to avoid. I then there's something to avoid. I then there's something to avoid. I really think in order to get any real really think in order to get any real really think in order to get any real behavioral change, you need to push away behavioral change, you need to push away behavioral change, you need to push away from something and towards something from something and towards something from something and towards something else. Okay. So I think that porn I mean else. Okay. So I think that porn I mean else. Okay. So I think that porn I mean it's our most fundamental wiring. The it's our most fundamental wiring. The it's our most fundamental wiring. The two the two circuits in the brain that two the two circuits in the brain that two the two circuits in the brain that really crank out dopamine. really crank out dopamine. really crank out dopamine. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Okay. Circuits for reproduction sex. &gt;&gt; Okay. Circuits for reproduction sex. &gt;&gt; Okay. Circuits for reproduction sex. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; And anger. There's this incredible study &gt;&gt; And anger. There's this incredible study &gt;&gt; And anger. There's this incredible study by a very uh controversial guy named by a very uh controversial guy named by a very uh controversial guy named Robert Heath in the 1960s. He was a Robert Heath in the 1960s. He was a Robert Heath in the 1960s. He was a neurosurgeon who would stimulate neurosurgeon who would stimulate neurosurgeon who would stimulate different areas of the brain and um different areas of the brain and um different areas of the brain and um unfortunately he was um into conversion unfortunately he was um into conversion unfortunately he was um into conversion therapy. So, you know, he appropriately therapy. So, you know, he appropriately therapy. So, you know, he appropriately got run out of science for trying to got run out of science for trying to got run out of science for trying to make gay people straight by stimulating make gay people straight by stimulating make gay people straight by stimulating certain areas of the brain. Yeah, he's certain areas of the brain. Yeah, he's certain areas of the brain. Yeah, he's kind of a piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] person. But kind of a piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] person. But kind of a piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] person. But again, let's look at what he did again, let's look at what he did again, let's look at what he did separate from that. Immediately people separate from that. Immediately people separate from that. Immediately people were like, I don't care about his data. were like, I don't care about his data. were like, I don't care about his data. But he gave people with electrodes in But he gave people with electrodes in But he gave people with electrodes in their brain in certain studies the their brain in certain studies the their brain in certain studies the option to stimulate anywhere they option to stimulate anywhere they option to stimulate anywhere they wanted. They could stimulate and get wanted. They could stimulate and get wanted. They could stimulate and get sexual arousal. They could get laughter. sexual arousal. They could get laughter. sexual arousal. They could get laughter. They could feel drunk. all the things They could feel drunk. all the things They could feel drunk. all the things we're talking about really. They could we're talking about really. They could we're talking about really. They could feel soothing of the sort that their feel soothing of the sort that their feel soothing of the sort that their mother was holding them. The area that mother was holding them. The area that mother was holding them. The area that they chose to stimulate the most is in they chose to stimulate the most is in they chose to stimulate the most is in the central midline nucleus of the central midline nucleus of the central midline nucleus of the phalamus, an area that my lab has spent phalamus, an area that my lab has spent phalamus, an area that my lab has spent a lot of time on in other situations. a lot of time on in other situations. a lot of time on in other situations. And they would just lever press and And they would just lever press and And they would just lever press and lever press and lever press for the lever press and lever press for the lever press and lever press for the feeling of mild frustration and anger feeling of mild frustration and anger feeling of mild frustration and anger &gt;&gt; because the arousal associated with it &gt;&gt; because the arousal associated with it &gt;&gt; because the arousal associated with it is its own reinforcement. as a student is its own reinforcement. as a student is its own reinforcement. as a student of mine who's now hopefully soon to be a of mine who's now hopefully soon to be a of mine who's now hopefully soon to be a faculty member. I won't name the faculty member. I won't name the faculty member. I won't name the university, but she has an offer from a university, but she has an offer from a university, but she has an offer from a phenomenal university. Her name is phenomenal university. Her name is phenomenal university. Her name is Lindsay Cleet and she's worked on this Lindsay Cleet and she's worked on this Lindsay Cleet and she's worked on this in a very mechanistic way. When in a very mechanistic way. When in a very mechanistic way. When we're angry, when we're frustrated, we're angry, when we're frustrated, we're angry, when we're frustrated, the link to the dopamine circuitry is the link to the dopamine circuitry is the link to the dopamine circuitry is just pounded out. We just all day long. just pounded out. We just all day long. just pounded out. We just all day long. And what's amazing is it doesn't And what's amazing is it doesn't And what's amazing is it doesn't attenuate. There's no threshold for attenuate. There's no threshold for attenuate. There's no threshold for anger. The more angry you get, the more anger. The more angry you get, the more anger. The more angry you get, the more frustrated you get, the more arousal you frustrated you get, the more arousal you frustrated you get, the more arousal you feel from that. You never satiate. feel from that. You never satiate. feel from that. You never satiate. There's no postcoidal bliss. There's no There's no postcoidal bliss. There's no There's no postcoidal bliss. There's no my belly is so full, I feel like I'm my belly is so full, I feel like I'm my belly is so full, I feel like I'm going to explode. going to explode. going to explode. &gt;&gt; And so this gets to the social media &gt;&gt; And so this gets to the social media &gt;&gt; And so this gets to the social media thing, too. That's the circuit that I thing, too. That's the circuit that I thing, too. That's the circuit that I worry about. And I think that's the worry about. And I think that's the worry about. And I think that's the circuit that yes, I think tech, big tech circuit that yes, I think tech, big tech circuit that yes, I think tech, big tech has tapped into whether they want to or has tapped into whether they want to or has tapped into whether they want to or not. And I think that that's the one we not. And I think that that's the one we not. And I think that that's the one we really have to be careful of. And um and really have to be careful of. And um and really have to be careful of. And um and I've experienced it myself. I think I I've experienced it myself. I think I I've experienced it myself. I think I actually in this moment I'm experiencing actually in this moment I'm experiencing actually in this moment I'm experiencing a little bit of it like that kind of a little bit of it like that kind of a little bit of it like that kind of arousal of like yes the forward arousal of like yes the forward arousal of like yes the forward center of mass that we feel but when center of mass that we feel but when center of mass that we feel but when it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] them like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the Republicans it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] them like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the Republicans it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] them like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the Republicans and you know or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the left or the and you know or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the left or the and you know or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the left or the extreme w I mean that's people are just extreme w I mean that's people are just extreme w I mean that's people are just high all day long on their own anger and high all day long on their own anger and high all day long on their own anger and frustration &gt;&gt; and I think we just see it everywhere &gt;&gt; and I think we just see it everywhere &gt;&gt; and I think we just see it everywhere and I raise my hand I'm sure I'm and I raise my hand I'm sure I'm and I raise my hand I'm sure I'm guilty of this at times too. Yeah, guilty of this at times too. Yeah, guilty of this at times too. Yeah, that's illuminating because I correlate that's illuminating because I correlate that's illuminating because I correlate my anger to a pathway to feeling my anger to a pathway to feeling my anger to a pathway to feeling depressed. I struggle with anger and depressed. I struggle with anger and depressed. I struggle with anger and depression and it usually starts as depression and it usually starts as depression and it usually starts as something triggers me. I get really something triggers me. I get really something triggers me. I get really angry and then I feel like my blood angry and then I feel like my blood angry and then I feel like my blood turns to some sort of corrosive acid and turns to some sort of corrosive acid and turns to some sort of corrosive acid and it just wears me down it just wears me down it just wears me down &gt;&gt; and I'm just replet. I'm just depleted &gt;&gt; and I'm just replet. I'm just depleted &gt;&gt; and I'm just replet. I'm just depleted for two or three days. So, I was I for two or three days. So, I was I for two or three days. So, I was I have a practice around trying to calm my have a practice around trying to calm my have a practice around trying to calm my anger, but just hearing you say that anger, but just hearing you say that anger, but just hearing you say that occasionally on one of my podcasts when occasionally on one of my podcasts when occasionally on one of my podcasts when I see something that's inherently wrong I see something that's inherently wrong I see something that's inherently wrong and I point it out or injust, I do feel and I point it out or injust, I do feel and I point it out or injust, I do feel like a rush, like I'm being a leader or like a rush, like I'm being a leader or like a rush, like I'm being a leader or a baller or pointing something out. a baller or pointing something out. a baller or pointing something out. &gt;&gt; You are. It's I mean, I will say, you &gt;&gt; You are. It's I mean, I will say, you &gt;&gt; You are. It's I mean, I will say, you know, testosterone, a conversation we've know, testosterone, a conversation we've know, testosterone, a conversation we've had a little bit before offline, had a little bit before offline, had a little bit before offline, &gt;&gt; at the level of the brain, it makes &gt;&gt; at the level of the brain, it makes &gt;&gt; at the level of the brain, it makes effort feel good. Mhm. Anyway, I don't effort feel good. Mhm. Anyway, I don't effort feel good. Mhm. Anyway, I don't want to go off on a too much of a want to go off on a too much of a want to go off on a too much of a tangent, but I'd like your thoughts tangent, but I'd like your thoughts tangent, but I'd like your thoughts about how testosterone can be leveraged about how testosterone can be leveraged about how testosterone can be leveraged for good versus bad. And maybe even I for good versus bad. And maybe even I for good versus bad. And maybe even I don't know that we put everyone on don't know that we put everyone on don't know that we put everyone on testosterone. I'm not suggesting that it testosterone. I'm not suggesting that it testosterone. I'm not suggesting that it can nuke your fertility if you don't do can nuke your fertility if you don't do can nuke your fertility if you don't do other things to offset it. So, uh, kids other things to offset it. So, uh, kids other things to offset it. So, uh, kids be careful, but what are your thoughts be careful, but what are your thoughts be careful, but what are your thoughts on testosterone and just sort of on testosterone and just sort of on testosterone and just sort of proactive male behavior, testosterone in adults, male behavior, testosterone in adults, male behavior, testosterone in adults, older generations taking testosterone? older generations taking testosterone? older generations taking testosterone? Well, I'm one of them. I'm on tea Well, I'm one of them. I'm on tea Well, I'm one of them. I'm on tea therapy and I do it because I quite therapy and I do it because I quite therapy and I do it because I quite frankly want to feel younger. It makes frankly want to feel younger. It makes frankly want to feel younger. It makes me stronger in the gym, better me stronger in the gym, better me stronger in the gym, better erections, even weird things like my erections, even weird things like my erections, even weird things like my skin. The way I would describe tea skin. The way I would describe tea skin. The way I would describe tea therapy is it just kind of took me back therapy is it just kind of took me back therapy is it just kind of took me back three or five years to in the gym. So, three or five years to in the gym. So, three or five years to in the gym. So, I'm an advocate for it. I'm You should I'm an advocate for it. I'm You should I'm an advocate for it. I'm You should do it under the guidance of a doctor, do it under the guidance of a doctor, do it under the guidance of a doctor, which I'm doing, but I'm a fan of it. which I'm doing, but I'm a fan of it. which I'm doing, but I'm a fan of it. And I think you've done really And I think you've done really And I think you've done really interesting work about hormone interesting work about hormone interesting work about hormone replacement theory. I've listened to a replacement theory. I've listened to a replacement theory. I've listened to a lot of your work on it. The argument lot of your work on it. The argument lot of your work on it. The argument around testosterone and masculinity, I around testosterone and masculinity, I around testosterone and masculinity, I think, is a really important one in the think, is a really important one in the think, is a really important one in the political spectrum because to the far political spectrum because to the far political spectrum because to the far right's credit, they recognize the right's credit, they recognize the right's credit, they recognize the problem with young men before anybody problem with young men before anybody problem with young men before anybody else. The problem is they conflate else. The problem is they conflate else. The problem is they conflate masculinity with coarseness and cruelty. masculinity with coarseness and cruelty. masculinity with coarseness and cruelty. And their solution was to take And their solution was to take And their solution was to take non-whites and women back to the 50s. non-whites and women back to the 50s. non-whites and women back to the 50s. &gt;&gt; Some of them, I I'm not trying to &gt;&gt; Some of them, I I'm not trying to &gt;&gt; Some of them, I I'm not trying to protect them, but I would say uh you protect them, but I would say uh you protect them, but I would say uh you know, I don't know his political know, I don't know his political know, I don't know his political leanings, but my friend Jaca Willink has leanings, but my friend Jaca Willink has leanings, but my friend Jaca Willink has daughters. He's not that guy you just daughters. He's not that guy you just daughters. He's not that guy you just described. I'm talking about the far described. I'm talking about the far described. I'm talking about the far right. I'm talking about whether it's right. I'm talking about whether it's right. I'm talking about whether it's Donald Trump or the, you know, quote Donald Trump or the, you know, quote Donald Trump or the, you know, quote unquote the traditional manosphere. It's unquote the traditional manosphere. It's unquote the traditional manosphere. It's about the subordination of women and about the subordination of women and about the subordination of women and it's about demonstrating a certain it's about demonstrating a certain it's about demonstrating a certain harshness and coarseness and I would harshness and coarseness and I would harshness and coarseness and I would argue cruelty and conflating that with argue cruelty and conflating that with argue cruelty and conflating that with masculinity. Whereas the far left, and masculinity. Whereas the far left, and masculinity. Whereas the far left, and this isn't helpful either, this isn't helpful either, this isn't helpful either, their advice to young men is to act more their advice to young men is to act more their advice to young men is to act more like a woman and that they conflate like a woman and that they conflate like a woman and that they conflate masculinity with toxicity. And there has masculinity with toxicity. And there has masculinity with toxicity. And there has to be something in the middle. There has to be something in the middle. There has to be something in the middle. There has to be an aspirational form of to be an aspirational form of to be an aspirational form of masculinity. And I would argue that we masculinity. And I would argue that we masculinity. And I would argue that we need to celebrate that initiation need to celebrate that initiation need to celebrate that initiation aggressiveness or you know Jimmy Carr aggressiveness or you know Jimmy Carr aggressiveness or you know Jimmy Carr who's one of my idols now says all right who's one of my idols now says all right who's one of my idols now says all right you can you can demonstrate cruelty or you can you can demonstrate cruelty or you can you can demonstrate cruelty or you can demonstrate valor. You can be a you can demonstrate valor. You can be a you can demonstrate valor. You can be a lover or you can be an addict. And lover or you can be an addict. And lover or you can be an addict. And Richard Reeves has this great saying Richard Reeves has this great saying Richard Reeves has this great saying he's like you want a man to be he's like you want a man to be he's like you want a man to be invaluable in a shipwreck but acceptable invaluable in a shipwreck but acceptable invaluable in a shipwreck but acceptable at a dance. So there is a certain needle at a dance. So there is a certain needle at a dance. So there is a certain needle to be threaded here. But the Carnegie to be threaded here. But the Carnegie to be threaded here. But the Carnegie award which is given out to people who award which is given out to people who award which is given out to people who put their own physical safety in danger put their own physical safety in danger put their own physical safety in danger to save someone else's physical safety. to save someone else's physical safety. to save someone else's physical safety. It's literally the running into a It's literally the running into a It's literally the running into a burning house award. You see a car on burning house award. You see a car on burning house award. You see a car on fire, you put your own safety in harm's fire, you put your own safety in harm's fire, you put your own safety in harm's way to try and protect someone else's way to try and protect someone else's way to try and protect someone else's physical well-being. They gave out 83 physical well-being. They gave out 83 physical well-being. They gave out 83 awards last year. 75 of them were men. awards last year. 75 of them were men. awards last year. 75 of them were men. Men are more prone to take those types Men are more prone to take those types Men are more prone to take those types of not only bad risks but good risks and of not only bad risks but good risks and of not only bad risks but good risks and we need to celebrate that. Now you need we need to celebrate that. Now you need we need to celebrate that. Now you need both. You need both on the by the way on both. You need both on the by the way on both. You need both on the by the way on the combat field because men are more the combat field because men are more the combat field because men are more likely to rush out and try and save likely to rush out and try and save likely to rush out and try and save their comrade but women are more likely their comrade but women are more likely their comrade but women are more likely to say let's not be stupid. Let's think to say let's not be stupid. Let's think to say let's not be stupid. Let's think this through. You need both of those. this through. You need both of those. this through. You need both of those. You I mean this is the great thing is You I mean this is the great thing is You I mean this is the great thing is that both energy when they come together that both energy when they come together that both energy when they come together make a better world but we seem to be make a better world but we seem to be make a better world but we seem to be very um suspicious of that masculine very um suspicious of that masculine very um suspicious of that masculine energy right now. And I think it needs energy right now. And I think it needs energy right now. And I think it needs to be celebrated. There needs to be to be celebrated. There needs to be to be celebrated. There needs to be someone who sees movement in the tribe someone who sees movement in the tribe someone who sees movement in the tribe and immediately grabs the spear and goes and immediately grabs the spear and goes and immediately grabs the spear and goes and tries and kill it for the benefit of and tries and kill it for the benefit of and tries and kill it for the benefit of the community, who wants to put people the community, who wants to put people the community, who wants to put people on Mars and makes these crazy, on Mars and makes these crazy, on Mars and makes these crazy, ridiculous investments that make no ridiculous investments that make no ridiculous investments that make no sense and is super aggressive around sense and is super aggressive around sense and is super aggressive around these things. I think that's a wonderful these things. I think that's a wonderful these things. I think that's a wonderful energy. And when I went to the energy. And when I went to the energy. And when I went to the Democratic National Convention, I saw a Democratic National Convention, I saw a Democratic National Convention, I saw a parade of special interest groups parade of special interest groups parade of special interest groups talking about the very real issues they talking about the very real issues they talking about the very real issues they all face. But I didn't see one mention all face. But I didn't see one mention all face. But I didn't see one mention of the group that has fallen further of the group that has fallen further of the group that has fallen further faster than any group in recent faster than any group in recent faster than any group in recent history, and that is young men. Well, I history, and that is young men. Well, I history, and that is young men. Well, I think that's because based on the think that's because based on the think that's because based on the feedback I've received, for instance, feedback I've received, for instance, feedback I've received, for instance, when we had Terry Reel on the podcast when we had Terry Reel on the podcast when we had Terry Reel on the podcast who talks about, you know, some balance who talks about, you know, some balance who talks about, you know, some balance of masculine and feminine uh phenotypes of masculine and feminine uh phenotypes of masculine and feminine uh phenotypes and therapy and partner and therapy and partner and therapy and partner communication and these kinds of things. communication and these kinds of things. communication and these kinds of things. The push back that I always get for or I The push back that I always get for or I The push back that I always get for or I got there um not because of Terry got there um not because of Terry got there um not because of Terry specifically was as long as we can't specifically was as long as we can't specifically was as long as we can't talk about toxic femininity, these were talk about toxic femininity, these were talk about toxic femininity, these were clearly men writing to me, then um this clearly men writing to me, then um this clearly men writing to me, then um this whole discussion feels imbalanced. whole discussion feels imbalanced. whole discussion feels imbalanced. That's how they feel. They feel like That's how they feel. They feel like That's how they feel. They feel like there's the this idea that they're good there's the this idea that they're good there's the this idea that they're good men and they're bad men and they're men and they're bad men and they're men and they're bad men and they're really bad men. really bad men. really bad men. &gt;&gt; Totally agree. I, you know, I'm I've got &gt;&gt; Totally agree. I, you know, I'm I've got &gt;&gt; Totally agree. I, you know, I'm I've got the optics of a, you know, Mac monkey the optics of a, you know, Mac monkey the optics of a, you know, Mac monkey blindfolded on LSD when it comes to blindfolded on LSD when it comes to blindfolded on LSD when it comes to certain thing members of our species, certain thing members of our species, certain thing members of our species, but when it comes to men, I grew up in a but when it comes to men, I grew up in a but when it comes to men, I grew up in a big group of boys, etc. Big group of big group of boys, etc. Big group of big group of boys, etc. Big group of men. I get it. That statement is true. men. I get it. That statement is true. men. I get it. That statement is true. There are great ones, they're ones, and There are great ones, they're ones, and There are great ones, they're ones, and then they're like really bad dudes. So then they're like really bad dudes. So then they're like really bad dudes. So when you talk about manosphere, you when you talk about manosphere, you when you talk about manosphere, you know, the I would say it the if I had my know, the I would say it the if I had my know, the I would say it the if I had my way, manosphere would apply to just the way, manosphere would apply to just the way, manosphere would apply to just the really bad ones because that name has really bad ones because that name has really bad ones because that name has become synonymous with really bad men. become synonymous with really bad men. become synonymous with really bad men. Okay, we can come back to that perhaps. Okay, we can come back to that perhaps. Okay, we can come back to that perhaps. But &gt;&gt; there is this issue that no one is &gt;&gt; there is this issue that no one is &gt;&gt; there is this issue that no one is allowed to say there's wonderful allowed to say there's wonderful allowed to say there's wonderful femininity. There's women with issues, femininity. There's women with issues, femininity. There's women with issues, right? And then there's bad women. right? And then there's bad women. right? And then there's bad women. You're not allowed to say it. The only You're not allowed to say it. The only You're not allowed to say it. The only women that I can have that conversation women that I can have that conversation women that I can have that conversation with are lesbians. They were the ones with are lesbians. They were the ones with are lesbians. They were the ones who explained to me there are truly bad who explained to me there are truly bad who explained to me there are truly bad women. And I said, well, how come no one women. And I said, well, how come no one women. And I said, well, how come no one talks about that except lesbians? Cuz talks about that except lesbians? Cuz talks about that except lesbians? Cuz they said, ah, because we are living in they said, ah, because we are living in they said, ah, because we are living in a time now where men talking about women a time now where men talking about women a time now where men talking about women or having things they wish for women to or having things they wish for women to or having things they wish for women to do differently itself is seen as toxic. do differently itself is seen as toxic. do differently itself is seen as toxic. that they've that women feel this is that they've that women feel this is that they've that women feel this is what I was told so I'm regurgitating what I was told so I'm regurgitating what I was told so I'm regurgitating that they've suffered so much at the that they've suffered so much at the that they've suffered so much at the hands of men that we need like a good 20 hands of men that we need like a good 20 hands of men that we need like a good 20 or 30 years before we're ready to get to or 30 years before we're ready to get to or 30 years before we're ready to get to that conversation that conversation that conversation &gt;&gt; which of course for young men growing up &gt;&gt; which of course for young men growing up &gt;&gt; which of course for young men growing up just p like makes them feel like okay just p like makes them feel like okay just p like makes them feel like okay it's all it's all on us it's all it's all on us it's all it's all on us &gt;&gt; and that's good like agency advocacy for &gt;&gt; and that's good like agency advocacy for &gt;&gt; and that's good like agency advocacy for one's own life is important stay out of one's own life is important stay out of one's own life is important stay out of the really bad men category and ideally the really bad men category and ideally the really bad men category and ideally the not so good men category too but the not so good men category too but the not so good men category too but this the polarization I think is set this the polarization I think is set this the polarization I think is set by the fact that sure we can talk about by the fact that sure we can talk about by the fact that sure we can talk about toxic mas masculinity. We can talk about toxic mas masculinity. We can talk about toxic mas masculinity. We can talk about the male crisis, but why aren't we the male crisis, but why aren't we the male crisis, but why aren't we talking about the suicide rate? Well, talking about the suicide rate? Well, talking about the suicide rate? Well, because women's issues, we're I think at because women's issues, we're I think at because women's issues, we're I think at a in a good way, we're still thinking a in a good way, we're still thinking a in a good way, we're still thinking that we need to protect and provide for that we need to protect and provide for that we need to protect and provide for the women and the children in our the women and the children in our the women and the children in our society. We're holding that as in the society. We're holding that as in the society. We're holding that as in the highest regard like those they get the highest regard like those they get the highest regard like those they get the life rafts on the Titan when the Titanic life rafts on the Titan when the Titanic life rafts on the Titan when the Titanic goes down. So, you know, it's goes down. So, you know, it's goes down. So, you know, it's complicated and there's a lot of complicated and there's a lot of complicated and there's a lot of offlimits terms and I'm glad that offlimits terms and I'm glad that offlimits terms and I'm glad that they're coming up today just organically they're coming up today just organically they're coming up today just organically because those offlimits terms I think because those offlimits terms I think because those offlimits terms I think are the potential bridges between the are the potential bridges between the are the potential bridges between the where we sit now where we look at men where we sit now where we look at men where we sit now where we look at men and we go, "Oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they're a mess. and we go, "Oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they're a mess. and we go, "Oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they're a mess. Some of them are just like downright Some of them are just like downright Some of them are just like downright awful." We look over here and we go, awful." We look over here and we go, awful." We look over here and we go, "Man, they're really dissatisfied." The "Man, they're really dissatisfied." The "Man, they're really dissatisfied." The assumption is if a woman is dissatisfied assumption is if a woman is dissatisfied assumption is if a woman is dissatisfied or somehow not doing well, that a man or somehow not doing well, that a man or somehow not doing well, that a man failed. That's a presumption that a lot of That's a presumption that a lot of That's a presumption that a lot of people make. I don't make that people make. I don't make that people make. I don't make that presumption and I can look back to times presumption and I can look back to times presumption and I can look back to times in my youth where '9s narrative probably in my youth where '9s narrative probably in my youth where '9s narrative probably fed that a bit. But now I think we fed that a bit. But now I think we fed that a bit. But now I think we need to really like pull back the veil need to really like pull back the veil need to really like pull back the veil and go like who are like take a real and go like who are like take a real and go like who are like take a real hard look at ourselves and try and you hard look at ourselves and try and you hard look at ourselves and try and you know do this mesh that we're talking know do this mesh that we're talking know do this mesh that we're talking about. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The only way you get there is with &gt;&gt; Yeah. The only way you get there is with &gt;&gt; Yeah. The only way you get there is with data. So from 1945 to 2000 America data. So from 1945 to 2000 America data. So from 1945 to 2000 America registered a third of the world's registered a third of the world's registered a third of the world's economic growth, a third of its economic growth, a third of its economic growth, a third of its prosperity with only 5% of the prosperity with only 5% of the prosperity with only 5% of the population. So we had 6x the growth of population. So we had 6x the growth of population. So we had 6x the growth of the rest of the world, right? And within the rest of the world, right? And within the rest of the world, right? And within that 6x, the majority of that prosperity that 6x, the majority of that prosperity that 6x, the majority of that prosperity was sequestered to the one-third of the was sequestered to the one-third of the was sequestered to the one-third of the population that were white, male, and population that were white, male, and population that were white, male, and heterosexual. It was just a lot harder heterosexual. It was just a lot harder heterosexual. It was just a lot harder to participate in that uplift if you to participate in that uplift if you to participate in that uplift if you weren't in that group. So men of my weren't in that group. So men of my weren't in that group. So men of my generation born with my sexual generation born with my sexual generation born with my sexual orientation, skin color, and gender orientation, skin color, and gender orientation, skin color, and gender arguably had 15 to 18x the wins in their arguably had 15 to 18x the wins in their arguably had 15 to 18x the wins in their sales. The question is, should a young sales. The question is, should a young sales. The question is, should a young man now pay the price for my privilege? man now pay the price for my privilege? man now pay the price for my privilege? And I understand the gag reflex when I And I understand the gag reflex when I And I understand the gag reflex when I start talking or advocating for men start talking or advocating for men start talking or advocating for men because they look at me and they said, because they look at me and they said, because they look at me and they said, "You had unfair advantage." 100% guilty "You had unfair advantage." 100% guilty "You had unfair advantage." 100% guilty as charge. But now a young man who is as charge. But now a young man who is as charge. But now a young man who is four times as likely to kill himself, four times as likely to kill himself, four times as likely to kill himself, three times as likely to be addicted, 12 three times as likely to be addicted, 12 three times as likely to be addicted, 12 times as likely to be incarcerated. and times as likely to be incarcerated. and times as likely to be incarcerated. and men of my generation aren't stepping up men of my generation aren't stepping up men of my generation aren't stepping up and providing the mentorship or voting and providing the mentorship or voting and providing the mentorship or voting for the programs that might take a for the programs that might take a for the programs that might take a little bit of money away from my little bit of money away from my little bit of money away from my generation to support all young people generation to support all young people generation to support all young people and bring them up. And most of the and bring them up. And most of the and bring them up. And most of the programs and policies I advocate for programs and policies I advocate for programs and policies I advocate for would advocate for all young would advocate for all young would advocate for all young people. The average 70-year-old is 72% people. The average 70-year-old is 72% people. The average 70-year-old is 72% wealthier than the 7-year-old 40 years wealthier than the 7-year-old 40 years wealthier than the 7-year-old 40 years ago. The 25-year-old is 24% less ago. The 25-year-old is 24% less ago. The 25-year-old is 24% less wealthy. And then every day it's speed wealthy. And then every day it's speed wealthy. And then every day it's speed balled with 110 notifications telling balled with 110 notifications telling balled with 110 notifications telling them that they're failing. And what do them that they're failing. And what do them that they're failing. And what do you know? They're the most obese, you know? They're the most obese, you know? They're the most obese, depressed, and anxious generation we've depressed, and anxious generation we've depressed, and anxious generation we've had in a long time. And there really had in a long time. And there really had in a long time. And there really isn't an honest conversation, and I've isn't an honest conversation, and I've isn't an honest conversation, and I've said this on stage, and it gets some said this on stage, and it gets some said this on stage, and it gets some push back. I'll say I think women make push back. I'll say I think women make push back. I'll say I think women make better managers. I think that they are better managers. I think that they are better managers. I think that they are more emotionally in touch with other more emotionally in touch with other more emotionally in touch with other people. They have higher EQ. I think people. They have higher EQ. I think people. They have higher EQ. I think they'll probably make better doctors and they'll probably make better doctors and they'll probably make better doctors and lawyers. I think their attention to lawyers. I think their attention to lawyers. I think their attention to detail genetically or detail genetically or detail genetically or anthropologically, whatever you want to anthropologically, whatever you want to anthropologically, whatever you want to call it, their bedside manner and call it, their bedside manner and call it, their bedside manner and there's more women in both law school there's more women in both law school there's more women in both law school and medical school now, especially and medical school now, especially and medical school now, especially medical school. medical school. medical school. If I say that women are better managers, If I say that women are better managers, If I say that women are better managers, will make better doctors nodding. will make better doctors nodding. will make better doctors nodding. Everyone, everyone, the women agree and Everyone, everyone, the women agree and Everyone, everyone, the women agree and the guys will look around and go nod, the guys will look around and go nod, the guys will look around and go nod, right? If I say men on average make right? If I say men on average make right? If I say men on average make better entrepreneurs and that's not to better entrepreneurs and that's not to better entrepreneurs and that's not to say that women shouldn't be offered the say that women shouldn't be offered the say that women shouldn't be offered the same opportunities and they haven't same opportunities and they haven't same opportunities and they haven't been, right? 95% of the capital has been been, right? 95% of the capital has been been, right? 95% of the capital has been not only allocated to men, but the not only allocated to men, but the not only allocated to men, but the majority of it has been allocated by men majority of it has been allocated by men majority of it has been allocated by men who went to one or two schools, Harvard who went to one or two schools, Harvard who went to one or two schools, Harvard and Stanford. There's I don't feel safe and Stanford. There's I don't feel safe and Stanford. There's I don't feel safe around you. around you. around you. &gt;&gt; Who doesn't feel safe around you? &gt;&gt; Who doesn't feel safe around you? &gt;&gt; Who doesn't feel safe around you? &gt;&gt; It's fine to say women are make better &gt;&gt; It's fine to say women are make better &gt;&gt; It's fine to say women are make better X, Y, and Zed. X, Y, and Zed. X, Y, and Zed. &gt;&gt; To say men are better at anything &gt;&gt; To say men are better at anything &gt;&gt; To say men are better at anything combat soldiers. combat soldiers. combat soldiers. &gt;&gt; I mean, let's be honest. If you said it &gt;&gt; I mean, let's be honest. If you said it &gt;&gt; I mean, let's be honest. If you said it on X, everyone would be like, cool entre on X, everyone would be like, cool entre on X, everyone would be like, cool entre males make better entrepreneurs. If you males make better entrepreneurs. If you males make better entrepreneurs. If you said it in a room, I mean I again I said it in a room, I mean I again I said it in a room, I mean I again I don't want to make this political but we don't want to make this political but we don't want to make this political but we can't we you know we can't avoid this. can't we you know we can't avoid this. can't we you know we can't avoid this. You know if you said it among a more You know if you said it among a more You know if you said it among a more right center to right leaning crowd I right center to right leaning crowd I right center to right leaning crowd I think you'd probably get less push back think you'd probably get less push back think you'd probably get less push back also from women. also from women. also from women. &gt;&gt; I think that's fair. &gt;&gt; I think that's fair. &gt;&gt; I think that's fair. &gt;&gt; I'm not saying it's who you're hanging &gt;&gt; I'm not saying it's who you're hanging &gt;&gt; I'm not saying it's who you're hanging out with. You know that's out with. You know that's out with. You know that's &gt;&gt; I barely hang out with anybody. So I've &gt;&gt; I barely hang out with anybody. So I've &gt;&gt; I barely hang out with anybody. So I've got a very small world but got a very small world but got a very small world but &gt;&gt; well but to your point if you go to the &gt;&gt; well but to your point if you go to the &gt;&gt; well but to your point if you go to the Democratic national website dnc.org And Democratic national website dnc.org And Democratic national website dnc.org And they changed this, but I talked about they changed this, but I talked about they changed this, but I talked about this a lot on CNN, left-leaning website. this a lot on CNN, left-leaning website. this a lot on CNN, left-leaning website. They they said they have a page say who They they said they have a page say who They they said they have a page say who we serve. And they outlined 16 special we serve. And they outlined 16 special we serve. And they outlined 16 special interest groups, veterans, the disabled, interest groups, veterans, the disabled, interest groups, veterans, the disabled, black Americans, Native Americans, black Americans, Native Americans, black Americans, Native Americans, seniors. And I added it up and it was seniors. And I added it up and it was seniors. And I added it up and it was 74% of the population. And when you say 74% of the population. And when you say 74% of the population. And when you say you're advocating for 74% of the you're advocating for 74% of the you're advocating for 74% of the population, you're not advocating for population, you're not advocating for population, you're not advocating for 74%. You're discriminating against 26%. 74%. You're discriminating against 26%. 74%. You're discriminating against 26%. And basically the only people they And basically the only people they And basically the only people they didn't mention were young men. So I didn't mention were young men. So I didn't mention were young men. So I understand the notion that men have had understand the notion that men have had understand the notion that men have had so much disproportionate advantage that so much disproportionate advantage that so much disproportionate advantage that there needs to be a catch-up period. But there needs to be a catch-up period. But there needs to be a catch-up period. But I would argue it's gone a little bit I would argue it's gone a little bit I would argue it's gone a little bit overboard. Our school system K through overboard. Our school system K through overboard. Our school system K through 12 I would argue is biased against boys. 12 I would argue is biased against boys. 12 I would argue is biased against boys. A boy is twice as likely to be suspended A boy is twice as likely to be suspended A boy is twice as likely to be suspended on a behavior adjusted basis as a girl. on a behavior adjusted basis as a girl. on a behavior adjusted basis as a girl. A black boy five times as likely. 70 to A black boy five times as likely. 70 to A black boy five times as likely. 70 to 80% of K through2 teachers are women. 80% of K through2 teachers are women. 80% of K through2 teachers are women. Who do people naturally advocate for? Who do people naturally advocate for? Who do people naturally advocate for? The people to remind them of themselves The people to remind them of themselves The people to remind them of themselves at that age. 7 to 10 high school at that age. 7 to 10 high school at that age. 7 to 10 high school valictorians are girls. It's now 6040 valictorians are girls. It's now 6040 valictorians are girls. It's now 6040 female male in college. And so the female male in college. And so the female male in college. And so the bottom line is we leveled the playing bottom line is we leveled the playing bottom line is we leveled the playing field and there's a little bit of bias field and there's a little bit of bias field and there's a little bit of bias and women have totally blown by men. and women have totally blown by men. and women have totally blown by men. Fine. More power to them. But what do we Fine. More power to them. But what do we Fine. More power to them. But what do we do now that young men just quite frankly do now that young men just quite frankly do now that young men just quite frankly don't have obvious paths to prosperity don't have obvious paths to prosperity don't have obvious paths to prosperity and young people aren't as economically and young people aren't as economically and young people aren't as economically prosperous relative as they used to be? prosperous relative as they used to be? prosperous relative as they used to be? and young men are disproportionately and young men are disproportionately and young men are disproportionately evaluated in society, especially in the evaluated in society, especially in the evaluated in society, especially in the mating market on their economic mating market on their economic mating market on their economic viability. And I get a ton of push back viability. And I get a ton of push back viability. And I get a ton of push back saying, "No, I'm just looking for an saying, "No, I'm just looking for an saying, "No, I'm just looking for an emotionally in touch male." I think that emotionally in touch male." I think that emotionally in touch male." I think that is such [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Oh, is such [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Oh, is such [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Oh, &gt;&gt; it's total [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] &gt;&gt; it's total [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] &gt;&gt; it's total [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] &gt;&gt; There's still economic hypergamy. &gt;&gt; There's still economic hypergamy. &gt;&gt; There's still economic hypergamy. Educational hypergamy has leveled out. Educational hypergamy has leveled out. Educational hypergamy has leveled out. There's a lot of people who women who There's a lot of people who women who There's a lot of people who women who will marry a guy who didn't go to will marry a guy who didn't go to will marry a guy who didn't go to college or there e educational hypergamy college or there e educational hypergamy college or there e educational hypergamy has vastly reduced. But in cities where has vastly reduced. But in cities where has vastly reduced. But in cities where women makes make as much as men, so women makes make as much as men, so women makes make as much as men, so there's an equality. If you find a there's an equality. If you find a there's an equality. If you find a couple, twice as many couples, the male couple, twice as many couples, the male couple, twice as many couples, the male earns more money than the woman. earns more money than the woman. earns more money than the woman. Economic hypergamy is still an Economic hypergamy is still an Economic hypergamy is still an absolutely full force. So if we absolutely full force. So if we absolutely full force. So if we don't figure out a way to level up all don't figure out a way to level up all don't figure out a way to level up all young people economically such that what young people economically such that what young people economically such that what is more passed for economic viability is more passed for economic viability is more passed for economic viability for young men, I think it's just going for young men, I think it's just going for young men, I think it's just going to tear out our society. We're going to tear out our society. We're going to tear out our society. We're going to have a lower birth rates, fewer people have a lower birth rates, fewer people have a lower birth rates, fewer people to support the very expensive programs to support the very expensive programs to support the very expensive programs which make up 40% of our government which make up 40% of our government which make up 40% of our government spending now on people over the age of spending now on people over the age of spending now on people over the age of 65. And we're going to have real issues. 65. And we're going to have real issues. 65. And we're going to have real issues. And people say, "Well, that's repackaged And people say, "Well, that's repackaged And people say, "Well, that's repackaged violence that men are more violent." I'm violence that men are more violent." I'm violence that men are more violent." I'm like, "No, it's just the reality. If you like, "No, it's just the reality. If you like, "No, it's just the reality. If you look at every unstable, violent society look at every unstable, violent society look at every unstable, violent society in history, it always has one thing at in history, it always has one thing at in history, it always has one thing at the core of it, and that is a group of the core of it, and that is a group of the core of it, and that is a group of young men with a lack of economic or young men with a lack of economic or young men with a lack of economic or romatic opportunities. I don't care if romatic opportunities. I don't care if romatic opportunities. I don't care if it's Weimar, Germany, or some of the it's Weimar, Germany, or some of the it's Weimar, Germany, or some of the most unstable places in the Middle East most unstable places in the Middle East most unstable places in the Middle East or Africa. when you have the most or Africa. when you have the most or Africa. when you have the most dangerous person in the world is a young dangerous person in the world is a young dangerous person in the world is a young man who is lonely and broke and we are man who is lonely and broke and we are man who is lonely and broke and we are producing way too many of them. And by producing way too many of them. And by producing way too many of them. And by the way, I don't think the remedy here the way, I don't think the remedy here the way, I don't think the remedy here is affirmative action for men. I just is affirmative action for men. I just is affirmative action for men. I just think that's too politicized. But we think that's too politicized. But we think that's too politicized. But we have to stop transferring wealth from have to stop transferring wealth from have to stop transferring wealth from people their age to people my age. Why people their age to people my age. Why people their age to people my age. Why the hell are we transferring every year the hell are we transferring every year the hell are we transferring every year $1.3 trillion from a generation that is $1.3 trillion from a generation that is $1.3 trillion from a generation that is the most anxious, depressed, and obese the most anxious, depressed, and obese the most anxious, depressed, and obese in American history to the wealthiest in American history to the wealthiest in American history to the wealthiest generation in the history of the planet generation in the history of the planet generation in the history of the planet called Social Security? That's a third called Social Security? That's a third called Social Security? That's a third realm in politics. I'm not suggesting realm in politics. I'm not suggesting realm in politics. I'm not suggesting anyone should die in poverty. Should you anyone should die in poverty. Should you anyone should die in poverty. Should you and I get social security? and I get social security? and I get social security? &gt;&gt; No. We don't need it. No, I don't need &gt;&gt; No. We don't need it. No, I don't need &gt;&gt; No. We don't need it. No, I don't need it. I mean, they don't need it. I mean, they don't need it. I mean, they don't need it. &gt;&gt; Probably a third uh a third of seniors &gt;&gt; Probably a third uh a third of seniors &gt;&gt; Probably a third uh a third of seniors really don't need social security. But really don't need social security. But really don't need social security. But you get near that, you can't get you get near that, you can't get you get near that, you can't get elected, right? 40% of all government elected, right? 40% of all government elected, right? 40% of all government spending is going to people over the age spending is going to people over the age spending is going to people over the age of 65. It's going to be 50% within 10 of 65. It's going to be 50% within 10 of 65. It's going to be 50% within 10 years. We spend more money on ICE than years. We spend more money on ICE than years. We spend more money on ICE than we spend on children. I mean, it's just we spend on children. I mean, it's just we spend on children. I mean, it's just there's my generation. I don't even there's my generation. I don't even there's my generation. I don't even think of us. I'm on the edge of Gen think of us. I'm on the edge of Gen think of us. I'm on the edge of Gen X baby boomer. The best way to describe X baby boomer. The best way to describe X baby boomer. The best way to describe my generation would be the vampire my generation would be the vampire my generation would be the vampire generation. We were never drafted into generation. We were never drafted into generation. We were never drafted into war. We never really had to serve. And war. We never really had to serve. And war. We never really had to serve. And what has my economic complexion been in what has my economic complexion been in what has my economic complexion been in America? Unprecedented prosperity, but America? Unprecedented prosperity, but America? Unprecedented prosperity, but the lowest taxes in modern history. the lowest taxes in modern history. the lowest taxes in modern history. So, a lot of these solutions I just So, a lot of these solutions I just So, a lot of these solutions I just think are common sense. We need to do think are common sense. We need to do think are common sense. We need to do away social security tax, right? 6% up away social security tax, right? 6% up away social security tax, right? 6% up to 160,000. So, a kid working for me to 160,000. So, a kid working for me to 160,000. So, a kid working for me making 150 or 160k, good living, they making 150 or 160k, good living, they making 150 or 160k, good living, they pay $9,000. I make a lot more than that. pay $9,000. I make a lot more than that. pay $9,000. I make a lot more than that. I pay $9,000 because it tops out at 160 I pay $9,000 because it tops out at 160 I pay $9,000 because it tops out at 160 grand. Why does that make any sense? Who grand. Why does that make any sense? Who grand. Why does that make any sense? Who two biggest tax deductions, mortgage two biggest tax deductions, mortgage two biggest tax deductions, mortgage interest rate and capital gains? Who interest rate and capital gains? Who interest rate and capital gains? Who owns homes and stocks? People our age. owns homes and stocks? People our age. owns homes and stocks? People our age. Who rents and makes their money from Who rents and makes their money from Who rents and makes their money from current income? All the dudes in this current income? All the dudes in this current income? All the dudes in this office, the young kids, right? We are office, the young kids, right? We are office, the young kids, right? We are literally transferring trillions of literally transferring trillions of literally transferring trillions of dollars from young people to old people. dollars from young people to old people. dollars from young people to old people. And we wonder why young men feel anxious And we wonder why young men feel anxious And we wonder why young men feel anxious when they are dispro 75% of women say when they are dispro 75% of women say when they are dispro 75% of women say economic viability is key to a mate. economic viability is key to a mate. economic viability is key to a mate. It's only 25% of men. Women still look It's only 25% of men. Women still look It's only 25% of men. Women still look at men as economic providers. And so you at men as economic providers. And so you at men as economic providers. And so you have this entire generation of young men have this entire generation of young men have this entire generation of young men who feel like they have no purpose, no who feel like they have no purpose, no who feel like they have no purpose, no on-ramps to the middle class and are on-ramps to the middle class and are on-ramps to the middle class and are being evaluated on a set of criteria being evaluated on a set of criteria being evaluated on a set of criteria that get harder and harder for them each that get harder and harder for them each that get harder and harder for them each year. And then this like unbelievable year. And then this like unbelievable year. And then this like unbelievable set of expectations that they're taught set of expectations that they're taught set of expectations that they're taught they should have because it seems like they should have because it seems like they should have because it seems like everyone else is making a million everyone else is making a million everyone else is making a million dollars selling ETH or is in amazing dollars selling ETH or is in amazing dollars selling ETH or is in amazing shape or has a ridiculously hot shape or has a ridiculously hot shape or has a ridiculously hot boyfriend or girlfriend and has artist boyfriend or girlfriend and has artist boyfriend or girlfriend and has artist passes to Coachella. So it'd be shocking passes to Coachella. So it'd be shocking passes to Coachella. So it'd be shocking if they weren't depressed and obese. if they weren't depressed and obese. if they weren't depressed and obese. &gt;&gt; Wow. Um the analogy that comes to mind &gt;&gt; Wow. Um the analogy that comes to mind &gt;&gt; Wow. Um the analogy that comes to mind is uh academic science. you know uh is uh academic science. you know uh is uh academic science. you know uh there's I used to joke you know the there's I used to joke you know the there's I used to joke you know the advantage of having a dad who was a advantage of having a dad who was a advantage of having a dad who was a scientist who was also a little bit scientist who was also a little bit scientist who was also a little bit irreverent uh was that I grew up around irreverent uh was that I grew up around irreverent uh was that I grew up around an understanding of how academics works an understanding of how academics works an understanding of how academics works and uh early on I thought as much as and uh early on I thought as much as and uh early on I thought as much as I love my colleagues like a lot of them I love my colleagues like a lot of them I love my colleagues like a lot of them need to retire they just need to go need to retire they just need to go need to retire they just need to go &gt;&gt; 100% &gt;&gt; 100% &gt;&gt; 100% &gt;&gt; and the reason they need to go is &gt;&gt; and the reason they need to go is &gt;&gt; and the reason they need to go is because they were having three four two because they were having three four two because they were having three four two to four NIH grants like million-dollar a to four NIH grants like million-dollar a to four NIH grants like million-dollar a year grants and that itself isn't a year grants and that itself isn't a year grants and that itself isn't a problem except that there wasn't enough problem except that there wasn't enough problem except that there wasn't enough money for young investigators And so money for young investigators And so money for young investigators And so fields die and science dies. They don't fields die and science dies. They don't fields die and science dies. They don't retire. And so it was very interesting retire. And so it was very interesting retire. And so it was very interesting right before the Trump administration right before the Trump administration right before the Trump administration came in, I started logging into these came in, I started logging into these came in, I started logging into these NIH hearings and I think our NIH hearings and I think our NIH hearings and I think our previous NIH director and I will go on previous NIH director and I will go on previous NIH director and I will go on record and saying and our current NIH record and saying and our current NIH record and saying and our current NIH director Jay Bacharia both very good director Jay Bacharia both very good director Jay Bacharia both very good directors in different ways trying to do directors in different ways trying to do directors in different ways trying to do important different things and you'll important different things and you'll important different things and you'll notice the budget was not cut under Jay notice the budget was not cut under Jay notice the budget was not cut under Jay and IDC for the academics out there was and IDC for the academics out there was and IDC for the academics out there was not cut but an interesting problem was not cut but an interesting problem was not cut but an interesting problem was outed at the kind of end of Carolyn's outed at the kind of end of Carolyn's outed at the kind of end of Carolyn's role at NIH the former director and it role at NIH the former director and it role at NIH the former director and it was the following was the following was the following Someone said, Someone said, Someone said, "What is the deal? Why are people living "What is the deal? Why are people living "What is the deal? Why are people living longer and young people are killing longer and young people are killing longer and young people are killing themselves and we have all these mental themselves and we have all these mental themselves and we have all these mental health issues, mostly among men, but health issues, mostly among men, but health issues, mostly among men, but also a young among young women?" and she also a young among young women?" and she also a young among young women?" and she said, "It is true that we've been very said, "It is true that we've been very said, "It is true that we've been very successful in medicine at getting people successful in medicine at getting people successful in medicine at getting people 65 and older to live much longer to 65 and older to live much longer to 65 and older to live much longer to treat latestage diabetes, to treat latestage diabetes, to treat latestage diabetes, to treat cancer, to treat uh we don't have cures cancer, to treat uh we don't have cures cancer, to treat uh we don't have cures for these things, but we've extended for these things, but we've extended for these things, but we've extended life for the older generation and to a life for the older generation and to a life for the older generation and to a large degree the quality of life, large degree the quality of life, large degree the quality of life, especially if they're willing to get especially if they're willing to get especially if they're willing to get sunlight, exercise, probably not drink sunlight, exercise, probably not drink sunlight, exercise, probably not drink alcohol at that age or drink a lot less, alcohol at that age or drink a lot less, alcohol at that age or drink a lot less, not smoke. people are living longer and not smoke. people are living longer and not smoke. people are living longer and longer and longer and tons of research longer and longer and tons of research longer and longer and tons of research money is being poured into this. There's money is being poured into this. There's money is being poured into this. There's this enormous gap where many of the this enormous gap where many of the this enormous gap where many of the problems that are most important to problems that are most important to problems that are most important to young people to thrive in every way, not young people to thrive in every way, not young people to thrive in every way, not just health, but mental health, etc., just health, but mental health, etc., just health, but mental health, etc., they're just not even being studied. So, they're just not even being studied. So, they're just not even being studied. So, there's this top waiting of age and of there's this top waiting of age and of there's this top waiting of age and of seniority clearly in what you're seniority clearly in what you're seniority clearly in what you're describing, but also in the science and describing, but also in the science and describing, but also in the science and that we're funding. And that we're funding. And that we're funding. And that clearly harms young people clearly harms young people clearly harms young people because no one's studying porn addiction because no one's studying porn addiction because no one's studying porn addiction in a serious way at scale. Nobody's in a serious way at scale. Nobody's in a serious way at scale. Nobody's studying social media addiction in a studying social media addiction in a studying social media addiction in a serious way at scale. I think what serious way at scale. I think what serious way at scale. I think what Jonathan's done is fantastic and others Jonathan's done is fantastic and others Jonathan's done is fantastic and others are now getting involved in this. But are now getting involved in this. But are now getting involved in this. But you know it's a problem if you look at you know it's a problem if you look at you know it's a problem if you look at the numbers as serious as cancer for the numbers as serious as cancer for the numbers as serious as cancer for people who are you know in their 50s and people who are you know in their 50s and people who are you know in their 50s and older and actually cancers and diabetes older and actually cancers and diabetes older and actually cancers and diabetes and u deaths of despair as our and u deaths of despair as our and u deaths of despair as our previous uh you know surgeon general previous uh you know surgeon general previous uh you know surgeon general pointed out uh are among the greatest pointed out uh are among the greatest pointed out uh are among the greatest killers of young people. So we've killers of young people. So we've killers of young people. So we've totally lost perspective in many ways. I totally lost perspective in many ways. I totally lost perspective in many ways. I don't know what to do about social don't know what to do about social don't know what to do about social security. That's your domain, not mine. security. That's your domain, not mine. security. That's your domain, not mine. But I vote very strongly for what they But I vote very strongly for what they But I vote very strongly for what they do in Japan. Force scientists to retire. do in Japan. Force scientists to retire. do in Japan. Force scientists to retire. I'm going to earn some hate from my I'm going to earn some hate from my I'm going to earn some hate from my colleagues, but anyway, force them to colleagues, but anyway, force them to colleagues, but anyway, force them to retire at 65. They still collect a retire at 65. They still collect a retire at 65. They still collect a salary and a and in many cases a salary and a and in many cases a salary and a and in many cases a pension if they're state funded schools. pension if they're state funded schools. pension if they're state funded schools. They still have health care. Their kids They still have health care. Their kids They still have health care. Their kids still probably went to college partially still probably went to college partially still probably went to college partially for free. The inside ball of these for free. The inside ball of these for free. The inside ball of these schools that you and I work at, right? schools that you and I work at, right? schools that you and I work at, right? This whole network. They got in This whole network. They got in This whole network. They got in &gt;&gt; and they got in. And so &gt;&gt; and they got in. And so &gt;&gt; and they got in. And so let them retire, let them keep their let them retire, let them keep their let them retire, let them keep their office. I don't I do believe there's a office. I don't I do believe there's a office. I don't I do believe there's a lot of wisdom in the older generations. lot of wisdom in the older generations. lot of wisdom in the older generations. But I was quite happy to But I was quite happy to But I was quite happy to &gt;&gt; There was your land acknowledgement. Let &gt;&gt; There was your land acknowledgement. Let &gt;&gt; There was your land acknowledgement. Let me let me go in. me let me go in. me let me go in. &gt;&gt; Oh well. Well, I just want to say there &gt;&gt; Oh well. Well, I just want to say there &gt;&gt; Oh well. Well, I just want to say there were senior faculty members like Lubbert were senior faculty members like Lubbert were senior faculty members like Lubbert Strier, I'll just call these people out Strier, I'll just call these people out Strier, I'll just call these people out who wrote the book biochemistry. Anyone who wrote the book biochemistry. Anyone who wrote the book biochemistry. Anyone there? Lubbert retired, closed his lab. there? Lubbert retired, closed his lab. there? Lubbert retired, closed his lab. He made a bunch of money at Aphimatrix, He made a bunch of money at Aphimatrix, He made a bunch of money at Aphimatrix, the gene ship company. And he used to the gene ship company. And he used to the gene ship company. And he used to come around to the lab and go, "Hey, come around to the lab and go, "Hey, come around to the lab and go, "Hey, what are you guys working on?" He would what are you guys working on?" He would what are you guys working on?" He would talk to the students and give them talk to the students and give them talk to the students and give them amazing ideas. I think that generational amazing ideas. I think that generational amazing ideas. I think that generational wisdom passed down is great. Guess what wisdom passed down is great. Guess what wisdom passed down is great. Guess what he wasn't doing? Consuming grant he wasn't doing? Consuming grant he wasn't doing? Consuming grant dollars, consuming square footage on dollars, consuming square footage on dollars, consuming square footage on campus. He was shedding knowledge for campus. He was shedding knowledge for campus. He was shedding knowledge for free because the system has taken free because the system has taken free because the system has taken &gt;&gt; he's a Yoda, but he's an outer. &gt;&gt; he's a Yoda, but he's an outer. &gt;&gt; he's a Yoda, but he's an outer. &gt;&gt; So you work at Stanford, one of the &gt;&gt; So you work at Stanford, one of the &gt;&gt; So you work at Stanford, one of the finest faculties ever assembled. NYU has finest faculties ever assembled. NYU has finest faculties ever assembled. NYU has an outst at the business school, we have an outst at the business school, we have an outst at the business school, we have an outstanding faculty. I would argue an outstanding faculty. I would argue an outstanding faculty. I would argue one of the best in the world. Not one of the best in the world. Not one of the best in the world. Not because it's our fault, but because it's our fault, but because it's our fault, but because every great faculty member loves the every great faculty member loves the every great faculty member loves the idea of coming and spending 4, 8, 10 idea of coming and spending 4, 8, 10 idea of coming and spending 4, 8, 10 years in New York and living in Soho. years in New York and living in Soho. years in New York and living in Soho. Sounds pretty good. Sounds pretty good. Sounds pretty good. &gt;&gt; That's our advantage. Hey, come here. &gt;&gt; That's our advantage. Hey, come here. &gt;&gt; That's our advantage. Hey, come here. We'll give you free housing. You and We'll give you free housing. You and We'll give you free housing. You and your wife, your kids are out of the your wife, your kids are out of the your wife, your kids are out of the house. Come teach accounting here. We house. Come teach accounting here. We house. Come teach accounting here. We get amazing faculty. A third should be get amazing faculty. A third should be get amazing faculty. A third should be out put on a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ice flow. They get out put on a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ice flow. They get out put on a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ice flow. They get to a point where they darn adding as to a point where they darn adding as to a point where they darn adding as much value. They were the bomb on gap much value. They were the bomb on gap much value. They were the bomb on gap one accounting in 1988. They get tenure one accounting in 1988. They get tenure one accounting in 1988. They get tenure and they won't leave. And they leave and they won't leave. And they leave and they won't leave. And they leave feet first. And the result is young feet first. And the result is young feet first. And the result is young people who could bring a certain people who could bring a certain people who could bring a certain creativity, a new way of looking at creativity, a new way of looking at creativity, a new way of looking at things. There's no room for them to come things. There's no room for them to come things. There's no room for them to come up. And I want to go back to the notion up. And I want to go back to the notion up. And I want to go back to the notion of vampire generation. We talk about of vampire generation. We talk about of vampire generation. We talk about sunlight, being social, eating well, sunlight, being social, eating well, sunlight, being social, eating well, sleeping well, all the keys, right? I sleeping well, all the keys, right? I sleeping well, all the keys, right? I would argue the number one predictor of would argue the number one predictor of would argue the number one predictor of longevity. It's one thing, money. longevity. It's one thing, money. longevity. It's one thing, money. China's gone from an average life China's gone from an average life China's gone from an average life expectancy of 47 to 77 in 60 years as expectancy of 47 to 77 in 60 years as expectancy of 47 to 77 in 60 years as their wealth has gone up. You're in the their wealth has gone up. You're in the their wealth has gone up. You're in the bottom decile, I believe, of income. You bottom decile, I believe, of income. You bottom decile, I believe, of income. You live 12 years less long than someone in live 12 years less long than someone in live 12 years less long than someone in the upper desile. Right? It's about the upper desile. Right? It's about the upper desile. Right? It's about money. And all we have done is not only money. And all we have done is not only money. And all we have done is not only suck money from young to old, we have suck money from young to old, we have suck money from young to old, we have sucked life because we are so selfish sucked life because we are so selfish sucked life because we are so selfish and so unwilling to pay it forward. Old and so unwilling to pay it forward. Old and so unwilling to pay it forward. Old people elect even older people to vote people elect even older people to vote people elect even older people to vote themselves more money. And what they are themselves more money. And what they are themselves more money. And what they are doing maybe unwittingly, but they are doing maybe unwittingly, but they are doing maybe unwittingly, but they are doing it is they are robbing life and doing it is they are robbing life and doing it is they are robbing life and happiness from young people and happiness from young people and happiness from young people and transferring it to old people. There not transferring it to old people. There not transferring it to old people. There not only needs to be term limits. Washington only needs to be term limits. Washington only needs to be term limits. Washington DC, the people allocating capital has be DC, the people allocating capital has be DC, the people allocating capital has be become a cross between the Golden Girls become a cross between the Golden Girls become a cross between the Golden Girls and the land of the walking dead. enough and the land of the walking dead. enough and the land of the walking dead. enough already. We have totally robbed and not already. We have totally robbed and not already. We have totally robbed and not only money, we have robbed life and only money, we have robbed life and only money, we have robbed life and health from young people because money health from young people because money health from young people because money in our society is health. How do we in our society is health. How do we in our society is health. How do we create financial incentives inside of create financial incentives inside of create financial incentives inside of uniqueness? I think that's what makes uniqueness? I think that's what makes uniqueness? I think that's what makes the United States great because I saw the United States great because I saw the United States great because I saw social media that way. But I will say social media that way. But I will say social media that way. But I will say that's cuz it worked out that way for that's cuz it worked out that way for that's cuz it worked out that way for me. I love learning. I love teaching. I me. I love learning. I love teaching. I me. I love learning. I love teaching. I flipped on a camera and I started the flipped on a camera and I started the flipped on a camera and I started the podcast with that guy sitting over there podcast with that guy sitting over there podcast with that guy sitting over there and it worked out great. The way I would and it worked out great. The way I would and it worked out great. The way I would describe the transition that's been bad describe the transition that's been bad describe the transition that's been bad for America is that the way I would for America is that the way I would for America is that the way I would describe it is that back when I was describe it is that back when I was describe it is that back when I was growing up, America had a commitment to growing up, America had a commitment to growing up, America had a commitment to and even loved the unremarkable. I was and even loved the unremarkable. I was and even loved the unremarkable. I was remarkably unremarkable. And I'm not remarkably unremarkable. And I'm not remarkably unremarkable. And I'm not that's not a humble brag. I got 1130 on that's not a humble brag. I got 1130 on that's not a humble brag. I got 1130 on the SAT, had a 3.1 GPA. We didn't have the SAT, had a 3.1 GPA. We didn't have the SAT, had a 3.1 GPA. We didn't have any money, but this is what I got. I got any money, but this is what I got. I got any money, but this is what I got. I got assisted lunch, right? And the great assisted lunch, right? And the great assisted lunch, right? And the great state of California used to send coupons state of California used to send coupons state of California used to send coupons to my house that were the same colors to my house that were the same colors to my house that were the same colors the kids would buy in school so I the kids would buy in school so I the kids would buy in school so I wouldn't be embarrassed. Right. I got wouldn't be embarrassed. Right. I got wouldn't be embarrassed. Right. I got Pell grants. I got accepted to UCLA on Pell grants. I got accepted to UCLA on Pell grants. I got accepted to UCLA on appeal. 74% admissions rate. I got I was appeal. 74% admissions rate. I got I was appeal. 74% admissions rate. I got I was one of the 26% that didn't get in and I one of the 26% that didn't get in and I one of the 26% that didn't get in and I was installed in Sheling. Came home was installed in Sheling. Came home was installed in Sheling. Came home really upset one day and said, "Is this really upset one day and said, "Is this really upset one day and said, "Is this my life?" I was always told I was funny. my life?" I was always told I was funny. my life?" I was always told I was funny. I wanted to be a doctor. And my mom I wanted to be a doctor. And my mom I wanted to be a doctor. And my mom said, "Well, is there an appeal said, "Well, is there an appeal said, "Well, is there an appeal process?" And I remember the day the process?" And I remember the day the process?" And I remember the day the admissions director called me and said, admissions director called me and said, admissions director called me and said, "You're not qualified, but you're a son "You're not qualified, but you're a son "You're not qualified, but you're a son of California. We're going to give you a of California. We're going to give you a of California. We're going to give you a shot." &gt;&gt; A son of California. &gt;&gt; A son of California. &gt;&gt; A son of California. &gt;&gt; Son of California. What a great &gt;&gt; Son of California. What a great &gt;&gt; Son of California. What a great statement. I get I get emotional just statement. I get I get emotional just statement. I get I get emotional just thinking about it. thinking about it. thinking about it. &gt;&gt; And then I got, as I said, I got into &gt;&gt; And then I got, as I said, I got into &gt;&gt; And then I got, as I said, I got into Berkeley. And this is a this is a brag Berkeley. And this is a this is a brag Berkeley. And this is a this is a brag and a flex, but I'm going to make it. and a flex, but I'm going to make it. and a flex, but I'm going to make it. I've given 20 million bucks back to the I've given 20 million bucks back to the I've given 20 million bucks back to the University of California in the last University of California in the last University of California in the last five years. five years. five years. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; So, it's worked out for all of us. &gt;&gt; So, it's worked out for all of us. &gt;&gt; So, it's worked out for all of us. America isn't about identifying a super America isn't about identifying a super America isn't about identifying a super class of rich kids and the freakishly class of rich kids and the freakishly class of rich kids and the freakishly remarkable. It's about betting on remarkable. It's about betting on remarkable. It's about betting on unremarkable kids. So this is what we unremarkable kids. So this is what we unremarkable kids. So this is what we need to do. We need if you're a need to do. We need if you're a need to do. We need if you're a university and you have more than a university and you have more than a university and you have more than a billion dollar endowment and you're not billion dollar endowment and you're not billion dollar endowment and you're not growing your freshman class faster than growing your freshman class faster than growing your freshman class faster than population, you're a hedge fund with population, you're a hedge fund with population, you're a hedge fund with classes and you should lose your taxfree classes and you should lose your taxfree classes and you should lose your taxfree status. If a 20% of your degrees aren't status. If a 20% of your degrees aren't status. If a 20% of your degrees aren't for non-traditional for non-traditional for non-traditional things such as nursing or specialy things such as nursing or specialy things such as nursing or specialy construction or vocational programming, construction or vocational programming, construction or vocational programming, you don't get access to tax-free money. you don't get access to tax-free money. you don't get access to tax-free money. in my opinion, mandatory national in my opinion, mandatory national in my opinion, mandatory national service. I think there's a ton of things service. I think there's a ton of things service. I think there's a ton of things we need to do. I think we should tax the we need to do. I think we should tax the we need to do. I think we should tax the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of private schools and reinvest [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of private schools and reinvest [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of private schools and reinvest that in public schools. We need to that in public schools. We need to that in public schools. We need to disassociate house property taxes from disassociate house property taxes from disassociate house property taxes from the quality of the schools. Think about the quality of the schools. Think about the quality of the schools. Think about the disadvantage kids. The average the disadvantage kids. The average the disadvantage kids. The average public school spends $15,000 a year on a public school spends $15,000 a year on a public school spends $15,000 a year on a kid. The kid uh schools in poor area is kid. The kid uh schools in poor area is kid. The kid uh schools in poor area is 9,000. The average private school spends 9,000. The average private school spends 9,000. The average private school spends $72,000 a year per student. So if you're $72,000 a year per student. So if you're $72,000 a year per student. So if you're fortunate enough to go to a private fortunate enough to go to a private fortunate enough to go to a private school like my kids, we're spending 850 school like my kids, we're spending 850 school like my kids, we're spending 850 grand on them and some kids were grand on them and some kids were grand on them and some kids were spending 120 grand and you want that kid spending 120 grand and you want that kid spending 120 grand and you want that kid to compete against another kid to get to compete against another kid to get to compete against another kid to get into an elite university. And we all into an elite university. And we all into an elite university. And we all tell ourselves this myth now that oh tell ourselves this myth now that oh tell ourselves this myth now that oh with AI the college doesn't matter. It's with AI the college doesn't matter. It's with AI the college doesn't matter. It's never been more important. And if you never been more important. And if you never been more important. And if you had a drug that can make it twice as had a drug that can make it twice as had a drug that can make it twice as likely that you get married, half as likely that you get married, half as likely that you get married, half as likely that you kill yourself, three likely that you kill yourself, three likely that you kill yourself, three times as likely that you become a times as likely that you become a times as likely that you become a millionaire, 10 times as likely that you millionaire, 10 times as likely that you millionaire, 10 times as likely that you run for office, four times as likely run for office, four times as likely run for office, four times as likely that you become an officer in the that you become an officer in the that you become an officer in the military, three times less likely that military, three times less likely that military, three times less likely that you become obese, would you hoard that you become obese, would you hoard that you become obese, would you hoard that drug? And then when someone gets into drug? And then when someone gets into drug? And then when someone gets into the working environment or the or the working environment or the or the working environment or the or the economy, would you create a tax the economy, would you create a tax the economy, would you create a tax policy that just transfers money from policy that just transfers money from policy that just transfers money from you to the wealthiest generation in the you to the wealthiest generation in the you to the wealthiest generation in the world? There's just so many basic common world? There's just so many basic common world? There's just so many basic common sense solution around higher ed and K sense solution around higher ed and K sense solution around higher ed and K through 12 that we come up with all through 12 that we come up with all through 12 that we come up with all these reasons. We use terms like network these reasons. We use terms like network these reasons. We use terms like network effects or globalization or tech and effects or globalization or tech and effects or globalization or tech and it's nothing but thinly veiled [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it's nothing but thinly veiled [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it's nothing but thinly veiled [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] to transfer more money. The bottom 99% to transfer more money. The bottom 99% to transfer more money. The bottom 99% and young people are just nutrition for and young people are just nutrition for and young people are just nutrition for older people and it's just to me it's older people and it's just to me it's older people and it's just to me it's fairly obvious. They're just common fairly obvious. They're just common fairly obvious. They're just common sense solutions. And higher ed has sense solutions. And higher ed has sense solutions. And higher ed has become unfortunately become unfortunately become unfortunately an emblematic of the rejection LVMHing an emblematic of the rejection LVMHing an emblematic of the rejection LVMHing of America where you either at the age of America where you either at the age of America where you either at the age of 18 have to be freakishly remarkable. of 18 have to be freakishly remarkable. of 18 have to be freakishly remarkable. Are you captain of your lacrosse team Are you captain of your lacrosse team Are you captain of your lacrosse team and building wells in Africa? Then fine, and building wells in Africa? Then fine, and building wells in Africa? Then fine, come in and we'll put you on a glide come in and we'll put you on a glide come in and we'll put you on a glide path to potentially being a billionaire path to potentially being a billionaire path to potentially being a billionaire or president. But say you're or president. But say you're or president. But say you're unremarkable. Sorry, you're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of unremarkable. Sorry, you're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of unremarkable. Sorry, you're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of luck. Maybe maybe you can build a data luck. Maybe maybe you can build a data luck. Maybe maybe you can build a data center somewhere and maybe get into the center somewhere and maybe get into the center somewhere and maybe get into the middle class. And by the way, we don't middle class. And by the way, we don't middle class. And by the way, we don't even have an apprentice culture in this even have an apprentice culture in this even have an apprentice culture in this environment. So many parents feel so environment. So many parents feel so environment. So many parents feel so shamed when their kid doesn't get into shamed when their kid doesn't get into shamed when their kid doesn't get into elite university. 11% of LinkedIn elite university. 11% of LinkedIn elite university. 11% of LinkedIn profiles in Germany and the UK say profiles in Germany and the UK say profiles in Germany and the UK say apprentice. It's 3% here because parents apprentice. It's 3% here because parents apprentice. It's 3% here because parents feel shamed if their kid doesn't get feel shamed if their kid doesn't get feel shamed if their kid doesn't get into an elite university. We need to into an elite university. We need to into an elite university. We need to dramatically expand vocational dramatically expand vocational dramatically expand vocational programming, freshman classes, and stop programming, freshman classes, and stop programming, freshman classes, and stop this insane transfer of wealth and this insane transfer of wealth and this insane transfer of wealth and health from young people to old people. health from young people to old people. health from young people to old people. and higher ed. Unfortunately, our and higher ed. Unfortunately, our and higher ed. Unfortunately, our industry is at the tip of the spear of industry is at the tip of the spear of industry is at the tip of the spear of fermenting this rejectionist [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fermenting this rejectionist [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fermenting this rejectionist [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] culture where we've identified we're the culture where we've identified we're the culture where we've identified we're the arbiters of success. You know who gets arbiters of success. You know who gets arbiters of success. You know who gets into Stanford and NYU? Two cohorts. The into Stanford and NYU? Two cohorts. The into Stanford and NYU? Two cohorts. The children of rich people. You're 77 times children of rich people. You're 77 times children of rich people. You're 77 times more likely to get into elite university more likely to get into elite university more likely to get into elite university if you're a top 1% household or the if you're a top 1% household or the if you're a top 1% household or the freakishly remarkable. And here's the freakishly remarkable. And here's the freakishly remarkable. And here's the thing, I can prove to us all thing, I can prove to us all thing, I can prove to us all mathematically that 99% of our children mathematically that 99% of our children mathematically that 99% of our children are not in the top 1%. America loved the are not in the top 1%. America loved the are not in the top 1%. America loved the unremarkable when I was a kid. It know unremarkable when I was a kid. It know unremarkable when I was a kid. It know it's fallen out of love with the it's fallen out of love with the it's fallen out of love with the unremarkable. Is America about unremarkable. Is America about unremarkable. Is America about identifying a superclass to become identifying a superclass to become identifying a superclass to become billionaires? Or is about planting as billionaires? Or is about planting as billionaires? Or is about planting as many seeds as possible? Because no one many seeds as possible? Because no one many seeds as possible? Because no one can be the arbiter of greatness at 18. can be the arbiter of greatness at 18. can be the arbiter of greatness at 18. No one was going to see me at 18 and go No one was going to see me at 18 and go No one was going to see me at 18 and go someday you might have an impact and someday you might have an impact and someday you might have an impact and you'll be wealthy. No one would have you'll be wealthy. No one would have you'll be wealthy. No one would have known that. And we've decided no, we're known that. And we've decided no, we're known that. And we've decided no, we're about the children of rich people and about the children of rich people and about the children of rich people and we're about the freakishly remarkable. we're about the freakishly remarkable. we're about the freakishly remarkable. on everybody else in my opinion. on everybody else in my opinion. on everybody else in my opinion. Hopefully hopefully gets to the middle Hopefully hopefully gets to the middle Hopefully hopefully gets to the middle class. But if you don't, there's big class. But if you don't, there's big class. But if you don't, there's big tech waiting there to addict you. tech waiting there to addict you. tech waiting there to addict you. There's a tax policy that might There's a tax policy that might There's a tax policy that might impoverish you. I think that young impoverish you. I think that young impoverish you. I think that young people say about young people say about young people say about young people they're entitled. I think they're entitled. I think they're entitled. I think they're entitled to be enraged. I can't imagine entitled to be enraged. I can't imagine entitled to be enraged. I can't imagine the rage they must feel right now that the rage they must feel right now that the rage they must feel right now that they look up they look sideways and that they look up they look sideways and that they look up they look sideways and they see all this prosperity and they see all this prosperity and they see all this prosperity and they look at my generation and see the look at my generation and see the look at my generation and see the benefits we've accured and we want to benefits we've accured and we want to benefits we've accured and we want to spend $2 billion $2 trillion a year on spend $2 billion $2 trillion a year on spend $2 billion $2 trillion a year on their credit card. We spend $7 trillion their credit card. We spend $7 trillion their credit card. We spend $7 trillion a year. We take in 5 trillion and that a year. We take in 5 trillion and that a year. We take in 5 trillion and that two trillion is all going that two trillion is all going that two trillion is all going that incremental two trillion is all going to incremental two trillion is all going to incremental two trillion is all going to seniors. I'm in the club doing rails of seniors. I'm in the club doing rails of seniors. I'm in the club doing rails of ketamine and champagne and the closest a ketamine and champagne and the closest a ketamine and champagne and the closest a young person gets is they get to throw young person gets is they get to throw young person gets is they get to throw their credit card in and I'll keep their credit card in and I'll keep their credit card in and I'll keep swiping it. I mean it is literally swiping it. I mean it is literally swiping it. I mean it is literally morally corrupt what we are doing in morally corrupt what we are doing in morally corrupt what we are doing in terms of deficit spending and how we are terms of deficit spending and how we are terms of deficit spending and how we are prioritizing our budget. our budget prioritizing our budget. our budget prioritizing our budget. our budget reflects our values and our values are reflects our values and our values are reflects our values and our values are all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up and have said let's party all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up and have said let's party all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up and have said let's party right the baby boomers let's party like right the baby boomers let's party like right the baby boomers let's party like there's no tomorrow and the and the there's no tomorrow and the and the there's no tomorrow and the and the young people well they're going to have young people well they're going to have young people well they're going to have to clean up the house and the garage is to clean up the house and the garage is to clean up the house and the garage is on fire and the dogs are going to be on fire and the dogs are going to be on fire and the dogs are going to be pregnant but that's their problem pregnant but that's their problem pregnant but that's their problem because I'll be dead by then this because I'll be dead by then this because I'll be dead by then this generation my generation for some reason generation my generation for some reason generation my generation for some reason does not feel the same obligation to pay does not feel the same obligation to pay does not feel the same obligation to pay it forward or back and create it forward or back and create it forward or back and create infrastructure and investments for young infrastructure and investments for young infrastructure and investments for young people and it's it to me it feels fairly people and it's it to me it feels fairly people and it's it to me it feels fairly obvious And the solutions are fairly common And the solutions are fairly common And the solutions are fairly common sense, but we'll have thoughtful sense, but we'll have thoughtful sense, but we'll have thoughtful conversations and social security will conversations and social security will conversations and social security will be a third rail. And we'll have be a third rail. And we'll have be a third rail. And we'll have thoughtful reasons for why when I sell thoughtful reasons for why when I sell thoughtful reasons for why when I sell my business, the first 10 million should my business, the first 10 million should my business, the first 10 million should be taxree. The last business I sold, be taxree. The last business I sold, be taxree. The last business I sold, first 10 million bucks is taxree. What first 10 million bucks is taxree. What first 10 million bucks is taxree. What the actual [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] They say, "Well, Scott, the actual [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] They say, "Well, Scott, the actual [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] They say, "Well, Scott, entrepreneurs are more productive. We we entrepreneurs are more productive. We we entrepreneurs are more productive. We we want to unleash our productivity, our we want to unleash our productivity, our we want to unleash our productivity, our most product." I had no idea what tax most product." I had no idea what tax most product." I had no idea what tax people don't start businesses because of people don't start businesses because of people don't start businesses because of tax policy. Did you know what the t Did tax policy. Did you know what the t Did tax policy. Did you know what the t Did you know about 1202? you know about 1202? you know about 1202? &gt;&gt; If you sell this business, the first 10 &gt;&gt; If you sell this business, the first 10 &gt;&gt; If you sell this business, the first 10 million bucks is taxree if it's a it's a million bucks is taxree if it's a it's a million bucks is taxree if it's a it's a core. That's not why people start core. That's not why people start core. That's not why people start businesses. No. But every day there are businesses. No. But every day there are businesses. No. But every day there are new tax policies that do one thing. new tax policies that do one thing. new tax policies that do one thing. Transfer money from those dudes to us. Transfer money from those dudes to us. Transfer money from those dudes to us. More me than you because you're 10 years More me than you because you're 10 years More me than you because you're 10 years younger than me. It needs to stop. younger than me. It needs to stop. younger than me. It needs to stop. There's basic tax policy. Basic health There's basic tax policy. Basic health There's basic tax policy. Basic health and human services policy, right? Why on and human services policy, right? Why on and human services policy, right? Why on earth? You're a doctor. For God's sakes, earth? You're a doctor. For God's sakes, earth? You're a doctor. For God's sakes, we spend $13,000 per individual for more we spend $13,000 per individual for more we spend $13,000 per individual for more obesity, more anxiety, more depression obesity, more anxiety, more depression obesity, more anxiety, more depression than every other G6 nation. We should than every other G6 nation. We should than every other G6 nation. We should absolutely have nationalized socialized absolutely have nationalized socialized absolutely have nationalized socialized healthcare. The bottom 99% again are healthcare. The bottom 99% again are healthcare. The bottom 99% again are just a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] body bag of nutrition for just a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] body bag of nutrition for just a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] body bag of nutrition for the top 1%. Monetizing health care. I'll the top 1%. Monetizing health care. I'll the top 1%. Monetizing health care. I'll put that to you. I absolutely think we put that to you. I absolutely think we put that to you. I absolutely think we need singlepayer socialized medicine need singlepayer socialized medicine need singlepayer socialized medicine right now. I think it is indefensible to right now. I think it is indefensible to right now. I think it is indefensible to healthcare in this country. 40% for I healthcare in this country. 40% for I healthcare in this country. 40% for I apologize, I'm going off script here. apologize, I'm going off script here. apologize, I'm going off script here. 30% of households medical or dental 30% of households medical or dental 30% of households medical or dental debt. You don't have kids. Do you debt. You don't have kids. Do you debt. You don't have kids. Do you realize how what kind of shame you would realize how what kind of shame you would realize how what kind of shame you would feel as a father if your 16-year-old feel as a father if your 16-year-old feel as a father if your 16-year-old girl gets a screaming toothache and you girl gets a screaming toothache and you girl gets a screaming toothache and you have to go into debt to get her a root have to go into debt to get her a root have to go into debt to get her a root canal and that hangs over you for the canal and that hangs over you for the canal and that hangs over you for the next two or three years? next two or three years? next two or three years? &gt;&gt; I'm all for robbing it from social &gt;&gt; I'm all for robbing it from social &gt;&gt; I'm all for robbing it from social security because I like that idea. The security because I like that idea. The security because I like that idea. The moment you say, you know, nationalized moment you say, you know, nationalized moment you say, you know, nationalized healthcare, I think, oh boy, here we go healthcare, I think, oh boy, here we go healthcare, I think, oh boy, here we go again. But I like the idea of robbing again. But I like the idea of robbing again. But I like the idea of robbing it from social security. I'm not it from social security. I'm not it from social security. I'm not talking about taking old people and talking about taking old people and talking about taking old people and turning them out to pastor and letting turning them out to pastor and letting turning them out to pastor and letting them wander the streets, you know, them wander the streets, you know, them wander the streets, you know, mumbling to themselves. I do think that mumbling to themselves. I do think that mumbling to themselves. I do think that taking care of the older generation is taking care of the older generation is taking care of the older generation is important, but I do think we are a very important, but I do think we are a very important, but I do think we are a very topheavy culture. And maybe because I topheavy culture. And maybe because I topheavy culture. And maybe because I want to I consider you Gen X as opposed want to I consider you Gen X as opposed want to I consider you Gen X as opposed to boomer. to boomer. to boomer. &gt;&gt; I appreciate that. &gt;&gt; I appreciate that. &gt;&gt; I appreciate that. &gt;&gt; I really do. And actually, it raised a &gt;&gt; I really do. And actually, it raised a &gt;&gt; I really do. And actually, it raised a question for me. Feel free to um say question for me. Feel free to um say question for me. Feel free to um say pass. You don't want to answer, but pass. You don't want to answer, but pass. You don't want to answer, but earlier you said you you're somewhat um earlier you said you you're somewhat um earlier you said you you're somewhat um I don't know, bashful or you have I don't know, bashful or you have I don't know, bashful or you have this issue around your age. Like I my this issue around your age. Like I my this issue around your age. Like I my friend Kelly Starret who's a you know friend Kelly Starret who's a you know friend Kelly Starret who's a you know PhD in physiology amazing trainer and PhD in physiology amazing trainer and PhD in physiology amazing trainer and stuff. He said the best thing about stuff. He said the best thing about stuff. He said the best thing about turning 50 when I was turning 50 he's turning 50 when I was turning 50 he's turning 50 when I was turning 50 he's like you're going to be among the best like you're going to be among the best like you're going to be among the best in shape for your decade. And I think I in shape for your decade. And I think I in shape for your decade. And I think I mean look you look great for a mean look you look great for a mean look you look great for a 40-year-old like you're killing 40-year-old like you're killing 40-year-old like you're killing it. You know you're fit all this stuff. it. You know you're fit all this stuff. it. You know you're fit all this stuff. So but I wonder is this kind of shame So but I wonder is this kind of shame So but I wonder is this kind of shame around it because your peer group kind around it because your peer group kind around it because your peer group kind of sucks in the way that you're of sucks in the way that you're of sucks in the way that you're describing or is this actually about describing or is this actually about describing or is this actually about age? Because to me, one of the mo one of age? Because to me, one of the mo one of age? Because to me, one of the mo one of the best things is to feel like your the best things is to feel like your the best things is to feel like your friends, your people, the people you friends, your people, the people you friends, your people, the people you associate with are awesome. And your associate with are awesome. And your associate with are awesome. And your generation, I loved I think Gen X is an generation, I loved I think Gen X is an generation, I loved I think Gen X is an incredible generation. As this incredible generation. As this incredible generation. As this conversation continues, I'm thinking conversation continues, I'm thinking conversation continues, I'm thinking more and more about the responsibility more and more about the responsibility more and more about the responsibility and both the failures and the and both the failures and the and both the failures and the opportunities to remedy things for opportunities to remedy things for opportunities to remedy things for the next generation. That's how we the next generation. That's how we the next generation. That's how we started this conversation. So, two started this conversation. So, two started this conversation. So, two questions there. First of all, is that questions there. First of all, is that questions there. First of all, is that what that's about? like your peers kind what that's about? like your peers kind what that's about? like your peers kind of suck and you don't want to be a part of suck and you don't want to be a part of suck and you don't want to be a part of it because I consider you Gen X and of it because I consider you Gen X and of it because I consider you Gen X and I'm not just trying to what do the kids I'm not just trying to what do the kids I'm not just trying to what do the kids say glaze you here you're winning on say glaze you here you're winning on say glaze you here you're winning on every dimension and you got two health every dimension and you got two health every dimension and you got two health what sounds like healthy productive boys what sounds like healthy productive boys what sounds like healthy productive boys like you got it all man like you got it all man like you got it all man like &gt;&gt; I think a lot of it comes down to very &gt;&gt; I think a lot of it comes down to very &gt;&gt; I think a lot of it comes down to very just base things and that is a fear of just base things and that is a fear of just base things and that is a fear of death I mean I'm not af I'm a I'm death I mean I'm not af I'm a I'm death I mean I'm not af I'm a I'm afraid of getting old and being afraid of getting old and being afraid of getting old and being unhealthy I don't mind the death part unhealthy I don't mind the death part unhealthy I don't mind the death part also just a fear of just wanting to feel also just a fear of just wanting to feel also just a fear of just wanting to feel young and vigorous and masculine and young and vigorous and masculine and young and vigorous and masculine and feel like that's slipping away from me. feel like that's slipping away from me. feel like that's slipping away from me. Biology is undefeated. So, I think I'm a Biology is undefeated. So, I think I'm a Biology is undefeated. So, I think I'm a little bit youth obsessed and a little bit youth obsessed and a little bit youth obsessed and a little bit aegist. So, I think I have just a bit aegist. So, I think I have just a bit aegist. So, I think I have just a fear of aging. Um, but just the fear of aging. Um, but just the fear of aging. Um, but just the call out about paying it forward and the call out about paying it forward and the call out about paying it forward and the call out to your to your I know a lot of call out to your to your I know a lot of call out to your to your I know a lot of young men and a lot of successful men young men and a lot of successful men young men and a lot of successful men listen to this podcast. Like, I think my listen to this podcast. Like, I think my listen to this podcast. Like, I think my generation on a lot of levels, we're generation on a lot of levels, we're generation on a lot of levels, we're talking about tax policy, but men aren't talking about tax policy, but men aren't talking about tax policy, but men aren't stepping up with respect to young men. stepping up with respect to young men. stepping up with respect to young men. If you look at the single point of If you look at the single point of If you look at the single point of failure, if you were to reverse engineer failure, if you were to reverse engineer failure, if you were to reverse engineer when a boy comes off the tracks, it's when a boy comes off the tracks, it's when a boy comes off the tracks, it's when he loses a male role model through when he loses a male role model through when he loses a male role model through either death, divorce, or abandonment. either death, divorce, or abandonment. either death, divorce, or abandonment. When a boy loses a male role model, and When a boy loses a male role model, and When a boy loses a male role model, and 90% of the time, single parenthood is 90% of the time, single parenthood is 90% of the time, single parenthood is headed by a woman, as mine was, at that headed by a woman, as mine was, at that headed by a woman, as mine was, at that moment, he becomes more likely to be moment, he becomes more likely to be moment, he becomes more likely to be incarcerated than graduate from college. incarcerated than graduate from college. incarcerated than graduate from college. And men aren't stepping up. There are And men aren't stepping up. There are And men aren't stepping up. There are three times as many women applying to be three times as many women applying to be three times as many women applying to be big sisters in New York as are men big sisters in New York as are men big sisters in New York as are men applying to be big brothers. And some of applying to be big brothers. And some of applying to be big brothers. And some of it is a taboo that men are concerned or it is a taboo that men are concerned or it is a taboo that men are concerned or self-conscious about expressing an self-conscious about expressing an self-conscious about expressing an interest to get involved in a boy's life interest to get involved in a boy's life interest to get involved in a boy's life because of sexual abuse from the because of sexual abuse from the because of sexual abuse from the Catholic Church and Michael Jackson and Catholic Church and Michael Jackson and Catholic Church and Michael Jackson and the rest. But there are a ton of men out the rest. But there are a ton of men out the rest. But there are a ton of men out there in their 30s. I think you have a there in their 30s. I think you have a there in their 30s. I think you have a bunch of Morgan with you that may or may bunch of Morgan with you that may or may bunch of Morgan with you that may or may not have kids of their own. You don't not have kids of their own. You don't not have kids of their own. You don't have to be Se Goldman Sachs. You don't have to be Se Goldman Sachs. You don't have to be Se Goldman Sachs. You don't have to degree have a degree in have to degree have a degree in have to degree have a degree in adolescent psychiatry. You just have to adolescent psychiatry. You just have to adolescent psychiatry. You just have to be a good man trying to live a virtuous be a good man trying to live a virtuous be a good man trying to live a virtuous life. And as someone who mentors young life. And as someone who mentors young life. And as someone who mentors young men, I can tell you it is so easy to add men, I can tell you it is so easy to add men, I can tell you it is so easy to add value. Just showing an interest, value. Just showing an interest, value. Just showing an interest, answering basic questions. answering basic questions. answering basic questions. This is a question I literally got now This is a question I literally got now This is a question I literally got now six weeks ago from a young man I'm six weeks ago from a young man I'm six weeks ago from a young man I'm mentoring. I'm on this new diet. I'm mentoring. I'm on this new diet. I'm mentoring. I'm on this new diet. I'm just drinking it pineapple juice and just drinking it pineapple juice and just drinking it pineapple juice and creatine. Okay. creatine. Okay. creatine. Okay. I don't have a medical degree and I can I don't have a medical degree and I can I don't have a medical degree and I can tell you that's wrong. Mhm. tell you that's wrong. Mhm. tell you that's wrong. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Another question I got eight weeks ago. &gt;&gt; Another question I got eight weeks ago. &gt;&gt; Another question I got eight weeks ago. I saw this amazing thing. I'm moving to I saw this amazing thing. I'm moving to I saw this amazing thing. I'm moving to Alaska, Scott. What do you You're moving Alaska, Scott. What do you You're moving Alaska, Scott. What do you You're moving to I saw this amazing thing on National to I saw this amazing thing on National to I saw this amazing thing on National Grave. I've decided I want to move to Grave. I've decided I want to move to Grave. I've decided I want to move to Alaska. You have a good job and your mom Alaska. You have a good job and your mom Alaska. You have a good job and your mom is sick, right? Yeah. Why are you moving is sick, right? Yeah. Why are you moving is sick, right? Yeah. Why are you moving to Alaska? You're going to quit your job to Alaska? You're going to quit your job to Alaska? You're going to quit your job and move to If you just ask basic and move to If you just ask basic and move to If you just ask basic questions, you add value to these young questions, you add value to these young questions, you add value to these young men's lives. men's lives. men's lives. &gt;&gt; Just real basic stuff. I'm feeling &gt;&gt; Just real basic stuff. I'm feeling &gt;&gt; Just real basic stuff. I'm feeling depressed. Did you get outside? Are you depressed. Did you get outside? Are you depressed. Did you get outside? Are you working out? There needs to be a working out? There needs to be a working out? There needs to be a societal zeitgeist that a moment a young societal zeitgeist that a moment a young societal zeitgeist that a moment a young man doesn't have men in his life that the doesn't have men in his life that the doesn't have men in his life that the tribe moves in and injects young men the tribe moves in and injects young men the tribe moves in and injects young men into their life. And I would the call into their life. And I would the call into their life. And I would the call out to men is you know there's this out to men is you know there's this out to men is you know there's this there's this great quote in one of the there's this great quote in one of the there's this great quote in one of the Paul Wes Anderson movies Magnolia where Paul Wes Anderson movies Magnolia where Paul Wes Anderson movies Magnolia where the guy says I have love to give. I just the guy says I have love to give. I just the guy says I have love to give. I just don't know where to give it. I just don't know where to give it. I just don't know where to give it. I just don't know where to put it. It's such a don't know where to put it. It's such a don't know where to put it. It's such a wonderful statement. I think there's so wonderful statement. I think there's so wonderful statement. I think there's so many men out there that have real uh many men out there that have real uh many men out there that have real uh like I think some of the most rewarding like I think some of the most rewarding like I think some of the most rewarding types of love is to give fraternal and types of love is to give fraternal and types of love is to give fraternal and paternal love. My purpose, my thing in paternal love. My purpose, my thing in paternal love. My purpose, my thing in life is to try and prepare my men for life is to try and prepare my men for life is to try and prepare my men for others. Prepare my boys for others. Prepare my boys for others. Prepare my boys for others. That's my job. It gives me purpose. I That's my job. It gives me purpose. I That's my job. It gives me purpose. I think there's so many men out there that think there's so many men out there that think there's so many men out there that could offer so much fraternal and could offer so much fraternal and could offer so much fraternal and fraternal love to a young man or a boy fraternal love to a young man or a boy fraternal love to a young man or a boy and they don't do it either because and they don't do it either because and they don't do it either because they're too lazy or they're not stepping they're too lazy or they're not stepping they're too lazy or they're not stepping up or they they're worried that people up or they they're worried that people up or they they're worried that people will suspect them of something and will suspect them of something and will suspect them of something and there's so much need and this is what there's so much need and this is what there's so much need and this is what you do. You find a single mother in your you do. You find a single mother in your you do. You find a single mother in your workplace and say going to a game, does workplace and say going to a game, does workplace and say going to a game, does your son want to join me or join me and your son want to join me or join me and your son want to join me or join me and my boys? Does your son want to hang out? my boys? Does your son want to hang out? my boys? Does your son want to hang out? washing your car, going to a game, washing your car, going to a game, washing your car, going to a game, whatever it is, that is the e, in my whatever it is, that is the e, in my whatever it is, that is the e, in my opinion, that is the easiest solve that opinion, that is the easiest solve that opinion, that is the easiest solve that doesn't involve the government right doesn't involve the government right doesn't involve the government right now. But the bottom line is men of our now. But the bottom line is men of our now. But the bottom line is men of our age aren't stepping up. And I couch it age aren't stepping up. And I couch it age aren't stepping up. And I couch it in masculinity. You take care of in masculinity. You take care of in masculinity. You take care of yourself. That's the first circle. You yourself. That's the first circle. You yourself. That's the first circle. You fix your own oxygen mask. You can't get fix your own oxygen mask. You can't get fix your own oxygen mask. You can't get can't take care of other people unless can't take care of other people unless can't take care of other people unless you're economically and emotionally you're economically and emotionally you're economically and emotionally somewhat viable. You take care of your somewhat viable. You take care of your somewhat viable. You take care of your family. Take care extended family. Take family. Take care extended family. Take family. Take care extended family. Take care of your community. But the ultimate care of your community. But the ultimate care of your community. But the ultimate expression of masculinity is to get expression of masculinity is to get expression of masculinity is to get involved in the life of a child that involved in the life of a child that involved in the life of a child that isn't yours. And not enough men are isn't yours. And not enough men are isn't yours. And not enough men are doing it. Even really successful men. doing it. Even really successful men. doing it. Even really successful men. They're not stepping up. They're not They're not stepping up. They're not They're not stepping up. They're not helping young men. And the easiest thing helping young men. And the easiest thing helping young men. And the easiest thing to do, the most and it's so rewarding. I to do, the most and it's so rewarding. I to do, the most and it's so rewarding. I can't tell you. It makes me feel, and I can't tell you. It makes me feel, and I can't tell you. It makes me feel, and I don't do enough of it, but I do mentor don't do enough of it, but I do mentor don't do enough of it, but I do mentor young men. It's just so easy to add young men. It's just so easy to add young men. It's just so easy to add value. They make such stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] value. They make such stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] value. They make such stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] decisions. My job with my sons is to be decisions. My job with my sons is to be decisions. My job with my sons is to be their prefrontal cortex. No, you have to their prefrontal cortex. No, you have to their prefrontal cortex. No, you have to wear shoes to school. I know this is wear shoes to school. I know this is wear shoes to school. I know this is right. Wear shoes to school. So anyways, right. Wear shoes to school. So anyways, right. Wear shoes to school. So anyways, the call out. If we want better men, we the call out. If we want better men, we the call out. If we want better men, we have to be better men. I don't think you have to be better men. I don't think you have to be better men. I don't think you can really hit the pinnacle of what it can really hit the pinnacle of what it can really hit the pinnacle of what it means to be successful in masculinity means to be successful in masculinity means to be successful in masculinity unless you're involved in the life of a unless you're involved in the life of a unless you're involved in the life of a child that isn't yours. We have the most child that isn't yours. We have the most child that isn't yours. We have the most single parent homes of any nation in the single parent homes of any nation in the single parent homes of any nation in the world. We used to be number two to world. We used to be number two to world. We used to be number two to Sweden. We'd pass them two years ago. Sweden. We'd pass them two years ago. Sweden. We'd pass them two years ago. But that's what I would call I But that's what I would call I But that's what I would call I constantly talk about government fixes constantly talk about government fixes constantly talk about government fixes because I'm a lefty. there. The easiest because I'm a lefty. there. The easiest because I'm a lefty. there. The easiest societal fix is quite frankly is just societal fix is quite frankly is just societal fix is quite frankly is just male mentorship. male mentorship. male mentorship. &gt;&gt; Yes. And yes, totally agree. I &gt;&gt; Yes. And yes, totally agree. I &gt;&gt; Yes. And yes, totally agree. I was very proactive in going out and was very proactive in going out and was very proactive in going out and seeking them. One feature of that I seeking them. One feature of that I seeking them. One feature of that I just wonder if we can kind of um just wonder if we can kind of um just wonder if we can kind of um superimpose or you know uh or superimpose some or you know uh or superimpose some or you know uh or superimpose some solutions on top of would be a better solutions on top of would be a better solutions on top of would be a better way to put it is for instance the I had way to put it is for instance the I had way to put it is for instance the I had no interest in playing football but kept no interest in playing football but kept no interest in playing football but kept getting hurt skateboarding. So I learned getting hurt skateboarding. So I learned getting hurt skateboarding. So I learned how to weightlift and make my body how to weightlift and make my body how to weightlift and make my body stronger from the football coach who was stronger from the football coach who was stronger from the football coach who was this amazing guy who wrote the original this amazing guy who wrote the original this amazing guy who wrote the original script for Mr. Mom that he wrote a script for Mr. Mom that he wrote a script for Mr. Mom that he wrote a play Wait Till Your Mother Gets Home play Wait Till Your Mother Gets Home play Wait Till Your Mother Gets Home that became Mr. Mom. He's like big buff that became Mr. Mom. He's like big buff that became Mr. Mom. He's like big buff guy. His wife Michael Kear. guy. His wife Michael Kear. guy. His wife Michael Kear. &gt;&gt; That's right. But so people were say he &gt;&gt; That's right. But so people were say he &gt;&gt; That's right. But so people were say he didn't write that but didn't write that but didn't write that but &gt;&gt; this guy Bob Peters was like a physical &gt;&gt; this guy Bob Peters was like a physical &gt;&gt; this guy Bob Peters was like a physical specimen. He also played the piano and specimen. He also played the piano and specimen. He also played the piano and he raised these kids and his wife dared he raised these kids and his wife dared he raised these kids and his wife dared him. She said in the se early 70s she him. She said in the se early 70s she him. She said in the se early 70s she said you couldn't do what I do. And so said you couldn't do what I do. And so said you couldn't do what I do. And so that was how the whole thing came to he that was how the whole thing came to he that was how the whole thing came to he realized you're right it's really realized you're right it's really realized you're right it's really tough. So um I went to him for tough. So um I went to him for tough. So um I went to him for working out advice but not for other working out advice but not for other working out advice but not for other sources of advice. I went to uh sources of advice. I went to uh sources of advice. I went to uh different men for different sources of different men for different sources of different men for different sources of mentorship. It'll become clear what I'm mentorship. It'll become clear what I'm mentorship. It'll become clear what I'm saying here in a moment. My academic saying here in a moment. My academic saying here in a moment. My academic adviser, my PhD adviser was an adviser, my PhD adviser was an adviser, my PhD adviser was an incredible woman. So I was mentored by incredible woman. So I was mentored by incredible woman. So I was mentored by women too. But that's characteristic of women too. But that's characteristic of women too. But that's characteristic of academ. &gt;&gt; Was your father very involved in your &gt;&gt; Was your father very involved in your &gt;&gt; Was your father very involved in your life? &gt;&gt; He he was. is I mean we had my parents &gt;&gt; He he was. is I mean we had my parents &gt;&gt; He he was. is I mean we had my parents split up at a at a you know at in split up at a at a you know at in split up at a at a you know at in adolescence and so we had our you know adolescence and so we had our you know adolescence and so we had our you know our challenges over the years over time our challenges over the years over time our challenges over the years over time you know my dad been a scientist first you know my dad been a scientist first you know my dad been a scientist first generation immigrant he generation immigrant he generation immigrant he &gt;&gt; How old were you when your parents split &gt;&gt; How old were you when your parents split &gt;&gt; How old were you when your parents split up? &gt;&gt; 14. &gt;&gt; 14. &gt;&gt; 14. &gt;&gt; And did other men kind of move in or was &gt;&gt; And did other men kind of move in or was &gt;&gt; And did other men kind of move in or was your father still very involved? your father still very involved? your father still very involved? &gt;&gt; I sought out other mentors at that &gt;&gt; I sought out other mentors at that &gt;&gt; I sought out other mentors at that point. I resented science. I resented point. I resented science. I resented point. I resented science. I resented what he was a part of. We eventually what he was a part of. We eventually what he was a part of. We eventually made amends. He's actually been a guest made amends. He's actually been a guest made amends. He's actually been a guest on the podcast. He's a he's a physicist. on the podcast. He's a he's a physicist. on the podcast. He's a he's a physicist. really helped me understand his really helped me understand his really helped me understand his trajectory and you know and we've worked trajectory and you know and we've worked trajectory and you know and we've worked out our stuff but at that time it out our stuff but at that time it out our stuff but at that time it was you know it was skateboarding it was you know it was skateboarding it was you know it was skateboarding it was lifting weights it was I want to become lifting weights it was I want to become lifting weights it was I want to become a firefighter actually took fire science a firefighter actually took fire science a firefighter actually took fire science courses and did that and then courses and did that and then courses and did that and then eventually tripped and fell into science eventually tripped and fell into science eventually tripped and fell into science and mentored uh menteed myself to a and mentored uh menteed myself to a and mentored uh menteed myself to a wonderful professor at Santa Barbara and wonderful professor at Santa Barbara and wonderful professor at Santa Barbara and then the story unfolds and then the story unfolds and then the story unfolds &gt;&gt; yeah and you're gonna you're going to &gt;&gt; yeah and you're gonna you're going to &gt;&gt; yeah and you're gonna you're going to gag on this but you're exceptional most gag on this but you're exceptional most gag on this but you're exceptional most 14-year-olds aren't exceptional and go 14-year-olds aren't exceptional and go 14-year-olds aren't exceptional and go out and find mentors have to out and find mentors have to out and find mentors have to find them cuz they don't even know most find them cuz they don't even know most find them cuz they don't even know most 14-year-olds don't even know they need 14-year-olds don't even know they need 14-year-olds don't even know they need mentors. They don't even know the mentors. They don't even know the mentors. They don't even know the concept. And my mom was smart enough to concept. And my mom was smart enough to concept. And my mom was smart enough to get men involved in my life really get men involved in my life really get men involved in my life really quickly. And it was hu it was everything quickly. And it was hu it was everything quickly. And it was hu it was everything for me. Everything. I got a my mom's for me. Everything. I got a my mom's for me. Everything. I got a my mom's boyfriend gave me 200 bucks and said I boyfriend gave me 200 bucks and said I boyfriend gave me 200 bucks and said I started asking about stocks and he said started asking about stocks and he said started asking about stocks and he said if you haven't spent this or bought if you haven't spent this or bought if you haven't spent this or bought stocks by the time I'm here next stocks by the time I'm here next stocks by the time I'm here next weekend, I'm um taking it back. So I weekend, I'm um taking it back. So I weekend, I'm um taking it back. So I went to Westwood and Wilshire Boulevard went to Westwood and Wilshire Boulevard went to Westwood and Wilshire Boulevard and walked into Dean Witter and this guy and walked into Dean Witter and this guy and walked into Dean Witter and this guy with a big jurow came walking out Syro with a big jurow came walking out Syro with a big jurow came walking out Syro and said, "Hi, I'm Sai Sero." And and said, "Hi, I'm Sai Sero." And and said, "Hi, I'm Sai Sero." And every day I would call I didn't have a every day I would call I didn't have a every day I would call I didn't have a lot of friends at 13 him from the lot of friends at 13 him from the lot of friends at 13 him from the Emerson junior high pay phone 20 cents Emerson junior high pay phone 20 cents Emerson junior high pay phone 20 cents and he'd give me a lessons on the and he'd give me a lessons on the and he'd give me a lessons on the market. I bought 12 shares of Columbia market. I bought 12 shares of Columbia market. I bought 12 shares of Columbia Pictures and be like Close Encounters Pictures and be like Close Encounters Pictures and be like Close Encounters the third kind is a hit. That's why the third kind is a hit. That's why the third kind is a hit. That's why the saga's up. Casey's shadow is a bomb. saga's up. Casey's shadow is a bomb. saga's up. Casey's shadow is a bomb. When there's more buyers for the stock When there's more buyers for the stock When there's more buyers for the stock and fewer sellers, the stock goes up. and fewer sellers, the stock goes up. and fewer sellers, the stock goes up. And he taught me about markets. I've And he taught me about markets. I've And he taught me about markets. I've been investing in stocks since I was 13. been investing in stocks since I was 13. been investing in stocks since I was 13. I've made a lot of money selling my I've made a lot of money selling my I've made a lot of money selling my companies. I've made a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of money companies. I've made a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of money companies. I've made a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of money investing in stocks. And just this guy, investing in stocks. And just this guy, investing in stocks. And just this guy, and by the way, he came to one of my and by the way, he came to one of my and by the way, he came to one of my live podcasts about two years ago. He's live podcasts about two years ago. He's live podcasts about two years ago. He's now 82. Just this guy's interest in me now 82. Just this guy's interest in me now 82. Just this guy's interest in me like just meant the world. And also, and like just meant the world. And also, and like just meant the world. And also, and this is a weird story, but he recently this is a weird story, but he recently this is a weird story, but he recently just passed away. You know how in media just passed away. You know how in media just passed away. You know how in media there's that second family people talk there's that second family people talk there's that second family people talk about? The dude who has a family and you about? The dude who has a family and you about? The dude who has a family and you find out he has a second family. My mom find out he has a second family. My mom find out he has a second family. My mom and I were the second family. My mom's and I were the second family. My mom's and I were the second family. My mom's boyfriend and my kind of male role model boyfriend and my kind of male role model boyfriend and my kind of male role model had a family had a family had a family &gt;&gt; unbeknownst to her. &gt;&gt; unbeknownst to her. &gt;&gt; unbeknownst to her. &gt;&gt; No, to her, &gt;&gt; No, to her, &gt;&gt; No, to her, &gt;&gt; but we didn't have any money. And I'm &gt;&gt; but we didn't have any money. And I'm &gt;&gt; but we didn't have any money. And I'm not going to judge my mom, but and I'm not going to judge my mom, but and I'm not going to judge my mom, but and I'm not going to judge him. And he was not going to judge him. And he was not going to judge him. And he was actually a really good man to me. He was actually a really good man to me. He was actually a really good man to me. He was really a good mentor, but he was only really a good mentor, but he was only really a good mentor, but he was only around every other weekend. But I had around every other weekend. But I had around every other weekend. But I had some great my athletic coaches took a some great my athletic coaches took a some great my athletic coaches took a really nice active role in my life. really nice active role in my life. really nice active role in my life. &gt;&gt; And when I think about what it would &gt;&gt; And when I think about what it would &gt;&gt; And when I think about what it would have been like because the reality is have been like because the reality is have been like because the reality is you have this healthy instinct as a boy you have this healthy instinct as a boy you have this healthy instinct as a boy to start rejecting your parents at a to start rejecting your parents at a to start rejecting your parents at a certain age. And not only that, I see it certain age. And not only that, I see it certain age. And not only that, I see it with my boys. Their mom's voice with my boys. Their mom's voice with my boys. Their mom's voice literally becomes white noise to them. literally becomes white noise to them. literally becomes white noise to them. They like stop hearing it and they They like stop hearing it and they They like stop hearing it and they take her seriously or literally but not take her seriously or literally but not take her seriously or literally but not seriously. And and but even just seriously. And and but even just seriously. And and but even just saying that boys needed men 5 years ago, saying that boys needed men 5 years ago, saying that boys needed men 5 years ago, this dialogue has come so far was this dialogue has come so far was this dialogue has come so far was triggering to some people. What women triggering to some people. What women triggering to some people. What women can't raise good men? No. My mom raised can't raise good men? No. My mom raised can't raise good men? No. My mom raised me, light of my life. But if I had not me, light of my life. But if I had not me, light of my life. But if I had not had a bunch of men who just naturally had a bunch of men who just naturally had a bunch of men who just naturally stepped in, there was a guy across the stepped in, there was a guy across the stepped in, there was a guy across the hall who noticed that it was just me and hall who noticed that it was just me and hall who noticed that it was just me and my mom. He would come over with his my mom. He would come over with his my mom. He would come over with his girlfriend to me every other week and girlfriend to me every other week and girlfriend to me every other week and say, "Do you want to come horseback say, "Do you want to come horseback say, "Do you want to come horseback riding with us?" Right? Because he knew riding with us?" Right? Because he knew riding with us?" Right? Because he knew I was being raised by my mom. It was a I was being raised by my mom. It was a I was being raised by my mom. It was a natural instinct for him to come over natural instinct for him to come over natural instinct for him to come over and take me out. And I worry that we've and take me out. And I worry that we've and take me out. And I worry that we've lost that we don't have enough male lost that we don't have enough male lost that we don't have enough male mentors. &gt;&gt; Wow. We're going to have to do 10 &gt;&gt; Wow. We're going to have to do 10 &gt;&gt; Wow. We're going to have to do 10 podcasts. You know, I've got so many podcasts. You know, I've got so many podcasts. You know, I've got so many more questions. I didn't get to a lot of more questions. I didn't get to a lot of more questions. I didn't get to a lot of things that Scott, I have to say it's things that Scott, I have to say it's things that Scott, I have to say it's been amazing to get to just sit with you been amazing to get to just sit with you been amazing to get to just sit with you and learn from you. I'm delighted and learn from you. I'm delighted and learn from you. I'm delighted that we had this conversation. I hope that we had this conversation. I hope that we had this conversation. I hope the fact that we had it um I don't know the fact that we had it um I don't know the fact that we had it um I don't know how polarized people view us as, how polarized people view us as, how polarized people view us as, but uh but that alone was important to but uh but that alone was important to but uh but that alone was important to me. But I'm going to think a lot about me. But I'm going to think a lot about me. But I'm going to think a lot about many of the things you said. You've many of the things you said. You've many of the things you said. You've talked about having a code, this, you talked about having a code, this, you talked about having a code, this, you know, this notion of really being a know, this notion of really being a know, this notion of really being a provider and a protector, having provider and a protector, having provider and a protector, having building a financial, you know, building a financial, you know, building a financial, you know, foundation for oneself. Uh, you know, foundation for oneself. Uh, you know, foundation for oneself. Uh, you know, putting service over uh attention to putting service over uh attention to putting service over uh attention to self and just so many things of self and just so many things of self and just so many things of value. This is one that, um, I know many value. This is one that, um, I know many value. This is one that, um, I know many people are going to come back to over people are going to come back to over people are going to come back to over and over again. And I'm just grateful and over again. And I'm just grateful and over again. And I'm just grateful for you doing what you do. you defy all for you doing what you do. you defy all for you doing what you do. you defy all the stereotypes of the of the groups the stereotypes of the of the groups the stereotypes of the of the groups that people assign you to, which those that people assign you to, which those that people assign you to, which those are my favorite kind of people. So, and are my favorite kind of people. So, and are my favorite kind of people. So, and again, you're killing it on the again, you're killing it on the again, you're killing it on the health front. Whatever you're doing, health front. Whatever you're doing, health front. Whatever you're doing, man, it's probably your boys. They're man, it's probably your boys. They're man, it's probably your boys. They're probably like, "This is what it's like probably like, "This is what it's like probably like, "This is what it's like to have vigor and you like to have vigor and you like to have vigor and you like to &gt;&gt; Well, tonight I'll go through everything &gt;&gt; Well, tonight I'll go through everything &gt;&gt; Well, tonight I'll go through everything what I do and I want you to edit it, but what I do and I want you to edit it, but what I do and I want you to edit it, but uh just in the mutual fan club here, one uh just in the mutual fan club here, one uh just in the mutual fan club here, one of the things I don't like about of the things I don't like about of the things I don't like about podcasting is it's emblematic of podcasting is it's emblematic of podcasting is it's emblematic of American politics and that is the more American politics and that is the more American politics and that is the more outrageous you are, outrageous you are, outrageous you are, &gt;&gt; the more ratings you get. So the &gt;&gt; the more ratings you get. So the &gt;&gt; the more ratings you get. So the podcasting algorithms podcasting algorithms podcasting algorithms encourage people to say outrageous encourage people to say outrageous encourage people to say outrageous things and sometimes they're not very things and sometimes they're not very things and sometimes they're not very informed. And I'm guilty of this informed. And I'm guilty of this informed. And I'm guilty of this sometimes. I've fallen into this Dunning sometimes. I've fallen into this Dunning sometimes. I've fallen into this Dunning Krueger where I think I know something Krueger where I think I know something Krueger where I think I know something about something because I know a decent about something because I know a decent about something because I know a decent amount about marketing or business. And amount about marketing or business. And amount about marketing or business. And I think in our leaders, we need to make I think in our leaders, we need to make I think in our leaders, we need to make intelligence and honesty and science cool again. And and honesty and science cool again. And and honesty and science cool again. And you're doing that. And I worry sometimes you're doing that. And I worry sometimes you're doing that. And I worry sometimes a lot of our most senior- elected a lot of our most senior- elected a lot of our most senior- elected officials on the health side are not officials on the health side are not officials on the health side are not making intelligence or science cool making intelligence or science cool making intelligence or science cool again. &gt;&gt; I have friends there and I'll just tell &gt;&gt; I have friends there and I'll just tell &gt;&gt; I have friends there and I'll just tell like they're not biologists. They need like they're not biologists. They need like they're not biologists. They need to talk to talk to talk to &gt;&gt; that's my point. You have real domain &gt;&gt; that's my point. You have real domain &gt;&gt; that's my point. You have real domain expertise. I think you are making expertise. I think you are making expertise. I think you are making science and intelligence cool again. And science and intelligence cool again. And science and intelligence cool again. And I think the nation is in desperate need I think the nation is in desperate need I think the nation is in desperate need of that. That certification domain of that. That certification domain of that. That certification domain expertise being measured about your expertise being measured about your expertise being measured about your comments citing data putting out comments citing data putting out comments citing data putting out disclosures telling me no Scott you disclosures telling me no Scott you disclosures telling me no Scott you don't understand DOPA. This is what don't understand DOPA. This is what don't understand DOPA. This is what actually is going on. I think that's actually is going on. I think that's actually is going on. I think that's important. And so I think you're a important. And so I think you're a important. And so I think you're a really positive influence for young really positive influence for young really positive influence for young people who are getting seduced by the people who are getting seduced by the people who are getting seduced by the algorithms. And there's got to be people algorithms. And there's got to be people algorithms. And there's got to be people like you out there that young men aspire like you out there that young men aspire like you out there that young men aspire to be more like that say no training to be more like that say no training to be more like that say no training domain expertise being measured and domain expertise being measured and domain expertise being measured and science matter like that. You're making science matter like that. You're making science matter like that. You're making that cool again. that cool again. that cool again. &gt;&gt; Well, thank you. Well, it's a labor of &gt;&gt; Well, thank you. Well, it's a labor of &gt;&gt; Well, thank you. Well, it's a labor of love and a bit of a compulsion. So, I love and a bit of a compulsion. So, I love and a bit of a compulsion. So, I plan to continue, but I'm excited for plan to continue, but I'm excited for plan to continue, but I'm excited for whatever comes next and especially in whatever comes next and especially in whatever comes next and especially in these very tense uh political years. these very tense uh political years. these very tense uh political years. You're a brave one. You're a brave one. You're a brave one. &gt;&gt; Go on. You got balls and brains, man. &gt;&gt; Go on. You got balls and brains, man. &gt;&gt; Go on. You got balls and brains, man. That's how I'll wrap this one. That's how I'll wrap this one. That's how I'll wrap this one. You got balls and brains. I've been the You got balls and brains. I've been the You got balls and brains. I've been the whole time. Like, and um you're willing whole time. Like, and um you're willing whole time. Like, and um you're willing to take risks and um and make mistakes to take risks and um and make mistakes to take risks and um and make mistakes and clearly you're making more better and clearly you're making more better and clearly you're making more better decisions than less good ones on average decisions than less good ones on average decisions than less good ones on average compared to your peer group and then compared to your peer group and then compared to your peer group and then some. So, come back again. Appreciate. some. So, come back again. Appreciate. some. So, come back again. Appreciate. &gt;&gt; Thanks again, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Thanks again, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Thanks again, Andrew. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Scott Galloway. To find discussion with Scott Galloway. To find discussion with Scott Galloway. To find links to his new book and to find links to his new book and to find links to his new book and to find links to his various podcasts and other to his various podcasts and other to his various podcasts and other resources, please see the show note resources, please see the show note resources, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Scott Galloway. today's discussion with Scott Galloway. today's discussion with Scott Galloway. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.