Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're talking all about goals and the we're talking all about goals and the we're talking all about goals and the science of goal setting and achieving science of goal setting and achieving science of goal setting and achieving your goals. So, when we think about goal your goals. So, when we think about goal your goals. So, when we think about goal seeking and the pursuit of goals of any kind in and the pursuit of goals of any kind in and the pursuit of goals of any kind in the brain, it doesn't matter what the brain, it doesn't matter what the brain, it doesn't matter what the goal is. It involves a common set of goal is. It involves a common set of goal is. It involves a common set of neural circuits. One of the brain areas neural circuits. One of the brain areas neural circuits. One of the brain areas is the so-called amygdala. The amygdala is the so-called amygdala. The amygdala is the so-called amygdala. The amygdala is most often associated with fear. So, is most often associated with fear. So, is most often associated with fear. So, you might say, "Wow, how is that you might say, "Wow, how is that you might say, "Wow, how is that involved in goal-directed behavior?" involved in goal-directed behavior?" involved in goal-directed behavior?" Well, a lot of our goal-directed Well, a lot of our goal-directed Well, a lot of our goal-directed behavior is to avoid punishments, behavior is to avoid punishments, behavior is to avoid punishments, including things like embarrassment or including things like embarrassment or including things like embarrassment or financial ruin or things of that sort. financial ruin or things of that sort. financial ruin or things of that sort. And so, the amygdala and some sense of And so, the amygdala and some sense of And so, the amygdala and some sense of anxiety or fear is actually built in to anxiety or fear is actually built in to anxiety or fear is actually built in to the circuits that generate goal seeking the circuits that generate goal seeking the circuits that generate goal seeking and our motivation to pursue goals. The and our motivation to pursue goals. The and our motivation to pursue goals. The other areas are the so-called ventral other areas are the so-called ventral other areas are the so-called ventral striatum. The striatum is part of what's called The striatum is part of what's called The striatum is part of what's called the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia is the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia is the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia is a neural circuit that can very simply be a neural circuit that can very simply be a neural circuit that can very simply be described as a neural circuit that helps described as a neural circuit that helps described as a neural circuit that helps us generate go, meaning the initiation us generate go, meaning the initiation us generate go, meaning the initiation of action, and no go, the prevention of action, and no go, the prevention of action, and no go, the prevention of action type scenarios. action type scenarios. action type scenarios. Let me make that even simpler. The Let me make that even simpler. The Let me make that even simpler. The ventral striatum is part of this thing ventral striatum is part of this thing ventral striatum is part of this thing called the basal ganglia. The basal called the basal ganglia. The basal called the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia has sort of two circuits within ganglia has sort of two circuits within ganglia has sort of two circuits within it. One circuit is involved in getting it. One circuit is involved in getting it. One circuit is involved in getting us to do things like I'm going to get up us to do things like I'm going to get up us to do things like I'm going to get up tomorrow and I'm going to run 5 miles tomorrow and I'm going to run 5 miles tomorrow and I'm going to run 5 miles first thing in the morning. I don't know first thing in the morning. I don't know first thing in the morning. I don't know if I'm actually going to do that, but if I'm actually going to do that, but if I'm actually going to do that, but I'm just using that as an example. I'm just using that as an example. I'm just using that as an example. Another circuit within the basal ganglia Another circuit within the basal ganglia Another circuit within the basal ganglia is a no go circuit. It's the one that is a no go circuit. It's the one that is a no go circuit. It's the one that says, "No, I'm not going to go for the says, "No, I'm not going to go for the says, "No, I'm not going to go for the second cookie or the third cookie. I'm second cookie or the third cookie. I'm second cookie or the third cookie. I'm not going to eat that." And then the go not going to eat that." And then the go not going to eat that." And then the go circuit would be the one that's circuit would be the one that's circuit would be the one that's responsible for instead eating something responsible for instead eating something responsible for instead eating something else. Okay? So, we have go and no go else. Okay? So, we have go and no go else. Okay? So, we have go and no go circuits within the basal ganglia. So, circuits within the basal ganglia. So, circuits within the basal ganglia. So, we've got amygdala, so you can of it as we've got amygdala, so you can of it as we've got amygdala, so you can of it as kind of fear and anxiety and avoidance. kind of fear and anxiety and avoidance. kind of fear and anxiety and avoidance. We've got the basal ganglia, which are We've got the basal ganglia, which are We've got the basal ganglia, which are for initiating action and preventing for initiating action and preventing for initiating action and preventing action. And then there is the so-called action. And then there is the so-called action. And then there is the so-called cortex. The cortex is the outer shell of cortex. The cortex is the outer shell of cortex. The cortex is the outer shell of the brain, and there are two subregions the brain, and there are two subregions the brain, and there are two subregions of the cortex that are involved in of the cortex that are involved in of the cortex that are involved in goal-directed behavior. One is the goal-directed behavior. One is the goal-directed behavior. One is the lateral prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal lateral prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal lateral prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal cortex is involved in so-called cortex is involved in so-called cortex is involved in so-called executive function, things like executive function, things like executive function, things like planning, thinking about things under planning, thinking about things under planning, thinking about things under different time scales, so not just what different time scales, so not just what different time scales, so not just what we want in the immediate term, but what we want in the immediate term, but what we want in the immediate term, but what we might want tomorrow or the next day, we might want tomorrow or the next day, we might want tomorrow or the next day, and how our actions currently are going and how our actions currently are going and how our actions currently are going to relate to the future. And the to relate to the future. And the to relate to the future. And the so-called orbitofrontal cortex. so-called orbitofrontal cortex. so-called orbitofrontal cortex. Orbitofrontal cortex has a large number Orbitofrontal cortex has a large number Orbitofrontal cortex has a large number of functions, but one of the key of functions, but one of the key of functions, but one of the key functions of the orbitofrontal cortex, functions of the orbitofrontal cortex, functions of the orbitofrontal cortex, it's involved in meshing some it's involved in meshing some it's involved in meshing some emotionality with our current state of emotionality with our current state of emotionality with our current state of progress and comparing that emotionality progress and comparing that emotionality progress and comparing that emotionality to where we it might be when we are to where we it might be when we are to where we it might be when we are closer to a goal, okay? So, there are closer to a goal, okay? So, there are closer to a goal, okay? So, there are basically four areas. One involved in basically four areas. One involved in basically four areas. One involved in anxiety, one involved in anxiety, one involved in anxiety, one involved in emotion, one involved in planning, and emotion, one involved in planning, and emotion, one involved in planning, and another involved in this go no go another involved in this go no go another involved in this go no go action, okay? If we want to make this action, okay? If we want to make this action, okay? If we want to make this even simpler, I'll just do this one more even simpler, I'll just do this one more even simpler, I'll just do this one more time. Think anxiety and fear, that's the time. Think anxiety and fear, that's the time. Think anxiety and fear, that's the amygdala. The second is involved in amygdala. The second is involved in amygdala. The second is involved in action and inaction. Remember, go and no go, so and inaction. Remember, go and no go, so and inaction. Remember, go and no go, so that's the basal ganglia. The other one that's the basal ganglia. The other one that's the basal ganglia. The other one is involved in planning and thinking across involved in planning and thinking across involved in planning and thinking across different time scales, so that's lateral different time scales, so that's lateral different time scales, so that's lateral prefrontal cortex. And then the fourth prefrontal cortex. And then the fourth prefrontal cortex. And then the fourth one is involved in emotionality, where one is involved in emotionality, where one is involved in emotionality, where we sit emotionally at present compared we sit emotionally at present compared we sit emotionally at present compared to where we think we will be emotionally to where we think we will be emotionally to where we think we will be emotionally when we reach some particular goal, and when we reach some particular goal, and when we reach some particular goal, and that's the orbitofrontal cortex. What is that's the orbitofrontal cortex. What is that's the orbitofrontal cortex. What is going on in these circuits can basically going on in these circuits can basically going on in these circuits can basically be boiled down to two particular things. be boiled down to two particular things. be boiled down to two particular things. The first is value information, trying The first is value information, trying The first is value information, trying to understand whether or not something to understand whether or not something to understand whether or not something is really worth pursuing or not. The is really worth pursuing or not. The is really worth pursuing or not. The other component of this neural circuit other component of this neural circuit other component of this neural circuit is associated with action, which actions is associated with action, which actions is associated with action, which actions to take and which actions not to take to take and which actions not to take to take and which actions not to take given the value of a particular goal in given the value of a particular goal in given the value of a particular goal in a given moment's time. You're going to a given moment's time. You're going to a given moment's time. You're going to hear me say over and over again in this hear me say over and over again in this hear me say over and over again in this episode the value information about a episode the value information about a episode the value information about a goal is so key. Here's why. goal is so key. Here's why. goal is so key. Here's why. There is basically one neurotransmitter There is basically one neurotransmitter There is basically one neurotransmitter or rather neuromodulator system that or rather neuromodulator system that or rather neuromodulator system that governs our goal setting, goal governs our goal setting, goal governs our goal setting, goal assessment, and goal pursuit. And that assessment, and goal pursuit. And that assessment, and goal pursuit. And that is the neuromodulator dopamine. Dopamine is the neuromodulator dopamine. Dopamine is the neuromodulator dopamine. Dopamine is the common currency by which we is the common currency by which we is the common currency by which we assess our progress toward particular assess our progress toward particular assess our progress toward particular things of particular value. In fact, things of particular value. In fact, things of particular value. In fact, dopamine is the way that we assess value dopamine is the way that we assess value dopamine is the way that we assess value of our pursuits. There are basically of our pursuits. There are basically of our pursuits. There are basically only three or four elements to goal only three or four elements to goal only three or four elements to goal setting and goal pursuit. setting and goal pursuit. setting and goal pursuit. Basically, an individual or set of Basically, an individual or set of Basically, an individual or set of individuals has to identify a specific individuals has to identify a specific individuals has to identify a specific thing that they're going to attain. thing that they're going to attain. thing that they're going to attain. Assessment of what whether or not one is Assessment of what whether or not one is Assessment of what whether or not one is making progress towards those goals is a making progress towards those goals is a making progress towards those goals is a second but necessary step. And then second but necessary step. And then second but necessary step. And then there's the business of goal execution. there's the business of goal execution. there's the business of goal execution. And that brings us back to the neural And that brings us back to the neural And that brings us back to the neural circuit components. Remember, this circuit components. Remember, this circuit components. Remember, this neural circuit involving those four neural circuit involving those four neural circuit involving those four things earlier, the amygdala, the things earlier, the amygdala, the things earlier, the amygdala, the striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and the striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and the striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and the prefrontal cortex. prefrontal cortex. prefrontal cortex. They work together to divide the whole They work together to divide the whole They work together to divide the whole process, as I mentioned before, into two process, as I mentioned before, into two process, as I mentioned before, into two general categories. The first is general categories. The first is general categories. The first is assessing value. Knowing whether or not assessing value. Knowing whether or not assessing value. Knowing whether or not where one is at one given moment relates where one is at one given moment relates where one is at one given moment relates to some external thing. Are things going to some external thing. Are things going to some external thing. Are things going well or are things going poorly? And well or are things going poorly? And well or are things going poorly? And knowing how to gauge that accurately. knowing how to gauge that accurately. knowing how to gauge that accurately. And then action steps. Goes and no goes. And then action steps. Goes and no goes. And then action steps. Goes and no goes. Do more of this, do less of that. Do more of this, do less of that. Do more of this, do less of that. Do this, don't do that, etc. So, now we are this, don't do that, etc. So, now we are this, don't do that, etc. So, now we are going to shift back to the neuroscience. going to shift back to the neuroscience. going to shift back to the neuroscience. And as we do this, I'd like you to keep And as we do this, I'd like you to keep And as we do this, I'd like you to keep in mind what are some things that you've in mind what are some things that you've in mind what are some things that you've either accomplished or that you'd like either accomplished or that you'd like either accomplished or that you'd like to accomplish going forward. Because as to accomplish going forward. Because as to accomplish going forward. Because as we do this, we can build toward a set of we do this, we can build toward a set of we do this, we can build toward a set of protocols that at the end you'll be able protocols that at the end you'll be able protocols that at the end you'll be able to very quickly plug in your particular to very quickly plug in your particular to very quickly plug in your particular goals and a route to those particular goals and a route to those particular goals and a route to those particular goals that's grounded in the science and goals that's grounded in the science and goals that's grounded in the science and that I think are going to be very that I think are going to be very that I think are going to be very effective in allowing you to reach those effective in allowing you to reach those effective in allowing you to reach those goals more quickly and with indeed less goals more quickly and with indeed less goals more quickly and with indeed less effort. In fact, let's start with a tool effort. In fact, let's start with a tool effort. In fact, let's start with a tool now. The first thing to do is to now. The first thing to do is to now. The first thing to do is to understand the difference between understand the difference between understand the difference between peripersonal space and extrapersonal peripersonal space and extrapersonal peripersonal space and extrapersonal space. Peripersonal space space. Peripersonal space space. Peripersonal space is a key concept in neuroscience because is a key concept in neuroscience because is a key concept in neuroscience because you have particular neural circuits and you have particular neural circuits and you have particular neural circuits and particular chemicals that are geared particular chemicals that are geared particular chemicals that are geared toward what are called consummatory toward what are called consummatory toward what are called consummatory behaviors, meaning using things and behaviors, meaning using things and behaviors, meaning using things and consuming things and enjoying things consuming things and enjoying things consuming things and enjoying things that are in your immediate peripersonal that are in your immediate peripersonal that are in your immediate peripersonal space. Within my current peripersonal space Within my current peripersonal space Within my current peripersonal space is my interoception, my understanding or is my interoception, my understanding or is my interoception, my understanding or perception of my internal body. So, how perception of my internal body. So, how perception of my internal body. So, how quickly I'm breathing, my heart rate, quickly I'm breathing, my heart rate, quickly I'm breathing, my heart rate, the feelings on the surface of my skin, the feelings on the surface of my skin, the feelings on the surface of my skin, etc. But, also within the confines of my etc. But, also within the confines of my etc. But, also within the confines of my peripersonal space is this coffee mug peripersonal space is this coffee mug peripersonal space is this coffee mug that if you're listening to this, you that if you're listening to this, you that if you're listening to this, you can't see this, but I'm lifting can't see this, but I'm lifting can't see this, but I'm lifting up a coffee mug. I'm going to take a sip up a coffee mug. I'm going to take a sip up a coffee mug. I'm going to take a sip of coffee. of coffee. of coffee. That's a consummatory behavior. I have That's a consummatory behavior. I have That's a consummatory behavior. I have the coffee. I don't have to do much or the coffee. I don't have to do much or the coffee. I don't have to do much or motivate much to get it. motivate much to get it. motivate much to get it. Contrast that with the so-called Contrast that with the so-called Contrast that with the so-called extrapersonal space. Extrapersonal space extrapersonal space. Extrapersonal space extrapersonal space. Extrapersonal space is everything beyond the confines of my is everything beyond the confines of my is everything beyond the confines of my reach. How we feel about a particular reach. How we feel about a particular reach. How we feel about a particular goal is truly a feeling that we goal is truly a feeling that we goal is truly a feeling that we experience in the here and now, even experience in the here and now, even experience in the here and now, even though the goal is in the future. though the goal is in the future. though the goal is in the future. Okay? If we are going to evaluate whether or If we are going to evaluate whether or If we are going to evaluate whether or not we made progress today or yesterday not we made progress today or yesterday not we made progress today or yesterday or not, that's an evaluation of how we or not, that's an evaluation of how we or not, that's an evaluation of how we feel in the immediate peripersonal feel in the immediate peripersonal feel in the immediate peripersonal space. However, moving toward any goal involves However, moving toward any goal involves However, moving toward any goal involves orienting our thinking toward the orienting our thinking toward the orienting our thinking toward the extrapersonal space. I'm just going to extrapersonal space. I'm just going to extrapersonal space. I'm just going to seed a little bit of the later seed a little bit of the later seed a little bit of the later conversation by saying that when we conversation by saying that when we conversation by saying that when we focus on an external point, focus on an external point, focus on an external point, we are in a process of exteroception. we are in a process of exteroception. we are in a process of exteroception. It's the focus on the extrapersonal It's the focus on the extrapersonal It's the focus on the extrapersonal space, not the peripersonal space. Work space, not the peripersonal space. Work space, not the peripersonal space. Work at NYU, in particular in the laboratory at NYU, in particular in the laboratory at NYU, in particular in the laboratory of a phenomenal researcher in their of a phenomenal researcher in their of a phenomenal researcher in their psychology department um by the name of psychology department um by the name of psychology department um by the name of Emily Balcetis, b a l c e t i s, Emily Balcetis, b a l c e t i s, Emily Balcetis, b a l c e t i s, Emily Balcetis has done really nice work on Balcetis has done really nice work on Balcetis has done really nice work on this. They've done is they've had people focus They've done is they've had people focus They've done is they've had people focus their visual attention on a goal line of their visual attention on a goal line of their visual attention on a goal line of some sort, and then to engage in some sort, and then to engage in some sort, and then to engage in some sort of behavior that requires a lot of sort of behavior that requires a lot of sort of behavior that requires a lot of effort. The long and short of these effort. The long and short of these effort. The long and short of these studies is that when people have to studies is that when people have to studies is that when people have to focus their attention on one location, focus their attention on one location, focus their attention on one location, like a goal line, they are much more like a goal line, they are much more like a goal line, they are much more effective in reaching those goals, and effective in reaching those goals, and effective in reaching those goals, and they achieve them they achieve them they achieve them with the perception that they expended with the perception that they expended with the perception that they expended less effort. And what they did is they less effort. And what they did is they less effort. And what they did is they had a group of people exercise wearing had a group of people exercise wearing had a group of people exercise wearing 15-lb ankle weights, and they had to 15-lb ankle weights, and they had to 15-lb ankle weights, and they had to basically move a certain distance or run basically move a certain distance or run basically move a certain distance or run a certain distance to reach a goal line. a certain distance to reach a goal line. a certain distance to reach a goal line. One group was focused on the goal line, One group was focused on the goal line, One group was focused on the goal line, visually focused on the goal line, the visually focused on the goal line, the visually focused on the goal line, the other group was not told to visually other group was not told to visually other group was not told to visually focus on the goal line. And what they focus on the goal line. And what they focus on the goal line. And what they found was that the group that focused on found was that the group that focused on found was that the group that focused on the goal line the goal line the goal line did was able to achieve reaching that did was able to achieve reaching that did was able to achieve reaching that goal with goal with goal with 17% less effort, and they got there 23% less effort, and they got there 23% less effort, and they got there 23% quicker. Simply by looking at the goal quicker. Simply by looking at the goal quicker. Simply by looking at the goal line does something to the psychology line does something to the psychology line does something to the psychology and physiology of these people that and physiology of these people that and physiology of these people that allows them to move forward with less allows them to move forward with less allows them to move forward with less perceived effort, and to do it more perceived effort, and to do it more perceived effort, and to do it more quickly. So, what is special about quickly. So, what is special about quickly. So, what is special about focusing one's visual attention at a focusing one's visual attention at a focusing one's visual attention at a given location? given location? given location? Well, it turns out that we have two Well, it turns out that we have two Well, it turns out that we have two branches of our visual system. So, branches of our visual system. So, branches of our visual system. So, visual information all comes in through visual information all comes in through visual information all comes in through our eyes, but then it can head down two our eyes, but then it can head down two our eyes, but then it can head down two different pathways. different pathways. different pathways. One pathway is engaged when our vision One pathway is engaged when our vision One pathway is engaged when our vision is brought to a common point, what we is brought to a common point, what we is brought to a common point, what we call a vergence eye movement. So, if call a vergence eye movement. So, if call a vergence eye movement. So, if we're focusing very intensely on a given we're focusing very intensely on a given we're focusing very intensely on a given point, regardless of how far away from point, regardless of how far away from point, regardless of how far away from us that point is, our visual system us that point is, our visual system us that point is, our visual system engages a certain set of neurons, neural engages a certain set of neurons, neural engages a certain set of neurons, neural circuits, that are involved in resolving circuits, that are involved in resolving circuits, that are involved in resolving fine detail, and that can evaluate small fine detail, and that can evaluate small fine detail, and that can evaluate small changes over small periods of time. The changes over small periods of time. The changes over small periods of time. The other pathway through the visual system other pathway through the visual system other pathway through the visual system is a so-called magnocellular pathway, is a so-called magnocellular pathway, is a so-called magnocellular pathway, and this is a pathway that's involved in and this is a pathway that's involved in and this is a pathway that's involved in taking in global information about lots taking in global information about lots taking in global information about lots of things that are happening around us. of things that are happening around us. of things that are happening around us. Movement of things to our right, Movement of things to our right, Movement of things to our right, movement of things to our left, things movement of things to our left, things movement of things to our left, things are happening down on the ground and all are happening down on the ground and all are happening down on the ground and all around us. around us. around us. And that pathway involves a sort of And that pathway involves a sort of And that pathway involves a sort of relaxation, if you will, of the neural relaxation, if you will, of the neural relaxation, if you will, of the neural circuits that are associated with circuits that are associated with circuits that are associated with alertness and attention. When you focus alertness and attention. When you focus alertness and attention. When you focus your eyes on a particular location, your eyes on a particular location, your eyes on a particular location, blood pressure goes up, and there are blood pressure goes up, and there are blood pressure goes up, and there are some other systems that are coordinated some other systems that are coordinated some other systems that are coordinated with it in your brain and body that with it in your brain and body that with it in your brain and body that start releasing adrenaline. start releasing adrenaline. start releasing adrenaline. Low amounts of adrenaline in most cases, Low amounts of adrenaline in most cases, Low amounts of adrenaline in most cases, and that adrenaline further readies your and that adrenaline further readies your and that adrenaline further readies your body for action. Conversely, when our body for action. Conversely, when our body for action. Conversely, when our visual system is in a mode of looking at visual system is in a mode of looking at visual system is in a mode of looking at everything, when the aperture of our everything, when the aperture of our everything, when the aperture of our visual system is very broad, visual system is very broad, visual system is very broad, we know that there's also a reduction in we know that there's also a reduction in we know that there's also a reduction in our goal-directed behavior and a our goal-directed behavior and a our goal-directed behavior and a reduction in blood pressure. What many reduction in blood pressure. What many reduction in blood pressure. What many of you are probably thinking is, "Okay, of you are probably thinking is, "Okay, of you are probably thinking is, "Okay, well, that's some physiology, there's well, that's some physiology, there's well, that's some physiology, there's some psychology, but how do you actually some psychology, but how do you actually some psychology, but how do you actually apply this towards setting and achieving apply this towards setting and achieving apply this towards setting and achieving goals?" Well, you do that by goals?" Well, you do that by goals?" Well, you do that by understanding that your mental frame and understanding that your mental frame and understanding that your mental frame and your attention are always either your attention are always either your attention are always either positioned to your peripersonal space, positioned to your peripersonal space, positioned to your peripersonal space, focused on your immediate focused on your immediate focused on your immediate possessions and state, or towards things possessions and state, or towards things possessions and state, or towards things outside you, but that you also have the outside you, but that you also have the outside you, but that you also have the ability to dynamically travel back and ability to dynamically travel back and ability to dynamically travel back and forth between those. If you already know forth between those. If you already know forth between those. If you already know what goal you want to pursue, maybe it's what goal you want to pursue, maybe it's what goal you want to pursue, maybe it's a workout, maybe it's a cognitive work a workout, maybe it's a cognitive work a workout, maybe it's a cognitive work of some particular sort. Again, the of some particular sort. Again, the of some particular sort. Again, the process is very simple. You're going to process is very simple. You're going to process is very simple. You're going to focus your visual attention on one point focus your visual attention on one point focus your visual attention on one point beyond your peripersonal space, so it beyond your peripersonal space, so it beyond your peripersonal space, so it could be on your computer, it could be could be on your computer, it could be could be on your computer, it could be on the wall, it could be a horizon, it on the wall, it could be a horizon, it on the wall, it could be a horizon, it could be at a at a distance, and you're could be at a at a distance, and you're could be at a at a distance, and you're going to focus your visual attention going to focus your visual attention going to focus your visual attention there, and with some effort, you're there, and with some effort, you're there, and with some effort, you're going to hold your visual attention for going to hold your visual attention for going to hold your visual attention for 30 to 60 seconds. You might blink, 30 to 60 seconds. You might blink, 30 to 60 seconds. You might blink, that's okay, but you're going to try and that's okay, but you're going to try and that's okay, but you're going to try and hold your visual attention there. So, no hold your visual attention there. So, no hold your visual attention there. So, no moving your head around, um no diverting moving your head around, um no diverting moving your head around, um no diverting your attention to other locations. your attention to other locations. your attention to other locations. Again, it places your brain and body Again, it places your brain and body Again, it places your brain and body into a state of readiness, and then the into a state of readiness, and then the into a state of readiness, and then the idea is to move into the particular idea is to move into the particular idea is to move into the particular actions that bring you closer to your actions that bring you closer to your actions that bring you closer to your goal. Okay, we haven't yet talked about goal. Okay, we haven't yet talked about goal. Okay, we haven't yet talked about how to set goals and how to assess how to set goals and how to assess how to set goals and how to assess progress. This is simply how to progress. This is simply how to progress. This is simply how to pursue goals, okay? But the visual pursue goals, okay? But the visual pursue goals, okay? But the visual component is important. In fact, I would component is important. In fact, I would component is important. In fact, I would argue that the visual system and argue that the visual system and argue that the visual system and harnessing your visual attention to a harnessing your visual attention to a harnessing your visual attention to a narrow point is going to be the most narrow point is going to be the most narrow point is going to be the most effective way to get your brain and body effective way to get your brain and body effective way to get your brain and body into a mode of action to pursue whatever into a mode of action to pursue whatever into a mode of action to pursue whatever goal it is you're trying to pursue. So, goal it is you're trying to pursue. So, goal it is you're trying to pursue. So, does visualization work? does visualization work? does visualization work? Well, turns out that visualization of Well, turns out that visualization of Well, turns out that visualization of the big win, the end goal, so the Super the big win, the end goal, so the Super the big win, the end goal, so the Super Bowl win or Bowl win or Bowl win or eight gold medals in the Olympics or eight gold medals in the Olympics or eight gold medals in the Olympics or graduation from the university of your graduation from the university of your graduation from the university of your choice or making a certain amount of choice or making a certain amount of choice or making a certain amount of money or finding the partner of your money or finding the partner of your money or finding the partner of your choice, etc. choice, etc. choice, etc. That visualization is effective in That visualization is effective in That visualization is effective in getting the goal pursuit process getting the goal pursuit process getting the goal pursuit process started, but it actually is a pretty lousy and but it actually is a pretty lousy and but it actually is a pretty lousy and maybe even counterproductive way of maybe even counterproductive way of maybe even counterproductive way of maintaining pursuit of that goal. In fact, there's a pursuit of that goal. In fact, there's a pursuit of that goal. In fact, there's a much better way to maintain ongoing much better way to maintain ongoing much better way to maintain ongoing action toward a goal that also involves action toward a goal that also involves action toward a goal that also involves visualization, but it turns out it's not visualization, but it turns out it's not visualization, but it turns out it's not about visualizing success, it's about visualizing success, it's about visualizing success, it's about visualizing failure. If you look at the visualizing failure. If you look at the visualizing failure. If you look at the literature, the scientific literature, the scientific literature, the scientific literature, there's a near doubling, near doubling there's a near doubling, near doubling there's a near doubling, near doubling in the probability of reaching one's in the probability of reaching one's in the probability of reaching one's goal if you focus if you focus if you focus routinely on routinely on routinely on foreshadowing failure. You think about foreshadowing failure. You think about foreshadowing failure. You think about the ways in which things could fail if the ways in which things could fail if the ways in which things could fail if you take action A or you take action B you take action A or you take action B you take action A or you take action B and instead therefore you take action C. and instead therefore you take action C. and instead therefore you take action C. If we think back to the neural circuit If we think back to the neural circuit If we think back to the neural circuit associated with assessing value in our associated with assessing value in our associated with assessing value in our goal pursuits, this makes perfect sense. goal pursuits, this makes perfect sense. goal pursuits, this makes perfect sense. The amygdala, that center of the brain The amygdala, that center of the brain The amygdala, that center of the brain that's involved in anxiety and fear and that's involved in anxiety and fear and that's involved in anxiety and fear and worry, well, the amygdala is one of the worry, well, the amygdala is one of the worry, well, the amygdala is one of the four core components of our goal-setting four core components of our goal-setting four core components of our goal-setting and goal-pursuit circuitry. And so, and goal-pursuit circuitry. And so, and goal-pursuit circuitry. And so, while I'd love to be able to tell you while I'd love to be able to tell you while I'd love to be able to tell you that all you should think about is that all you should think about is that all you should think about is rainbows and puppies and all the rainbows and puppies and all the rainbows and puppies and all the wonderful rewarding things that are wonderful rewarding things that are wonderful rewarding things that are going to happen when you achieve your going to happen when you achieve your going to happen when you achieve your goals, the truth is, you should be thinking the truth is, you should be thinking the truth is, you should be thinking mainly about how bad it's really going mainly about how bad it's really going mainly about how bad it's really going to get if you don't do it. How to get if you don't do it. How to get if you don't do it. How disappointing yourself you're going to disappointing yourself you're going to disappointing yourself you're going to feel. How feel. How feel. How it will negatively impact you if not in it will negatively impact you if not in it will negatively impact you if not in the immediate term, in the long term. If the immediate term, in the long term. If the immediate term, in the long term. If indeed your goal is to reach your goal. indeed your goal is to reach your goal. indeed your goal is to reach your goal. And the more specific you can get by And the more specific you can get by And the more specific you can get by writing down or thinking about or writing down or thinking about or writing down or thinking about or talking about how bad it will be if you talking about how bad it will be if you talking about how bad it will be if you don't achieve your goals, the more don't achieve your goals, the more don't achieve your goals, the more likely you are to achieve those goals. likely you are to achieve those goals. likely you are to achieve those goals. If you're going to visualize in a If you're going to visualize in a If you're going to visualize in a positive way, do that at the very positive way, do that at the very positive way, do that at the very beginning of some goal pursuit. Maybe beginning of some goal pursuit. Maybe beginning of some goal pursuit. Maybe intermittently every once in a while. intermittently every once in a while. intermittently every once in a while. You imagine the big win of, you know, You imagine the big win of, you know, You imagine the big win of, you know, scoring perfect on an exam or winning scoring perfect on an exam or winning scoring perfect on an exam or winning the championship or the great the championship or the great the championship or the great relationship. But most of the time, if relationship. But most of the time, if relationship. But most of the time, if you want to be effective, you should be you want to be effective, you should be you want to be effective, you should be focusing on avoiding failure and you focusing on avoiding failure and you focusing on avoiding failure and you should be really clear about what those should be really clear about what those should be really clear about what those failures would look like and feel like. failures would look like and feel like. failures would look like and feel like. Now let's talk about goal setting. Now let's talk about goal setting. Now let's talk about goal setting. The goal should be significant, we are The goal should be significant, we are The goal should be significant, we are told. It should be inspirational. It told. It should be inspirational. It told. It should be inspirational. It should be aggressive yet realistic. But should be aggressive yet realistic. But should be aggressive yet realistic. But what does that really look like? And what does that really look like? And what does that really look like? And what does that correspond to? And how do what does that correspond to? And how do what does that correspond to? And how do we actually make that happen? Turns out we actually make that happen? Turns out we actually make that happen? Turns out that the probability of achieving a goal that the probability of achieving a goal that the probability of achieving a goal goes up or down depending on whether or goes up or down depending on whether or goes up or down depending on whether or not one visualizes or sets a goal that not one visualizes or sets a goal that not one visualizes or sets a goal that is easy, is easy, is easy, moderate, or impossible. moderate, or impossible. moderate, or impossible. Turns out that if the goal is too easy, Turns out that if the goal is too easy, Turns out that if the goal is too easy, it's too within reach, it doesn't it's too within reach, it doesn't it's too within reach, it doesn't recruit enough of the autonomic nervous recruit enough of the autonomic nervous recruit enough of the autonomic nervous system to make pursuit of that goal system to make pursuit of that goal system to make pursuit of that goal likely. Also, if a goal was too lofty, likely. Also, if a goal was too lofty, likely. Also, if a goal was too lofty, if it was too far from their current if it was too far from their current if it was too far from their current abilities, it didn't recruit enough systolic blood it didn't recruit enough systolic blood it didn't recruit enough systolic blood pressure. Even if people could get very pressure. Even if people could get very pressure. Even if people could get very excited about something mentally, it excited about something mentally, it excited about something mentally, it simply didn't place their body into a simply didn't place their body into a simply didn't place their body into a state of readiness because they it state of readiness because they it state of readiness because they it wasn't tangible that they could actually wasn't tangible that they could actually wasn't tangible that they could actually perhaps really achieve it. So it turns perhaps really achieve it. So it turns perhaps really achieve it. So it turns out that when goals were moderate, when out that when goals were moderate, when out that when goals were moderate, when they were just outside of one's they were just outside of one's they were just outside of one's immediate abilities, or that one felt immediate abilities, or that one felt immediate abilities, or that one felt that yeah, that would take a lot of that yeah, that would take a lot of that yeah, that would take a lot of effort, but it's within range or maybe effort, but it's within range or maybe effort, but it's within range or maybe in range, like maybe I can do it, maybe in range, like maybe I can do it, maybe in range, like maybe I can do it, maybe I can't, then there was a near doubling I can't, then there was a near doubling I can't, then there was a near doubling of the likelihood that they would engage of the likelihood that they would engage of the likelihood that they would engage in the ongoing pursuit of that in the ongoing pursuit of that in the ongoing pursuit of that particular goal. The goals need to be particular goal. The goals need to be particular goal. The goals need to be realistic and truly challenging. realistic and truly challenging. realistic and truly challenging. Don't set goals that are so challenging Don't set goals that are so challenging Don't set goals that are so challenging and so lofty that they crash that blood and so lofty that they crash that blood and so lofty that they crash that blood pressure system in the other direction pressure system in the other direction pressure system in the other direction and make you or anyone feel unmotivated. and make you or anyone feel unmotivated. and make you or anyone feel unmotivated. Now, I'd like to talk about three Now, I'd like to talk about three Now, I'd like to talk about three particular areas of scientific study particular areas of scientific study particular areas of scientific study that point to goal pursuit, goal that point to goal pursuit, goal that point to goal pursuit, goal assessment, and goal achievement. Any assessment, and goal achievement. Any assessment, and goal achievement. Any discussion about goals and goal pursuit discussion about goals and goal pursuit discussion about goals and goal pursuit would be incomplete without a discussion would be incomplete without a discussion would be incomplete without a discussion about the molecule dopamine. about the molecule dopamine. about the molecule dopamine. Dopamine is often thought of as the Dopamine is often thought of as the Dopamine is often thought of as the molecule of pleasure and reward, but molecule of pleasure and reward, but molecule of pleasure and reward, but actually it is the molecule of actually it is the molecule of actually it is the molecule of motivation. This is best illustrated by a classic This is best illustrated by a classic This is best illustrated by a classic set of studies that have been carried set of studies that have been carried set of studies that have been carried out in both animals and in humans. The out in both animals and in humans. The out in both animals and in humans. The animal study can be described the animal study can be described the animal study can be described the following way. following way. following way. Two rats, each in a separate cage. You Two rats, each in a separate cage. You Two rats, each in a separate cage. You can provide those rats with the can provide those rats with the can provide those rats with the opportunity to indulge in something that opportunity to indulge in something that opportunity to indulge in something that they like, like food or mating or heat they like, like food or mating or heat they like, like food or mating or heat if it's cold in the environment or a if it's cold in the environment or a if it's cold in the environment or a cool spot in the cage if it's warm in cool spot in the cage if it's warm in cool spot in the cage if it's warm in the environment and so forth. And what the environment and so forth. And what the environment and so forth. And what you find is that you find is that you find is that rats will very readily approach the rats will very readily approach the rats will very readily approach the rewarding thing. They will mate, they rewarding thing. They will mate, they rewarding thing. They will mate, they will eat, they will pursue something will eat, they will pursue something will eat, they will pursue something that is of pleasure. that is of pleasure. that is of pleasure. Now, if you are to take one of those Now, if you are to take one of those Now, if you are to take one of those rats and deplete its dopamine neurons, rats and deplete its dopamine neurons, rats and deplete its dopamine neurons, you can eliminate its dopamine neurons you can eliminate its dopamine neurons you can eliminate its dopamine neurons or block dopamine in the brain, what you or block dopamine in the brain, what you or block dopamine in the brain, what you find is that those animals will still find is that those animals will still find is that those animals will still enjoy pleasure. enjoy pleasure. enjoy pleasure. However, their motivation However, their motivation However, their motivation to achieve pleasure is vastly reduced. to achieve pleasure is vastly reduced. to achieve pleasure is vastly reduced. In fact, if you place the item of In fact, if you place the item of In fact, if you place the item of pleasure, the mate, the food, et cetera, pleasure, the mate, the food, et cetera, pleasure, the mate, the food, et cetera, even just one rat's length away from even just one rat's length away from even just one rat's length away from that rat, the rat without dopamine will that rat, the rat without dopamine will that rat, the rat without dopamine will not even move one length of its own body not even move one length of its own body not even move one length of its own body in order to achieve that pleasure. in order to achieve that pleasure. in order to achieve that pleasure. And there are naturally occurring And there are naturally occurring And there are naturally occurring experiments in humans that mimic that experiments in humans that mimic that experiments in humans that mimic that result very accurately. result very accurately. result very accurately. There are certain conditions in humans There are certain conditions in humans There are certain conditions in humans where there is a depletion of dopamine where there is a depletion of dopamine where there is a depletion of dopamine and what you find is that and what you find is that and what you find is that the depletion of dopamine does not the depletion of dopamine does not the depletion of dopamine does not inhibit an ability to experience inhibit an ability to experience inhibit an ability to experience pleasure necessarily. It inhibits an pleasure necessarily. It inhibits an pleasure necessarily. It inhibits an ability to pursue or go through the ability to pursue or go through the ability to pursue or go through the series of action steps in order to series of action steps in order to series of action steps in order to achieve pleasure. achieve pleasure. achieve pleasure. So, dopamine really sits at the heart of So, dopamine really sits at the heart of So, dopamine really sits at the heart of our motivational state to seek out goals our motivational state to seek out goals our motivational state to seek out goals and to seek pleasure. And this is true and to seek pleasure. And this is true and to seek pleasure. And this is true for immediate goals that take place for immediate goals that take place for immediate goals that take place within a time frame of minutes or a time within a time frame of minutes or a time within a time frame of minutes or a time frame of a day or the time frame of a frame of a day or the time frame of a frame of a day or the time frame of a week or the time frame of a lifetime. week or the time frame of a lifetime. week or the time frame of a lifetime. Dopamine is the common currency by which Dopamine is the common currency by which Dopamine is the common currency by which we pursue goals. Now, dopamine does a we pursue goals. Now, dopamine does a we pursue goals. Now, dopamine does a number of things that are very number of things that are very number of things that are very interesting. I'm going to describe a few interesting. I'm going to describe a few interesting. I'm going to describe a few of them as they relate to goal-seeking of them as they relate to goal-seeking of them as they relate to goal-seeking behavior. First of all, there's a fundamental First of all, there's a fundamental First of all, there's a fundamental feature of how our brain releases and feature of how our brain releases and feature of how our brain releases and uses dopamine that's called reward uses dopamine that's called reward uses dopamine that's called reward prediction error. And the simplest way prediction error. And the simplest way prediction error. And the simplest way to think about dopamine reward to think about dopamine reward to think about dopamine reward prediction error is that prediction error is that prediction error is that dopamine is released in the greatest dopamine is released in the greatest dopamine is released in the greatest amount and places us into a greater amount and places us into a greater amount and places us into a greater state of motivation state of motivation state of motivation when something happens that's positive and something happens that's positive and something happens that's positive and novel. If you don't expect something novel. If you don't expect something novel. If you don't expect something positive to happen, you're just going positive to happen, you're just going positive to happen, you're just going about your day and something positive about your day and something positive about your day and something positive happens, dopamine and a lot of dopamine happens, dopamine and a lot of dopamine happens, dopamine and a lot of dopamine is released. However, is released. However, is released. However, if we anticipate something positive is if we anticipate something positive is if we anticipate something positive is going to happen, going to happen, going to happen, and then that thing happens, and then that thing happens, and then that thing happens, we experience dopamine as part of the we experience dopamine as part of the we experience dopamine as part of the anticipation, so even before we get the anticipation, so even before we get the anticipation, so even before we get the reward, there's an increase in dopamine. reward, there's an increase in dopamine. reward, there's an increase in dopamine. It's not as high as it would be if It's not as high as it would be if It's not as high as it would be if something really novel and unexpected something really novel and unexpected something really novel and unexpected and positive happened, but we do get an and positive happened, but we do get an and positive happened, but we do get an increase in dopamine. And then, when we increase in dopamine. And then, when we increase in dopamine. And then, when we actually experience the reward, we actually experience the reward, we actually experience the reward, we experience the positive thing, there's a experience the positive thing, there's a experience the positive thing, there's a smaller increase in dopamine. Okay, so smaller increase in dopamine. Okay, so smaller increase in dopamine. Okay, so again, the biggest increases in dopamine again, the biggest increases in dopamine again, the biggest increases in dopamine are response to things that are positive are response to things that are positive are response to things that are positive and unexpected. and unexpected. and unexpected. Lesser dopamine is released when we Lesser dopamine is released when we Lesser dopamine is released when we anticipate something good will happen. anticipate something good will happen. anticipate something good will happen. And when that happens, yes, we get some And when that happens, yes, we get some And when that happens, yes, we get some dopamine and we also get some dopamine and we also get some dopamine and we also get some dopamine when the positive thing happens. There's when the positive thing happens. There's when the positive thing happens. There's also the case in which we predict that also the case in which we predict that also the case in which we predict that something good will happen. When that something good will happen. When that something good will happen. When that happens, there's an increase in dopamine happens, there's an increase in dopamine happens, there's an increase in dopamine just as it was before. But then if that just as it was before. But then if that just as it was before. But then if that thing doesn't happen, for instance, our thing doesn't happen, for instance, our thing doesn't happen, for instance, our friends don't show up for dinner, then friends don't show up for dinner, then friends don't show up for dinner, then there's a drop in dopamine below our there's a drop in dopamine below our there's a drop in dopamine below our initial baseline. That drop in dopamine initial baseline. That drop in dopamine initial baseline. That drop in dopamine is the chemical essence of what we call is the chemical essence of what we call is the chemical essence of what we call disappointment. Now, this dopamine reward prediction Now, this dopamine reward prediction Now, this dopamine reward prediction error as it's called can be leveraged error as it's called can be leveraged error as it's called can be leveraged toward trying to reach our goals because toward trying to reach our goals because toward trying to reach our goals because it tells us it tells us it tells us where we should set our milestones. where we should set our milestones. where we should set our milestones. We can't be in a mode of simply being We can't be in a mode of simply being We can't be in a mode of simply being focused on the finish line. focused on the finish line. focused on the finish line. So, understanding what we know about reward understanding what we know about reward understanding what we know about reward prediction error, prediction error, prediction error, we can make better choices about where we can make better choices about where we can make better choices about where to place the milestones, how far out in to place the milestones, how far out in to place the milestones, how far out in the future to place milestones. So then the future to place milestones. So then the future to place milestones. So then the question becomes how often or at the question becomes how often or at the question becomes how often or at what intervals should one assess what intervals should one assess what intervals should one assess progress? I think that checking in at progress? I think that checking in at progress? I think that checking in at the end of a week, looking back on the end of a week, looking back on the end of a week, looking back on the previous week, and assessing how well previous week, and assessing how well previous week, and assessing how well you performed in pursuit of a given goal you performed in pursuit of a given goal you performed in pursuit of a given goal or how many times you did something that or how many times you did something that or how many times you did something that you wanted to do or avoided something you wanted to do or avoided something you wanted to do or avoided something that you didn't want to do, I think that you didn't want to do, I think that you didn't want to do, I think that's a reasonable that's a reasonable that's a reasonable and tractable schedule to assess once a and tractable schedule to assess once a and tractable schedule to assess once a week. This dopamine system is critical to This dopamine system is critical to This dopamine system is critical to re-up, to remind ourselves that we are re-up, to remind ourselves that we are re-up, to remind ourselves that we are on track if indeed we are on track, on track if indeed we are on track, on track if indeed we are on track, because dopamine itself provides a state because dopamine itself provides a state because dopamine itself provides a state of motivation and readiness to continue of motivation and readiness to continue of motivation and readiness to continue in the regular pursuit of our goals. in the regular pursuit of our goals. in the regular pursuit of our goals. Another very interesting aspect of Another very interesting aspect of Another very interesting aspect of dopamine is actually how the dopamine is actually how the dopamine is actually how the dopamine system interacts with the visual system. system interacts with the visual system. system interacts with the visual system. When we are focused on a particular When we are focused on a particular When we are focused on a particular point in visual space or a particular point in visual space or a particular point in visual space or a particular goal or horizon, goal or horizon, goal or horizon, all those systems, our blood pressure, all those systems, our blood pressure, all those systems, our blood pressure, epinephrine, and indeed dopamine get epinephrine, and indeed dopamine get epinephrine, and indeed dopamine get recruited to put us into a state of recruited to put us into a state of recruited to put us into a state of readiness and willingness to go pursue readiness and willingness to go pursue readiness and willingness to go pursue things in that extra-personal space. things in that extra-personal space. things in that extra-personal space. When our visual attention is very When our visual attention is very When our visual attention is very diffuse, all of that relaxes and we tend diffuse, all of that relaxes and we tend diffuse, all of that relaxes and we tend to be more comfortable staying in the to be more comfortable staying in the to be more comfortable staying in the place that we are in our peri-personal place that we are in our peri-personal place that we are in our peri-personal space. And the effect works in the other space. And the effect works in the other space. And the effect works in the other direction, too. direction, too. direction, too. When dopamine is increased, our visual When dopamine is increased, our visual When dopamine is increased, our visual attention for particular things out in attention for particular things out in attention for particular things out in space increase. So, the way it works is space increase. So, the way it works is space increase. So, the way it works is reciprocal. When we use our visual system in a When we use our visual system in a When we use our visual system in a particular way, bring it to a point of particular way, bring it to a point of particular way, bring it to a point of focus, it recruits chemical and neural focus, it recruits chemical and neural focus, it recruits chemical and neural systems in our brain and body that put systems in our brain and body that put systems in our brain and body that put us into a state of readiness and us into a state of readiness and us into a state of readiness and pursuit. And increase certain chemicals in our brain increase certain chemicals in our brain increase certain chemicals in our brain and body, like epinephrine, like and body, like epinephrine, like and body, like epinephrine, like dopamine, then we also dopamine, then we also dopamine, then we also allow our visual system to be in a state allow our visual system to be in a state allow our visual system to be in a state of looking out at particular locations in looking out at particular locations in looking out at particular locations in our visual world. So, the system works our visual world. So, the system works our visual world. So, the system works in both directions. And some people in both directions. And some people in both directions. And some people leverage this by using things like leverage this by using things like leverage this by using things like caffeine or taking things like caffeine or taking things like caffeine or taking things like L-tyrosine to increase dopamine. And L-tyrosine to increase dopamine. And L-tyrosine to increase dopamine. And again, it works both ways. There's no again, it works both ways. There's no again, it works both ways. There's no right or wrong way to do it. I'm a right or wrong way to do it. I'm a right or wrong way to do it. I'm a particular fan of using behavioral tools particular fan of using behavioral tools particular fan of using behavioral tools always prior to using supplementation or always prior to using supplementation or always prior to using supplementation or any kinds of other tools because any kinds of other tools because any kinds of other tools because behavioral tools have a very unique behavioral tools have a very unique behavioral tools have a very unique feature that supplementation and other feature that supplementation and other feature that supplementation and other chemical tools don't, which is that chemical tools don't, which is that chemical tools don't, which is that behavioral tools used over time engage behavioral tools used over time engage behavioral tools used over time engage neuroplasticity. As we start to practice neuroplasticity. As we start to practice neuroplasticity. As we start to practice using our visual system to harness our using our visual system to harness our using our visual system to harness our attention to particular locations and in attention to particular locations and in attention to particular locations and in that way move toward particular goals, that way move toward particular goals, that way move toward particular goals, we get better and better at using those we get better and better at using those we get better and better at using those systems. In fact, the systems for focus systems. In fact, the systems for focus systems. In fact, the systems for focus and motivation themselves have and motivation themselves have and motivation themselves have plasticity, so we get better at being plasticity, so we get better at being plasticity, so we get better at being motivated and focused when we place our motivated and focused when we place our motivated and focused when we place our visual attention at a given location. visual attention at a given location. visual attention at a given location. I'd like to just briefly recap what I've I'd like to just briefly recap what I've I'd like to just briefly recap what I've covered up until now. First of all, set covered up until now. First of all, set covered up until now. First of all, set goals that are challenging but possible. goals that are challenging but possible. goals that are challenging but possible. Those moderate goals, not super easy, Those moderate goals, not super easy, Those moderate goals, not super easy, not super difficult, but moderately not super difficult, but moderately not super difficult, but moderately challenging goals seem to be the most challenging goals seem to be the most challenging goals seem to be the most effective in moving people towards their effective in moving people towards their effective in moving people towards their goals over the short and long term. goals over the short and long term. goals over the short and long term. Second, plan concretely. You need a Second, plan concretely. You need a Second, plan concretely. You need a concrete set of actions that you're concrete set of actions that you're concrete set of actions that you're going to follow in order to reach your going to follow in order to reach your going to follow in order to reach your goals. Third, foreshadow failure. It turns out that foreshadow failure. It turns out that foreshadow failure. It turns out that imagining success and visualizing imagining success and visualizing imagining success and visualizing success can be useful at the outset of a success can be useful at the outset of a success can be useful at the outset of a goal and maybe every once in a while in goal and maybe every once in a while in goal and maybe every once in a while in pursuit of that goal, pursuit of that goal, pursuit of that goal, but that it's not terrific for putting but that it's not terrific for putting but that it's not terrific for putting you in constant pursuit of that goal. you in constant pursuit of that goal. you in constant pursuit of that goal. Rather, foreshadowing failure, Rather, foreshadowing failure, Rather, foreshadowing failure, visualizing failure and all the terrible visualizing failure and all the terrible visualizing failure and all the terrible things that it's going to bring, seems things that it's going to bring, seems things that it's going to bring, seems to be more effective and that maps very to be more effective and that maps very to be more effective and that maps very well to what's known about the neural well to what's known about the neural well to what's known about the neural circuitry and the involvement of the circuitry and the involvement of the circuitry and the involvement of the amygdala. Focus on particular visual points as a Focus on particular visual points as a Focus on particular visual points as a way to harness your attention and to way to harness your attention and to way to harness your attention and to remove distractors. Removing distractors remove distractors. Removing distractors remove distractors. Removing distractors and getting your body and brain into a and getting your body and brain into a and getting your body and brain into a mode of activation, getting that healthy mode of activation, getting that healthy mode of activation, getting that healthy increase in systolic blood pressure that increase in systolic blood pressure that increase in systolic blood pressure that puts you into forward motion towards puts you into forward motion towards puts you into forward motion towards your goals is absolutely key. So, that's your goals is absolutely key. So, that's your goals is absolutely key. So, that's a brief summary of what I've covered up a brief summary of what I've covered up a brief summary of what I've covered up until now. until now. until now. But, I want to be sure to include a tool But, I want to be sure to include a tool But, I want to be sure to include a tool that's been especially powerful for me that's been especially powerful for me that's been especially powerful for me that's grounded in the neuroscience that's grounded in the neuroscience that's grounded in the neuroscience research and in the psychology research. research and in the psychology research. research and in the psychology research. And as I describe this tool next, I And as I describe this tool next, I And as I describe this tool next, I think you'll see the ways in which it think you'll see the ways in which it think you'll see the ways in which it meshes nicely with the work that Emily meshes nicely with the work that Emily meshes nicely with the work that Emily Balcetis and colleagues have done. Balcetis and colleagues have done. Balcetis and colleagues have done. This is something that I've personally This is something that I've personally This is something that I've personally been doing for many years based on my been doing for many years based on my been doing for many years based on my understanding of the visual system understanding of the visual system understanding of the visual system and the understanding that indeed we can and the understanding that indeed we can and the understanding that indeed we can move our cognition and our perception move our cognition and our perception move our cognition and our perception from a place of interoception and from a place of interoception and from a place of interoception and focusing on our peripersonal space, that focusing on our peripersonal space, that focusing on our peripersonal space, that space within us and immediately around space within us and immediately around space within us and immediately around us, and on the things that are us, and on the things that are us, and on the things that are immediately accessible to us, immediately accessible to us, immediately accessible to us, that we can shift from that mode to this that we can shift from that mode to this that we can shift from that mode to this mode of exteroception, of focusing on mode of exteroception, of focusing on mode of exteroception, of focusing on things outside the confines of our skin things outside the confines of our skin things outside the confines of our skin and that are beyond our reach, that are and that are beyond our reach, that are and that are beyond our reach, that are literally goal-directed behaviors and literally goal-directed behaviors and literally goal-directed behaviors and goal-directed thoughts. goal-directed thoughts. goal-directed thoughts. And [snorts] this is something that in And [snorts] this is something that in And [snorts] this is something that in the past I've talked about a little bit. the past I've talked about a little bit. the past I've talked about a little bit. I've talked about something called I've talked about something called I've talked about something called space-time bridging. And we haven't space-time bridging. And we haven't space-time bridging. And we haven't talked too much about the time domain of talked too much about the time domain of talked too much about the time domain of the visual system today. the visual system today. the visual system today. But space-time bridging is simply a way of space-time bridging is simply a way of space-time bridging is simply a way of using one's visual system to focus on using one's visual system to focus on using one's visual system to focus on the peripersonal space and the peripersonal space and the peripersonal space and interoception, and then gradually in a interoception, and then gradually in a interoception, and then gradually in a deliberate way stepping one's focus into deliberate way stepping one's focus into deliberate way stepping one's focus into the extrapersonal space, and then back the extrapersonal space, and then back the extrapersonal space, and then back to the peripersonal space in a way that to the peripersonal space in a way that to the peripersonal space in a way that gives you a lot of flexibility and gives you a lot of flexibility and gives you a lot of flexibility and control over that ability in your daily control over that ability in your daily control over that ability in your daily life. So, I'm going to first describe life. So, I'm going to first describe life. So, I'm going to first describe the tool, and then I will explain more the tool, and then I will explain more the tool, and then I will explain more about the underlying science and the about the underlying science and the about the underlying science and the underlying mechanism. underlying mechanism. underlying mechanism. Here's how you would do this. Here's how you would do this. Here's how you would do this. What you first do is you would close What you first do is you would close What you first do is you would close your eyes, your eyes, your eyes, and you would focus as much of your and you would focus as much of your and you would focus as much of your attention, including your visual attention, including your visual attention, including your visual attention, on your inner landscape, on attention, on your inner landscape, on attention, on your inner landscape, on your interoception. So, that would be your interoception. So, that would be your interoception. So, that would be your breathing, your heart rate, maybe your breathing, your heart rate, maybe your breathing, your heart rate, maybe even the surface of your skin, but even the surface of your skin, but even the surface of your skin, but really focusing internally. And you really focusing internally. And you really focusing internally. And you would do that for a duration of would do that for a duration of would do that for a duration of approximately three slow breaths. approximately three slow breaths. approximately three slow breaths. Then you would open your eyes, Then you would open your eyes, Then you would open your eyes, and you would focus your visual and you would focus your visual and you would focus your visual attention on some area on the surface of attention on some area on the surface of attention on some area on the surface of your body. So, for me, the way that I your body. So, for me, the way that I your body. So, for me, the way that I typically do this will be to focus on, typically do this will be to focus on, typically do this will be to focus on, say, the palm of my hand. So, I'll focus say, the palm of my hand. So, I'll focus say, the palm of my hand. So, I'll focus my visual attention on the palm of my visual attention on the palm of my visual attention on the palm of my hand, and I then do three breaths again, hand, and I then do three breaths again, hand, and I then do three breaths again, focusing on my internal state, but now focusing on my internal state, but now focusing on my internal state, but now I'm splitting out a little bit of my I'm splitting out a little bit of my I'm splitting out a little bit of my attention from interoception to attention from interoception to attention from interoception to exteroception. I'm focusing on something exteroception. I'm focusing on something exteroception. I'm focusing on something outside me. The ratio or the split of outside me. The ratio or the split of outside me. The ratio or the split of attention is about 90/10. About 90% of attention is about 90/10. About 90% of attention is about 90/10. About 90% of my attention is focused internally, but my attention is focused internally, but my attention is focused internally, but I'm also focusing some of my attention I'm also focusing some of my attention I'm also focusing some of my attention externally. Okay. Most people can do externally. Okay. Most people can do externally. Okay. Most people can do this pretty easily. this pretty easily. this pretty easily. Then there's a third, what I call Then there's a third, what I call Then there's a third, what I call station. I now move my visual attention station. I now move my visual attention station. I now move my visual attention to outside my body, to some location in to outside my body, to some location in to outside my body, to some location in the room, or if I'm outside, in the room, or if I'm outside, in the room, or if I'm outside, in the external environment, something in the external environment, something in the external environment, something in the range of 5 to 15 ft away, and I'm trying range of 5 to 15 ft away, and I'm trying range of 5 to 15 ft away, and I'm trying to move 90% of my attention to that to move 90% of my attention to that to move 90% of my attention to that external object. As I breathe, I'm external object. As I breathe, I'm external object. As I breathe, I'm paying attention to those three breaths, paying attention to those three breaths, paying attention to those three breaths, so that's why there's still 10% that's so that's why there's still 10% that's so that's why there's still 10% that's focused on my internal landscape, focused on my internal landscape, focused on my internal landscape, because I want to pay attention to those because I want to pay attention to those because I want to pay attention to those three breaths, but I'm focusing as much three breaths, but I'm focusing as much three breaths, but I'm focusing as much of my attention as of my attention as of my attention as outside of myself, maintaining just a outside of myself, maintaining just a outside of myself, maintaining just a little bit on my internal state, so I little bit on my internal state, so I little bit on my internal state, so I can measure the cadence of those three can measure the cadence of those three can measure the cadence of those three breaths. Then, I move my visual attention to yet Then, I move my visual attention to yet Then, I move my visual attention to yet another station, which is further away, another station, which is further away, another station, which is further away, typically a horizon or something as far typically a horizon or something as far typically a horizon or something as far off in the distance as I can possibly off in the distance as I can possibly off in the distance as I can possibly see, again for the duration of three see, again for the duration of three see, again for the duration of three breaths. And at that point, I'm trying my very And at that point, I'm trying my very And at that point, I'm trying my very best to move 99, if not 100%, of my best to move 99, if not 100%, of my best to move 99, if not 100%, of my attention to that external location. attention to that external location. attention to that external location. Okay? And then, And then, And then, what I typically will do is I will try what I typically will do is I will try what I typically will do is I will try and expand both my vision and expand both my vision and expand both my vision and my cognition to a much broader and my cognition to a much broader and my cognition to a much broader sphere. This is that magnocellular sphere. This is that magnocellular sphere. This is that magnocellular vision that we talked about before, vision that we talked about before, vision that we talked about before, where I'm not focusing on a particular where I'm not focusing on a particular where I'm not focusing on a particular location on the horizon, I'm trying to location on the horizon, I'm trying to location on the horizon, I'm trying to dilate the aperture of my field of view, dilate the aperture of my field of view, dilate the aperture of my field of view, so I can see as much of the visual so I can see as much of the visual so I can see as much of the visual landscape as I'm in as possible. Again, landscape as I'm in as possible. Again, landscape as I'm in as possible. Again, for the duration of three breaths. Then, for the duration of three breaths. Then, for the duration of three breaths. Then, I would return immediately to my I would return immediately to my I would return immediately to my internal landscape. I would close my internal landscape. I would close my internal landscape. I would close my eyes, and I would do three more breaths, eyes, and I would do three more breaths, eyes, and I would do three more breaths, focusing entirely on my interoception, focusing entirely on my interoception, focusing entirely on my interoception, on my internal landscape, or what we on my internal landscape, or what we on my internal landscape, or what we called before my peripersonal space. And called before my peripersonal space. And called before my peripersonal space. And I would work through each of those I would work through each of those I would work through each of those stations maybe two or three times. The stations maybe two or three times. The stations maybe two or three times. The entire thing takes about 90 seconds to 3 entire thing takes about 90 seconds to 3 entire thing takes about 90 seconds to 3 minutes, depending on how many breaths minutes, depending on how many breaths minutes, depending on how many breaths you do. What is all of this doing? Why you do. What is all of this doing? Why you do. What is all of this doing? Why do I call this space-time bridging? And do I call this space-time bridging? And do I call this space-time bridging? And why is this useful for goal setting? why is this useful for goal setting? why is this useful for goal setting? The [clears throat] reason I call it The [clears throat] reason I call it The [clears throat] reason I call it space-time bridging is that the visual space-time bridging is that the visual space-time bridging is that the visual system is not just about analyzing system is not just about analyzing system is not just about analyzing space, it's actually how we batch time. space, it's actually how we batch time. space, it's actually how we batch time. It's how we carve up time. And the It's how we carve up time. And the It's how we carve up time. And the simple way to state this is that when we simple way to state this is that when we simple way to state this is that when we focus our visual attention on a very focus our visual attention on a very focus our visual attention on a very narrow point that's close to our body narrow point that's close to our body narrow point that's close to our body and our immediate experience, we tend to and our immediate experience, we tend to and our immediate experience, we tend to slice up time very finely. We're focused slice up time very finely. We're focused slice up time very finely. We're focused on our breathing. We're focused on our on our breathing. We're focused on our on our breathing. We're focused on our heartbeats. In fact, our breathing and heartbeats. In fact, our breathing and heartbeats. In fact, our breathing and our internal landscape and our internal landscape and our internal landscape and our heartbeats become the sort of second heartbeats become the sort of second heartbeats become the sort of second hand, if you will, on our experience. We hand, if you will, on our experience. We hand, if you will, on our experience. We are carving up time according to our are carving up time according to our are carving up time according to our immediate physiological experience. immediate physiological experience. immediate physiological experience. Whereas when we focus our visual Whereas when we focus our visual Whereas when we focus our visual attention outside our body, not only do attention outside our body, not only do attention outside our body, not only do we engage that exteroceptive we engage that exteroceptive we engage that exteroceptive extrapersonal space system and we start extrapersonal space system and we start extrapersonal space system and we start to engage the dopamine system, the to engage the dopamine system, the to engage the dopamine system, the goal-directed system, goal-directed system, goal-directed system, but we also start batching time but we also start batching time but we also start batching time differently. When we focus our visual differently. When we focus our visual differently. When we focus our visual system into a broader sphere of space or system into a broader sphere of space or system into a broader sphere of space or into a space beyond the confines of our into a space beyond the confines of our into a space beyond the confines of our skin, we start carving up time, our skin, we start carving up time, our skin, we start carving up time, our frame rate changes. Now, this is useful frame rate changes. Now, this is useful frame rate changes. Now, this is useful in the context of goal setting, goal in the context of goal setting, goal in the context of goal setting, goal assessment, and goal pursuit because assessment, and goal pursuit because assessment, and goal pursuit because with the exception of a very few isolated the exception of a very few isolated the exception of a very few isolated examples, almost all goals involve examples, almost all goals involve examples, almost all goals involve setting some goal setting some goal setting some goal that's off in the future and then that's off in the future and then that's off in the future and then carving up the time between now and the carving up the time between now and the carving up the time between now and the achievement of that goal into milestones achievement of that goal into milestones achievement of that goal into milestones that range in duration. And the rewards, that range in duration. And the rewards, that range in duration. And the rewards, even if we try and just make them every even if we try and just make them every even if we try and just make them every week, are going to come at some week, are going to come at some week, are going to come at some unexpected intervals. And that's unexpected intervals. And that's unexpected intervals. And that's actually can be helpful for reinforcing actually can be helpful for reinforcing actually can be helpful for reinforcing behavior. Intermittent reward that's behavior. Intermittent reward that's behavior. Intermittent reward that's intermittent and random is the most intermittent and random is the most intermittent and random is the most effective reward schedule we know. effective reward schedule we know. effective reward schedule we know. But the problem is always how do we keep But the problem is always how do we keep But the problem is always how do we keep our cognition in line with the long-term our cognition in line with the long-term our cognition in line with the long-term goal while also being focused on these goal while also being focused on these goal while also being focused on these more immediate goals? This behavior, or more immediate goals? This behavior, or more immediate goals? This behavior, or this practice rather, is teaching us to this practice rather, is teaching us to this practice rather, is teaching us to use our visual system and thereby our use our visual system and thereby our use our visual system and thereby our cognitive system and thereby our reward cognitive system and thereby our reward cognitive system and thereby our reward systems to orient to different locations in to orient to different locations in to orient to different locations in space and therefore at different space and therefore at different space and therefore at different locations in time. And that is the locations in time. And that is the locations in time. And that is the essence of goal-directed behavior. That essence of goal-directed behavior. That essence of goal-directed behavior. That is the essence of setting a goal. It's is the essence of setting a goal. It's is the essence of setting a goal. It's about thinking about what you want. Then about thinking about what you want. Then about thinking about what you want. Then it's about setting milestones that are it's about setting milestones that are it's about setting milestones that are intermediate to that goal. Then it's intermediate to that goal. Then it's intermediate to that goal. Then it's about assessing whether or not you're about assessing whether or not you're about assessing whether or not you're reaching those milestones. And then it's reaching those milestones. And then it's reaching those milestones. And then it's of course about updating your goals if of course about updating your goals if of course about updating your goals if you need to update your goals. All of you need to update your goals. All of you need to update your goals. All of that is an enormously confusing batch of that is an enormously confusing batch of that is an enormously confusing batch of challenges if you think about it all at challenges if you think about it all at challenges if you think about it all at once. But if you break it down into once. But if you break it down into once. But if you break it down into these elements that the visual system these elements that the visual system these elements that the visual system can help you find and move towards those can help you find and move towards those can help you find and move towards those milestones, I think there's ample milestones, I think there's ample milestones, I think there's ample evidence to support that. What's very evidence to support that. What's very evidence to support that. What's very clear is that an ability to move from clear is that an ability to move from clear is that an ability to move from different visual stations and to do that different visual stations and to do that different visual stations and to do that in a deliberate way, in a focused and in a deliberate way, in a focused and in a deliberate way, in a focused and conscious way, clearly maps to an conscious way, clearly maps to an conscious way, clearly maps to an ability to conceive of different goals ability to conceive of different goals ability to conceive of different goals over different periods of time and I do over different periods of time and I do over different periods of time and I do believe can be greatly beneficial in believe can be greatly beneficial in believe can be greatly beneficial in allowing one to set particular goals and allowing one to set particular goals and allowing one to set particular goals and then move through the milestones to then move through the milestones to then move through the milestones to those goals and to constantly update those goals and to constantly update those goals and to constantly update one's pursuit and reward in reaching one's pursuit and reward in reaching one's pursuit and reward in reaching those milestones and eventually the those milestones and eventually the those milestones and eventually the overall goal. Per usual, I covered a lot overall goal. Per usual, I covered a lot overall goal. Per usual, I covered a lot of material today. We talked about some of material today. We talked about some of material today. We talked about some of the neuroscience and psychology and of the neuroscience and psychology and of the neuroscience and psychology and popular understanding of goal-seeking popular understanding of goal-seeking popular understanding of goal-seeking behavior, how to assess goals, etc. behavior, how to assess goals, etc. behavior, how to assess goals, etc. Talked about the use of the visual Talked about the use of the visual Talked about the use of the visual system to better achieve goals. And system to better achieve goals. And system to better achieve goals. And indeed, things like visualization and indeed, things like visualization and indeed, things like visualization and why forecasting failure can be more why forecasting failure can be more why forecasting failure can be more effective than forecasting success. And effective than forecasting success. And effective than forecasting success. And in addition, I described this practice in addition, I described this practice in addition, I described this practice that one can incorporate as a daily or that one can incorporate as a daily or that one can incorporate as a daily or semi-daily practice of so-called semi-daily practice of so-called semi-daily practice of so-called space-time bridging, of using the visual space-time bridging, of using the visual space-time bridging, of using the visual system and your ability to deliberately system and your ability to deliberately system and your ability to deliberately step your visual system from stations step your visual system from stations step your visual system from stations that are within your body, so-called that are within your body, so-called that are within your body, so-called peripersonal or interoceptive space, out peripersonal or interoceptive space, out peripersonal or interoceptive space, out into the world further and further and into the world further and further and into the world further and further and then back again in sequence as a way to then back again in sequence as a way to then back again in sequence as a way to harness and cultivate and build up these harness and cultivate and build up these harness and cultivate and build up these systems that link vision, systems that link vision, systems that link vision, space, time, reward systems, and so space, time, reward systems, and so space, time, reward systems, and so forth. Ultimately, as you set out to accomplish your goals, as you set out to accomplish your goals, as you set out to accomplish your goals, there are going to be a number of basic there are going to be a number of basic there are going to be a number of basic steps that everyone will have to follow. steps that everyone will have to follow. steps that everyone will have to follow. You'll have to clearly identify what the You'll have to clearly identify what the You'll have to clearly identify what the long-arching ultimate goal is. You have long-arching ultimate goal is. You have long-arching ultimate goal is. You have to identify what the milestones will be. to identify what the milestones will be. to identify what the milestones will be. You might not know all of them at the You might not know all of them at the You might not know all of them at the outset, but you ought to have some idea outset, but you ought to have some idea outset, but you ought to have some idea about the intervals at which you're about the intervals at which you're about the intervals at which you're going to set those milestones and set going to set those milestones and set going to set those milestones and set your reward schedule for assessing your reward schedule for assessing your reward schedule for assessing progress en route to those milestones progress en route to those milestones progress en route to those milestones and your ultimate goal. My hope is that and your ultimate goal. My hope is that and your ultimate goal. My hope is that you'll be able to incorporate these you'll be able to incorporate these you'll be able to incorporate these tools, if not all of them, tools, if not all of them, tools, if not all of them, perhaps just one of them or two of them perhaps just one of them or two of them perhaps just one of them or two of them in pursuit of whatever particular goals in pursuit of whatever particular goals in pursuit of whatever particular goals you happen to be focused on at this you happen to be focused on at this you happen to be focused on at this point and in the future. And last but point and in the future. And last but point and in the future. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]