Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This Stanford School of Medicine. This Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost consumer information bring zero-cost consumer information bring zero-cost consumer information about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools about science and science-related tools to the general public. Today, we're to the general public. Today, we're to the general public. Today, we're going to talk about the science of tools going to talk about the science of tools going to talk about the science of tools for fat loss. Today's episode is mainly for fat loss. Today's episode is mainly for fat loss. Today's episode is mainly going to be focused on how the nervous going to be focused on how the nervous going to be focused on how the nervous system, neurons, and some of the cells system, neurons, and some of the cells system, neurons, and some of the cells they collaborate with, like glia and they collaborate with, like glia and they collaborate with, like glia and macrophages, how those encourage or can macrophages, how those encourage or can macrophages, how those encourage or can encourage accelerated fat loss, because encourage accelerated fat loss, because encourage accelerated fat loss, because it turns out they can. Remember, your it turns out they can. Remember, your it turns out they can. Remember, your nervous system, which includes your nervous system, which includes your nervous system, which includes your brain and your spinal cord, and all the brain and your spinal cord, and all the brain and your spinal cord, and all the connections that they make with the connections that they make with the connections that they make with the organs of the body, organs of the body, organs of the body, governs everything. The nervous system governs everything. The nervous system governs everything. The nervous system and the role of the brain and other and the role of the brain and other and the role of the brain and other neurons has been vastly overlooked in neurons has been vastly overlooked in neurons has been vastly overlooked in the discussion about losing fat. the discussion about losing fat. the discussion about losing fat. Now, I would be remiss, and I'd probably Now, I would be remiss, and I'd probably Now, I would be remiss, and I'd probably come under a pretty considerable attack come under a pretty considerable attack come under a pretty considerable attack if I didn't just acknowledge up front a if I didn't just acknowledge up front a if I didn't just acknowledge up front a core truth of core truth of core truth of metabolic science and also of metabolic science and also of metabolic science and also of neuroscience, frankly, which is that neuroscience, frankly, which is that neuroscience, frankly, which is that calories in versus calories out, meaning calories in versus calories out, meaning calories in versus calories out, meaning how many calories you ingest versus how many calories you ingest versus how many calories you ingest versus how many calories you burn, is the many calories you burn, is the many calories you burn, is the fundamental and most important formula fundamental and most important formula fundamental and most important formula in this business of fat loss and weight in this business of fat loss and weight in this business of fat loss and weight management in general. management in general. management in general. There's simply no way around the fact There's simply no way around the fact There's simply no way around the fact that if you ingest far more calories that if you ingest far more calories that if you ingest far more calories than you burn, you're likely to gain than you burn, you're likely to gain than you burn, you're likely to gain weight. And a good portion of that weight. And a good portion of that weight. And a good portion of that weight is likely to be adipose tissue, weight is likely to be adipose tissue, weight is likely to be adipose tissue, fat. It's also true that if you ingest fewer It's also true that if you ingest fewer It's also true that if you ingest fewer calories than you burn, that you will calories than you burn, that you will calories than you burn, that you will lose weight, and that a significant lose weight, and that a significant lose weight, and that a significant portion of that will come from body fat. portion of that will come from body fat. portion of that will come from body fat. What portion depends on a number of What portion depends on a number of What portion depends on a number of factors, but that simple formula is factors, but that simple formula is factors, but that simple formula is important. So, a calorie is a calorie as important. So, a calorie is a calorie as important. So, a calorie is a calorie as a unit of energy, and we need to accept a unit of energy, and we need to accept a unit of energy, and we need to accept and acknowledge this calories in and acknowledge this calories in and acknowledge this calories in meaning calories ingested versus meaning calories ingested versus meaning calories ingested versus calories burned formula, but the calories burned formula, but the calories burned formula, but the calories burned portion is strongly calories burned portion is strongly calories burned portion is strongly influenced by a number of things that influenced by a number of things that influenced by a number of things that you can control you can control you can control that can greatly accelerate or increase that can greatly accelerate or increase that can greatly accelerate or increase the amount of adipose tissue or the amount of adipose tissue or the amount of adipose tissue or the proportion of adipose tissue that you proportion of adipose tissue that you proportion of adipose tissue that you burn in response to exercise and food. burn in response to exercise and food. burn in response to exercise and food. Today, we're going to talk about the Today, we're going to talk about the Today, we're going to talk about the fact that your body fat of various fact that your body fat of various fact that your body fat of various kinds, and there are several kinds of kinds, and there are several kinds of kinds, and there are several kinds of body fat, body fat, body fat, are actually innervated by neurons. are actually innervated by neurons. are actually innervated by neurons. Neurons connect to your body fat and can Neurons connect to your body fat and can Neurons connect to your body fat and can change the probability that body change the probability that body change the probability that body fat will be burned or not. So, your fat will be burned or not. So, your fat will be burned or not. So, your nervous system is the master controller nervous system is the master controller nervous system is the master controller of this process, of this process, of this process, and it plays a strong role in the and it plays a strong role in the and it plays a strong role in the calories out the calories burned calories out the calories burned calories out the calories burned component. So, let's talk about fat component. So, let's talk about fat component. So, let's talk about fat utilization. Let's talk about how fat is utilization. Let's talk about how fat is utilization. Let's talk about how fat is converted into energy, converted into energy, converted into energy, which is sometimes also called fat which is sometimes also called fat which is sometimes also called fat burning. There's two parts to this burning. There's two parts to this burning. There's two parts to this process. One is fat mobilization, process. One is fat mobilization, process. One is fat mobilization, and the second is fat oxidation or and the second is fat oxidation or and the second is fat oxidation or utilization. And that's a process called utilization. And that's a process called utilization. And that's a process called lipolysis. Fat cells can be visceral, lipolysis. Fat cells can be visceral, lipolysis. Fat cells can be visceral, around our viscera, our organs, or they around our viscera, our organs, or they around our viscera, our organs, or they can be subcutaneous, under our skin. can be subcutaneous, under our skin. can be subcutaneous, under our skin. Stored fat Stored fat Stored fat has two parts that are relevant here. has two parts that are relevant here. has two parts that are relevant here. It's got the fatty acid part, and that's It's got the fatty acid part, and that's It's got the fatty acid part, and that's the part that your body can use, and the part that your body can use, and the part that your body can use, and that's attached to something called that's attached to something called that's attached to something called glycerol, and they're linked by a glycerol, and they're linked by a glycerol, and they're linked by a backbone. To mobilize fat, you got to backbone. To mobilize fat, you got to backbone. To mobilize fat, you got to break the backbone between glycerol and break the backbone between glycerol and break the backbone between glycerol and these fatty acids, okay? That's these fatty acids, okay? That's these fatty acids, okay? That's accomplished by an enzyme called lipase, accomplished by an enzyme called lipase, accomplished by an enzyme called lipase, but you can forget all that if you want. but you can forget all that if you want. but you can forget all that if you want. Remember, we're just trying to mobilize Remember, we're just trying to mobilize Remember, we're just trying to mobilize fat. So, the first step is to get those fat. So, the first step is to get those fat. So, the first step is to get those fatty acids moving around in the fatty acids moving around in the fatty acids moving around in the bloodstream, to get them out of those bloodstream, to get them out of those bloodstream, to get them out of those fat cells. fat cells. fat cells. And then, they can travel and be used And then, they can travel and be used And then, they can travel and be used for energy. They're going to go into for energy. They're going to go into for energy. They're going to go into cells that can use them for energy. that can use them for energy. that can use them for energy. And once they are inside those cells, And once they are inside those cells, And once they are inside those cells, they're still not burned up. You need to they're still not burned up. You need to they're still not burned up. You need to oxidize them. oxidize them. oxidize them. They need to be moved They need to be moved They need to be moved into the mitochondria. into the mitochondria. into the mitochondria. And then, they can be converted into And then, they can be converted into And then, they can be converted into ATP, into energy. So, just to really ATP, into energy. So, just to really ATP, into energy. So, just to really zoom out again to make sure I don't lose zoom out again to make sure I don't lose zoom out again to make sure I don't lose anybody, you got to mobilize the fat, anybody, you got to mobilize the fat, anybody, you got to mobilize the fat, then you have to oxidize the fat. And then you have to oxidize the fat. And then you have to oxidize the fat. And many of the things that the nervous many of the things that the nervous many of the things that the nervous system can do system can do system can do is to increase the mobilization of fat, is to increase the mobilization of fat, is to increase the mobilization of fat, but also the oxidation of fat. So, what but also the oxidation of fat. So, what but also the oxidation of fat. So, what are these neurons that connect to fat are these neurons that connect to fat are these neurons that connect to fat doing? What are they releasing exactly? doing? What are they releasing exactly? doing? What are they releasing exactly? How do they actually increase fat How do they actually increase fat How do they actually increase fat mobilization, and how do they increase mobilization, and how do they increase mobilization, and how do they increase fat oxidation, burning of fat? fat oxidation, burning of fat? fat oxidation, burning of fat? Well, there are a couple of things that Well, there are a couple of things that Well, there are a couple of things that they release that encourage that they release that encourage that they release that encourage that process. And the main one that you need process. And the main one that you need process. And the main one that you need to know about is epinephrine, or to know about is epinephrine, or to know about is epinephrine, or adrenaline. The conversion of these fatty acids into The conversion of these fatty acids into The conversion of these fatty acids into ATP in the mitochondria of cells is ATP in the mitochondria of cells is ATP in the mitochondria of cells is favored by adrenaline. favored by adrenaline. favored by adrenaline. Okay? And adrenaline is released from Okay? And adrenaline is released from Okay? And adrenaline is released from two sources. two sources. two sources. Adrenaline is released from the adrenal Adrenaline is released from the adrenal Adrenaline is released from the adrenal glands, which sit atop our kidneys in glands, which sit atop our kidneys in glands, which sit atop our kidneys in our lower back, our lower back, our lower back, and it's also released and it's also released and it's also released from the so-called sympathetic nervous from the so-called sympathetic nervous from the so-called sympathetic nervous system, although that name is a bit of a system, although that name is a bit of a system, although that name is a bit of a misnomer, because it has nothing to do with because it has nothing to do with because it has nothing to do with sympathy. Has to do with stimulating sympathy. Has to do with stimulating sympathy. Has to do with stimulating alertness and promoting action of the alertness and promoting action of the alertness and promoting action of the body. It was thought for a long time that It was thought for a long time that It was thought for a long time that adrenaline swimming around in your body adrenaline swimming around in your body adrenaline swimming around in your body of when you're fasted, because fasting of when you're fasted, because fasting of when you're fasted, because fasting can increase adrenaline, or when you're can increase adrenaline, or when you're can increase adrenaline, or when you're engaging in intense exercise, or when engaging in intense exercise, or when engaging in intense exercise, or when you're stressed, is going to promote fat you're stressed, is going to promote fat you're stressed, is going to promote fat oxidation. That's actually not the case. oxidation. That's actually not the case. oxidation. That's actually not the case. The adrenaline that stimulates fat The adrenaline that stimulates fat The adrenaline that stimulates fat oxidation, the burning of fat, is coming oxidation, the burning of fat, is coming oxidation, the burning of fat, is coming from neurons that actually connect to from neurons that actually connect to from neurons that actually connect to the fat. It's a local process. And this the fat. It's a local process. And this the fat. It's a local process. And this is very important because it means that is very important because it means that is very important because it means that what you do, the specific patterns of what you do, the specific patterns of what you do, the specific patterns of movements and the specific environment movements and the specific environment movements and the specific environment you create you create you create that can stimulate these particular that can stimulate these particular that can stimulate these particular neurons to activate fat, meaning to activate fat, meaning to activate fat, meaning to release fat, to mobilize it, and then to release fat, to mobilize it, and then to release fat, to mobilize it, and then to burn it, is going to be a powerful lever burn it, is going to be a powerful lever burn it, is going to be a powerful lever that you can use in order to increase that you can use in order to increase that you can use in order to increase fat loss. Okay. So, let's talk about how fat loss. Okay. So, let's talk about how fat loss. Okay. So, let's talk about how to activate the nervous system in ways to activate the nervous system in ways to activate the nervous system in ways that it promotes more liberation, that it promotes more liberation, that it promotes more liberation, movement, mobilization of fat, and more movement, mobilization of fat, and more movement, mobilization of fat, and more oxidation of fat. So, one of the most oxidation of fat. So, one of the most oxidation of fat. So, one of the most powerful ways to stimulate epinephrine, powerful ways to stimulate epinephrine, powerful ways to stimulate epinephrine, which is also called adrenaline, from which is also called adrenaline, from which is also called adrenaline, from these neurons is through movement. these neurons is through movement. these neurons is through movement. The type of movement that I'm referring The type of movement that I'm referring The type of movement that I'm referring to is extremely subtle. to is extremely subtle. to is extremely subtle. Shivering is a strong stimulus for the release of is a strong stimulus for the release of is a strong stimulus for the release of adrenaline, epinephrine, into fat and the increase epinephrine, into fat and the increase epinephrine, into fat and the increase in fat oxidation and mobilization. in fat oxidation and mobilization. in fat oxidation and mobilization. And there are other subtle forms of And there are other subtle forms of And there are other subtle forms of movement that can greatly increase fat movement that can greatly increase fat movement that can greatly increase fat metabolism and fat loss. metabolism and fat loss. metabolism and fat loss. There was a group in England during the There was a group in England during the There was a group in England during the 1960s and 70s that discovered a pathway 1960s and 70s that discovered a pathway 1960s and 70s that discovered a pathway by which by which by which subtle forms of movement can greatly subtle forms of movement can greatly subtle forms of movement can greatly increase fat loss. increase fat loss. increase fat loss. This is the work of This is the work of This is the work of Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in the thermogenesis literature. And I the thermogenesis literature. And I the thermogenesis literature. And I learned about this early on when I was learned about this early on when I was learned about this early on when I was an undergraduate. And I asked, "How did an undergraduate. And I asked, "How did an undergraduate. And I asked, "How did they come across this?" And here's how they come across this?" And here's how they come across this?" And here's how the story goes. the story goes. the story goes. They were aware that some people They were aware that some people They were aware that some people overeat and yet don't put on weight. overeat and yet don't put on weight. overeat and yet don't put on weight. Other people overeat even just a little Other people overeat even just a little Other people overeat even just a little bit, and they seem to accumulate extra bit, and they seem to accumulate extra bit, and they seem to accumulate extra adipose tissue. adipose tissue. adipose tissue. Now, this is long before all the Now, this is long before all the Now, this is long before all the discussions about microbiome and hormone discussions about microbiome and hormone discussions about microbiome and hormone factors and you know, it was long before factors and you know, it was long before factors and you know, it was long before many of the hormone factors besides many of the hormone factors besides many of the hormone factors besides insulin had even been discovered. insulin had even been discovered. insulin had even been discovered. What they did was they examined people What they did was they examined people What they did was they examined people who overate and did not gain weight. who overate and did not gain weight. who overate and did not gain weight. And what they observed was that those And what they observed was that those And what they observed was that those people engaged in lots of subtle people engaged in lots of subtle people engaged in lots of subtle movement throughout the day. In other movement throughout the day. In other movement throughout the day. In other words, they were fidgeters. words, they were fidgeters. words, they were fidgeters. And that's what they called them. And in And that's what they called them. And in And that's what they called them. And in 2015 and again in 2015 and again in 2015 and again in 2017, there have been studies that have 2017, there have been studies that have 2017, there have been studies that have been have explored this using some modern have explored this using some modern have explored this using some modern metabolic tracking. And indeed, simply metabolic tracking. And indeed, simply metabolic tracking. And indeed, simply moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing your knee, standing up and pacing your knee, standing up and pacing your knee, standing up and pacing several times or many times throughout several times or many times throughout several times or many times throughout the day the day the day led to considerable amounts of fat loss led to considerable amounts of fat loss led to considerable amounts of fat loss and weight loss when people were and weight loss when people were and weight loss when people were ingesting the same amount of food. If ingesting the same amount of food. If ingesting the same amount of food. If they overate, they were able to they overate, they were able to they overate, they were able to compensate and burn off that food. So, compensate and burn off that food. So, compensate and burn off that food. So, for people that are overweight, who are for people that are overweight, who are for people that are overweight, who are kind of averse to exercise, fidgeting kind of averse to exercise, fidgeting kind of averse to exercise, fidgeting might actually be a good entry point. might actually be a good entry point. might actually be a good entry point. Now, that's great and you can think about the that's great and you can think about the that's great and you can think about the protocols, but I want to protocols, but I want to protocols, but I want to nest that protocol in what I said nest that protocol in what I said nest that protocol in what I said before, which is that which is that which is that fat is controlled by these neurons and fat is controlled by these neurons and fat is controlled by these neurons and the epinephrine they release. Those the epinephrine they release. Those the epinephrine they release. Those subtle movements of our core subtle movements of our core subtle movements of our core musculature, not just the core, but all our limbs and not just the core, but all our limbs and not just the core, but all our limbs and our and our musculature, those low-level our and our musculature, those low-level our and our musculature, those low-level movements, they trigger epinephrine release from they trigger epinephrine release from they trigger epinephrine release from these neurons and they stimulate the these neurons and they stimulate the these neurons and they stimulate the mobilization of fat. And then that fat mobilization of fat. And then that fat mobilization of fat. And then that fat is oxidized at higher rates. So, what's is oxidized at higher rates. So, what's is oxidized at higher rates. So, what's the protocol? Fidget. the protocol? Fidget. the protocol? Fidget. If you're really interested in burning If you're really interested in burning If you're really interested in burning calories and you already exercise, you calories and you already exercise, you calories and you already exercise, you want to burn more or you don't have the want to burn more or you don't have the want to burn more or you don't have the opportunity to exercise or you're averse opportunity to exercise or you're averse opportunity to exercise or you're averse to exercise for whatever reason, to exercise for whatever reason, to exercise for whatever reason, fidgeting movements, staccato movements, fidgeting movements, staccato movements, fidgeting movements, staccato movements, standing up, walking around, pacing, all standing up, walking around, pacing, all standing up, walking around, pacing, all the sort of nervous activities that the sort of nervous activities that the sort of nervous activities that we're so critical of in other people and we're so critical of in other people and we're so critical of in other people and sometimes in ourselves, are actually sometimes in ourselves, are actually sometimes in ourselves, are actually mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat and a lot of energy. and a lot of energy. and a lot of energy. And while this probably won't compensate And while this probably won't compensate And while this probably won't compensate for chronic overeating, for chronic overeating, for chronic overeating, the caloric burn from this is the caloric burn from this is the caloric burn from this is considerable and very likely can offset considerable and very likely can offset considerable and very likely can offset a, you know, a meal that had excessive a, you know, a meal that had excessive a, you know, a meal that had excessive calories or a kind of steady state of calories or a kind of steady state of calories or a kind of steady state of accumu- of eating too much. accumu- of eating too much. accumu- of eating too much. Now it should make sense Now it should make sense Now it should make sense why shivering why shivering why shivering is one of the strongest stimulus stimuli is one of the strongest stimulus stimuli is one of the strongest stimulus stimuli that one can incorporate to stimulate that one can incorporate to stimulate that one can incorporate to stimulate fat loss. fat loss. fat loss. Now shivering is almost always Now shivering is almost always Now shivering is almost always associated with cold. We think associated with cold. We think associated with cold. We think shivering, we think cold because when we shivering, we think cold because when we shivering, we think cold because when we get cold, we shiver. get cold, we shiver. get cold, we shiver. And there are two ways that shivering And there are two ways that shivering And there are two ways that shivering can increase fat loss. can increase fat loss. can increase fat loss. And there are several ways that you can And there are several ways that you can And there are several ways that you can use shivering, you can leverage use shivering, you can leverage use shivering, you can leverage shivering, and you can leverage cold to shivering, and you can leverage cold to shivering, and you can leverage cold to accelerate fat loss. But you have to do accelerate fat loss. But you have to do accelerate fat loss. But you have to do it correctly. And most of the people it correctly. And most of the people it correctly. And most of the people that are using cold and, frankly, that are using cold and, frankly, that are using cold and, frankly, suggesting cold as a means to increase suggesting cold as a means to increase suggesting cold as a means to increase metabolism fat loss, are suggesting the metabolism fat loss, are suggesting the metabolism fat loss, are suggesting the exact wrong protocol. Most people out exact wrong protocol. Most people out exact wrong protocol. Most people out there are using cold exposure, there are using cold exposure, there are using cold exposure, typically by taking cold showers typically by taking cold showers typically by taking cold showers or by getting into cold water of some or by getting into cold water of some or by getting into cold water of some other kind, a lake or a river or a cold other kind, a lake or a river or a cold other kind, a lake or a river or a cold bath or an ice bath. bath or an ice bath. bath or an ice bath. Since today we're talking about Since today we're talking about Since today we're talking about accelerating fat loss through the use of accelerating fat loss through the use of accelerating fat loss through the use of science-based tools, I want to emphasize science-based tools, I want to emphasize science-based tools, I want to emphasize a study that was published in Nature a study that was published in Nature a study that was published in Nature just a couple years ago showing just a couple years ago showing just a couple years ago showing exactly how cold exactly how cold exactly how cold increases metabolism and fat loss. Okay. increases metabolism and fat loss. Okay. increases metabolism and fat loss. Okay. So, we have several kinds of fat. So, we have several kinds of fat. So, we have several kinds of fat. Three kinds, in fact. We have white fat, Three kinds, in fact. We have white fat, Three kinds, in fact. We have white fat, white adipose tissue, and we have brown white adipose tissue, and we have brown white adipose tissue, and we have brown fat or brown adipose tissue. fat or brown adipose tissue. fat or brown adipose tissue. And there's a third kind which is beige And there's a third kind which is beige And there's a third kind which is beige adipose tissue. adipose tissue. adipose tissue. White fat is the type that we White fat is the type that we White fat is the type that we traditionally think of as fat, traditionally think of as fat, traditionally think of as fat, subcutaneous fat. subcutaneous fat. subcutaneous fat. And it is not particularly rich in And it is not particularly rich in And it is not particularly rich in mitochondria. It is there as an energy mitochondria. It is there as an energy mitochondria. It is there as an energy storage site. storage site. storage site. And we have to mobilize the fat out as And we have to mobilize the fat out as And we have to mobilize the fat out as we talked about before and burn it up we talked about before and burn it up we talked about before and burn it up elsewhere. Brown fat Brown fat Brown fat largely exists between our shoulder largely exists between our shoulder largely exists between our shoulder blades and on the back of our neck, blades and on the back of our neck, blades and on the back of our neck, between the scapulae, between the scapulae, between the scapulae, and it's rich with mitochondria, which and it's rich with mitochondria, which and it's rich with mitochondria, which is why it's called brown fat. is why it's called brown fat. is why it's called brown fat. And brown fat has a particular And brown fat has a particular And brown fat has a particular biochemical cascade whereby it can take biochemical cascade whereby it can take biochemical cascade whereby it can take food energy food energy food energy and can it can take food basically, and can it can take food basically, and can it can take food basically, break it down, and convert it into break it down, and convert it into break it down, and convert it into energy within those cells. But unlike energy within those cells. But unlike energy within those cells. But unlike fatty acids from white fat which have to fatty acids from white fat which have to fatty acids from white fat which have to travel elsewhere, get broken down in travel elsewhere, get broken down in travel elsewhere, get broken down in mitochondria, and convert into ATP, mitochondria, and convert into ATP, mitochondria, and convert into ATP, etc., used by the mitochondria rather, used by the mitochondria rather, used by the mitochondria rather, brown fat is thermogenic. It can brown fat is thermogenic. It can brown fat is thermogenic. It can actually use energy directly. Cold actually use energy directly. Cold actually use energy directly. Cold causes the release of adrenaline from causes the release of adrenaline from causes the release of adrenaline from your adrenals, your adrenals, your adrenals, and it causes the release of epinephrine and it causes the release of epinephrine and it causes the release of epinephrine from these neurons that connect to fat. from these neurons that connect to fat. from these neurons that connect to fat. The paper published in Nature shows that The paper published in Nature shows that The paper published in Nature shows that it is shivering itself it is shivering itself it is shivering itself that causes the brown fat to increase that causes the brown fat to increase that causes the brown fat to increase your burning, your burn rate, and your burning, your burn rate, and your burning, your burn rate, and your metabolism. And it works like this. When metabolism. And it works like this. When metabolism. And it works like this. When you get into cold and you shiver, the you get into cold and you shiver, the you get into cold and you shiver, the shivering, those that low-level movement shivering, those that low-level movement shivering, those that low-level movement of the muscle, those small movements, of the muscle, those small movements, of the muscle, those small movements, triggers the release of a molecule triggers the release of a molecule triggers the release of a molecule called succinate, s u c i n a t e, called succinate, s u c i n a t e, called succinate, s u c i n a t e, succinate. And succinate acts on the succinate. And succinate acts on the succinate. And succinate acts on the brown fat to increase brown fat brown fat to increase brown fat brown fat to increase brown fat thermogenesis and fat burning overall. thermogenesis and fat burning overall. thermogenesis and fat burning overall. The question then is how long The question then is how long The question then is how long to get into that cold environment and to get into that cold environment and to get into that cold environment and how cold should that environment be? how cold should that environment be? how cold should that environment be? So, first let's talk about how long to So, first let's talk about how long to So, first let's talk about how long to get into that cold environment. It turns get into that cold environment. It turns get into that cold environment. It turns out that if you want to trigger the out that if you want to trigger the out that if you want to trigger the shiver, what you want to do is to get shiver, what you want to do is to get shiver, what you want to do is to get into the cold into the cold into the cold and then get out of the cold and then get out of the cold and then get out of the cold and typically not dry off typically not dry off typically not dry off and then get back into the cold and out and then get back into the cold and out and then get back into the cold and out of the cold. That will definitely of the cold. That will definitely of the cold. That will definitely stimulate more shivering than just stimulate more shivering than just stimulate more shivering than just getting into the cold itself. So, how getting into the cold itself. So, how getting into the cold itself. So, how cold should it be? And look, if you get cold should it be? And look, if you get cold should it be? And look, if you get into water that's very, very cold, it into water that's very, very cold, it into water that's very, very cold, it can actually shock your heart. It can actually shock your heart. It can actually shock your heart. It can actually give you a heart attack if it's actually give you a heart attack if it's actually give you a heart attack if it's truly, truly truly, truly truly, truly ice cold and you're not adapted to that. ice cold and you're not adapted to that. ice cold and you're not adapted to that. So, proceed with caution, please. I'm So, proceed with caution, please. I'm So, proceed with caution, please. I'm not a physician and I'm not I don't want not a physician and I'm not I don't want not a physician and I'm not I don't want to see anyone get hurt. to see anyone get hurt. to see anyone get hurt. Cold just cold enough to be Cold just cold enough to be Cold just cold enough to be uncomfortable is a good place to start. uncomfortable is a good place to start. uncomfortable is a good place to start. So, for some of you that's going to be So, for some of you that's going to be So, for some of you that's going to be 60°. For some of you that's going to be 60°. For some of you that's going to be 60°. For some of you that's going to be 55°. For some of you it's going to be 55°. For some of you it's going to be 55°. For some of you it's going to be high 30s, right? Depends on how cold high 30s, right? Depends on how cold high 30s, right? Depends on how cold adapted you are. So, what you need to do adapted you are. So, what you need to do adapted you are. So, what you need to do is find a temperature that you can get is find a temperature that you can get is find a temperature that you can get into one to five, probably one to three into one to five, probably one to three into one to five, probably one to three times a week if you really want this to times a week if you really want this to times a week if you really want this to accelerate fat loss. And you want to get accelerate fat loss. And you want to get accelerate fat loss. And you want to get in until you just start to shiver and in until you just start to shiver and in until you just start to shiver and then you want to get out and not dry then you want to get out and not dry then you want to get out and not dry off. Wait anywhere from one to three minutes Wait anywhere from one to three minutes Wait anywhere from one to three minutes and then get back into the cold. So, and then get back into the cold. So, and then get back into the cold. So, here's a potential kind of sets reps here's a potential kind of sets reps here's a potential kind of sets reps protocol that you can play with. Find a protocol that you can play with. Find a protocol that you can play with. Find a temperature that induces shiver for you. temperature that induces shiver for you. temperature that induces shiver for you. That's going to vary depending on your That's going to vary depending on your That's going to vary depending on your cold tolerance and how cold adapted you cold tolerance and how cold adapted you cold tolerance and how cold adapted you are. One to three, maybe five times a are. One to three, maybe five times a are. One to three, maybe five times a week. Get in until you or get under the week. Get in until you or get under the week. Get in until you or get under the shower or whatever it is until you start shower or whatever it is until you start shower or whatever it is until you start to shiver, genuinely shiver. to shiver, genuinely shiver. to shiver, genuinely shiver. Then after about a minute or so, get out. after about a minute or so, get out. after about a minute or so, get out. Spend one to three minutes out but don't Spend one to three minutes out but don't Spend one to three minutes out but don't dry off. Get back in dry off. Get back in dry off. Get back in for anywhere from one to three minutes for anywhere from one to three minutes for anywhere from one to three minutes but try and access the shiver point but try and access the shiver point but try and access the shiver point again. And you might do three again. And you might do three again. And you might do three repetitions of that. So, it's three repetitions of that. So, it's three repetitions of that. So, it's three times in and three times out total. times in and three times out total. times in and three times out total. Next, I'd like to move to exercise and Next, I'd like to move to exercise and Next, I'd like to move to exercise and how particular timing and types of how particular timing and types of how particular timing and types of exercise can vastly improve fat loss. exercise can vastly improve fat loss. exercise can vastly improve fat loss. The topic of exercise is a kind of The topic of exercise is a kind of The topic of exercise is a kind of controversial one. I think the most controversial one. I think the most controversial one. I think the most simple way, the most fluid way to have simple way, the most fluid way to have simple way, the most fluid way to have this conversation about exercise this conversation about exercise this conversation about exercise and fat loss is in terms of three and fat loss is in terms of three and fat loss is in terms of three general types of training. general types of training. general types of training. And those are high-intensity interval And those are high-intensity interval And those are high-intensity interval training, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T. So, training, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T. So, training, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T. So, high-intensity interval training, high-intensity interval training, high-intensity interval training, sprint interval training, so that's sprint interval training, so that's sprint interval training, so that's going to be very high intensity or SIT, going to be very high intensity or SIT, going to be very high intensity or SIT, or moderate-intensity continuous or moderate-intensity continuous or moderate-intensity continuous training, MICT. So, we've got HIIT, SIT, training, MICT. So, we've got HIIT, SIT, training, MICT. So, we've got HIIT, SIT, and MICT. If you'd like to map this to and MICT. If you'd like to map this to and MICT. If you'd like to map this to VO2 max, VO2 max, VO2 max, SIT, this uh sprint interval training, SIT, this uh sprint interval training, SIT, this uh sprint interval training, was defined as all-out, greater than was defined as all-out, greater than was defined as all-out, greater than 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that last 8 to 30 seconds, last 8 to 30 seconds, last 8 to 30 seconds, interspersed with less intense recovery interspersed with less intense recovery interspersed with less intense recovery periods. So, this would be sprinting periods. So, this would be sprinting periods. So, this would be sprinting down field for 8 to 30 seconds, then down field for 8 to 30 seconds, then down field for 8 to 30 seconds, then maybe walking back maybe walking back maybe walking back for about a minute or two, and then for about a minute or two, and then for about a minute or two, and then sprinting again, and then continuing. sprinting again, and then continuing. sprinting again, and then continuing. So, that would be SIT. HIIT, H-I-I-T, So, that would be SIT. HIIT, H-I-I-T, So, that would be SIT. HIIT, H-I-I-T, is defined as submaximal, so 80 to 100% is defined as submaximal, so 80 to 100% is defined as submaximal, so 80 to 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that last of VO2 max bursts of activity that last of VO2 max bursts of activity that last 60 to 240 seconds, interspersed with 60 to 240 seconds, interspersed with 60 to 240 seconds, interspersed with less intense recovery periods. MICT, less intense recovery periods. MICT, less intense recovery periods. MICT, okay? This moderate-intensity continuous okay? This moderate-intensity continuous okay? This moderate-intensity continuous training is steady-state cardio, training is steady-state cardio, training is steady-state cardio, sometimes called zone two cardio these sometimes called zone two cardio these sometimes called zone two cardio these days on the internet, which is performed days on the internet, which is performed days on the internet, which is performed continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 max, or if you prefer heart rate, 55 to max, or if you prefer heart rate, 55 to max, or if you prefer heart rate, 55 to 70% of max heart rate. Okay? So, we can 70% of max heart rate. Okay? So, we can 70% of max heart rate. Okay? So, we can think about high, medium, and low think about high, medium, and low think about high, medium, and low intensity exercise. Although, low intensity exercise. Although, low intensity exercise. Although, low intensity um usually means that you could carry on um usually means that you could carry on um usually means that you could carry on a conversation or maybe you have to gasp a conversation or maybe you have to gasp a conversation or maybe you have to gasp every few steps or so while trying every few steps or so while trying every few steps or so while trying to talk and run. That's I think uh going to talk and run. That's I think uh going to talk and run. That's I think uh going to be the most useful way to have this to be the most useful way to have this to be the most useful way to have this conversation that we're having now conversation that we're having now conversation that we're having now because there's so many different forms because there's so many different forms because there's so many different forms of exercise that people do and intensity of exercise that people do and intensity of exercise that people do and intensity is important. is important. is important. Let's ask the question that I think many Let's ask the question that I think many Let's ask the question that I think many of people are wondering about of people are wondering about of people are wondering about it which is it better, meaning do you it which is it better, meaning do you it which is it better, meaning do you burn more fat if you do your exercise burn more fat if you do your exercise burn more fat if you do your exercise fasted? And fasted in this respect could fasted? And fasted in this respect could fasted? And fasted in this respect could be that you wake up in the morning, be that you wake up in the morning, be that you wake up in the morning, you've been fasting all night, you just you've been fasting all night, you just you've been fasting all night, you just hydrate, and you exercise. For short hydrate, and you exercise. For short hydrate, and you exercise. For short periods of training, it doesn't really periods of training, it doesn't really periods of training, it doesn't really seem to matter whether or not you eat seem to matter whether or not you eat seem to matter whether or not you eat before training or you don't if your before training or you don't if your before training or you don't if your goal is fat oxidation. goal is fat oxidation. goal is fat oxidation. At a period of about 90 minutes At a period of about 90 minutes At a period of about 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercise, there's of moderate intensity exercise, there's of moderate intensity exercise, there's a switch over point a switch over point a switch over point whereby if you ate before the exercise, whereby if you ate before the exercise, whereby if you ate before the exercise, you will reduce Excuse me, you will burn you will reduce Excuse me, you will burn you will reduce Excuse me, you will burn far less fat far less fat far less fat from the 90-minute point onward than you from the 90-minute point onward than you from the 90-minute point onward than you would if you had gone into the training would if you had gone into the training would if you had gone into the training fasted. Now, there are also studies that fasted. Now, there are also studies that fasted. Now, there are also studies that point to the fact that you don't have to point to the fact that you don't have to point to the fact that you don't have to wait to 90 minutes in order to get this wait to 90 minutes in order to get this wait to 90 minutes in order to get this enhanced fat burning effect. If one does enhanced fat burning effect. If one does enhanced fat burning effect. If one does high intensity training or even the very high intensity training or even the very high intensity training or even the very high intensity forms of training like high intensity forms of training like high intensity forms of training like sprints or squats or deadlifts or sprints or squats or deadlifts or sprints or squats or deadlifts or any kind of activity that can't be any kind of activity that can't be any kind of activity that can't be maintained for more than these, you maintained for more than these, you maintained for more than these, you know, eight or I would say up to 60 know, eight or I would say up to 60 know, eight or I would say up to 60 seconds. So, a set of lifting weights seconds. So, a set of lifting weights seconds. So, a set of lifting weights repeated repeated. If that's done repeated repeated. If that's done repeated repeated. If that's done for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight training or powerlifting or these kinds training or powerlifting or these kinds training or powerlifting or these kinds of things or kettlebell swings of things or kettlebell swings of things or kettlebell swings or up to 60 minutes, or up to 60 minutes, or up to 60 minutes, well, then the switch over point in well, then the switch over point in well, then the switch over point in which you can burn more fat if you go which you can burn more fat if you go which you can burn more fat if you go into that fasted comes earlier. into that fasted comes earlier. into that fasted comes earlier. And this makes sense because there's And this makes sense because there's And this makes sense because there's nothing wholly about the 90-minute point nothing wholly about the 90-minute point nothing wholly about the 90-minute point for medium-intensity for medium-intensity for medium-intensity zone two cardio. zone two cardio. zone two cardio. That 90-minute point is the point in That 90-minute point is the point in That 90-minute point is the point in which the body shifts over from mainly burning the body shifts over from mainly burning the body shifts over from mainly burning glycogen, basically sugar that comes from muscles basically sugar that comes from muscles basically sugar that comes from muscles or the liver, and realizes this is going or the liver, and realizes this is going or the liver, and realizes this is going on for a while, I'm going to shift over on for a while, I'm going to shift over on for a while, I'm going to shift over to a to a to a storage site storage site storage site fuel that fuel that fuel that is in reserve, like body fat. This is in reserve, like body fat. This is in reserve, like body fat. This is something that has to do with the milieu something that has to do with the milieu something that has to do with the milieu of various hormones. What has to happen of various hormones. What has to happen of various hormones. What has to happen is insulin has to go down far enough. is insulin has to go down far enough. is insulin has to go down far enough. So, if you ate before the exercise, So, if you ate before the exercise, So, if you ate before the exercise, you'd have an increase in insulin. If you'd have an increase in insulin. If you'd have an increase in insulin. If you ate carbohydrates, you'd have a you ate carbohydrates, you'd have a you ate carbohydrates, you'd have a bigger increase in insulin. Fat and bigger increase in insulin. Fat and bigger increase in insulin. Fat and proteins indeed will have lower amounts proteins indeed will have lower amounts proteins indeed will have lower amounts of insulin, and fasting will give you of insulin, and fasting will give you of insulin, and fasting will give you the lowest amount of insulin. Well, then the lowest amount of insulin. Well, then the lowest amount of insulin. Well, then that switch over point is going to come that switch over point is going to come that switch over point is going to come earlier in the exercise. And if you earlier in the exercise. And if you earlier in the exercise. And if you think about it, if you were to do think about it, if you were to do think about it, if you were to do something high-intensity for 20, 30, 40 something high-intensity for 20, 30, 40 something high-intensity for 20, 30, 40 minutes, or maybe lift weights, and then minutes, or maybe lift weights, and then minutes, or maybe lift weights, and then get into zone two cardio, if you were get into zone two cardio, if you were get into zone two cardio, if you were fasted, the literature says that you're fasted, the literature says that you're fasted, the literature says that you're going to burn more body fat going to burn more body fat going to burn more body fat per unit time than if you had eaten per unit time than if you had eaten per unit time than if you had eaten before or during the exercise. So, what before or during the exercise. So, what before or during the exercise. So, what does this mean? This means if you want does this mean? This means if you want does this mean? This means if you want to burn more body fat, if it's in your to burn more body fat, if it's in your to burn more body fat, if it's in your protocols and you're you know have been protocols and you're you know have been protocols and you're you know have been approved to do this safely, approved to do this safely, approved to do this safely, exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes, exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes, exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes, the higher the intensity, obviously, the higher the intensity, obviously, the higher the intensity, obviously, the shorter that bout is going to be, and shorter that bout is going to be, and shorter that bout is going to be, and then move over into zone two cardio. And then move over into zone two cardio. And then move over into zone two cardio. And if you do that fasted, then indeed you if you do that fasted, then indeed you if you do that fasted, then indeed you will burn a higher percentage of body will burn a higher percentage of body will burn a higher percentage of body fat. But if you can't even get to the fat. But if you can't even get to the fat. But if you can't even get to the exercise, if you're somebody who just exercise, if you're somebody who just exercise, if you're somebody who just can't do the training at all, you're can't do the training at all, you're can't do the training at all, you're unwilling to or you're incapable of unwilling to or you're incapable of unwilling to or you're incapable of training unless you eat something, then obviously unless you eat something, then obviously unless you eat something, then obviously eating something makes the most sense. eating something makes the most sense. eating something makes the most sense. And what you eat prior to exercise, And what you eat prior to exercise, And what you eat prior to exercise, that's a whole other that's a whole other that's a whole other biz that people argue about and biz that people argue about and biz that people argue about and fight about whether or not you should go fight about whether or not you should go fight about whether or not you should go into it with low carbohydrates or higher into it with low carbohydrates or higher into it with low carbohydrates or higher carb all of that. But in general, the carb all of that. But in general, the carb all of that. But in general, the theme there is very simple, which is theme there is very simple, which is theme there is very simple, which is that you want insulin levels to be that you want insulin levels to be that you want insulin levels to be pretty low if your goal is body fat pretty low if your goal is body fat pretty low if your goal is body fat reduction. This could be distilled into reduction. This could be distilled into reduction. This could be distilled into a simple protocol whereby three or four a simple protocol whereby three or four a simple protocol whereby three or four times a week you do high intensity times a week you do high intensity times a week you do high intensity training followed by either nothing or training followed by either nothing or training followed by either nothing or followed by followed by followed by low intensity training, especially if low intensity training, especially if low intensity training, especially if you're able to do that fasted. you're able to do that fasted. you're able to do that fasted. And I should just mention that none of And I should just mention that none of And I should just mention that none of this stuff about fasted is about this stuff about fasted is about this stuff about fasted is about performance. If you want to perform performance. If you want to perform performance. If you want to perform really well, you want to your this is really well, you want to your this is really well, you want to your this is for reasons of performance and you want to reasons of performance and you want to reasons of performance and you want to you know, it's for a sport or a you know, it's for a sport or a you know, it's for a sport or a competition, it's not for body fat competition, it's not for body fat competition, it's not for body fat purposes. Well, then purposes. Well, then purposes. Well, then all of this kind of falls away and is all of this kind of falls away and is all of this kind of falls away and is modified by what's ideal to eat for modified by what's ideal to eat for modified by what's ideal to eat for performance. But what we're talking performance. But what we're talking performance. But what we're talking about today is how to optimize body fat about today is how to optimize body fat about today is how to optimize body fat uh body fat loss. uh body fat loss. uh body fat loss. So, I think you get the principle now. So, I think you get the principle now. So, I think you get the principle now. But you should all be asking yourselves But you should all be asking yourselves But you should all be asking yourselves as scientists of yourselves, as scientists of yourselves, as scientists of yourselves, why would it be that certain patterns of why would it be that certain patterns of why would it be that certain patterns of exercise would lead to more or less fat exercise would lead to more or less fat exercise would lead to more or less fat loss? And again, it has to do with the loss? And again, it has to do with the loss? And again, it has to do with the neurons. It has to do with how we engage neurons. It has to do with how we engage neurons. It has to do with how we engage the nervous system. So, while the nervous system. So, while the nervous system. So, while non-exercise activity-induced non-exercise activity-induced non-exercise activity-induced thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting, and thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting, and thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting, and cold can induce thermogenesis cold can induce thermogenesis cold can induce thermogenesis by engaging shiver type movement or by engaging shiver type movement or by engaging shiver type movement or low-level movements, big movements that low-level movements, big movements that low-level movements, big movements that are of very high intensity, meaning they are of very high intensity, meaning they are of very high intensity, meaning they require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of adrenaline, epinephrine from our adrenaline, epinephrine from our adrenaline, epinephrine from our neurons, and signal particular types and neurons, and signal particular types and neurons, and signal particular types and amounts of fat thermogenesis, amounts of fat thermogenesis, amounts of fat thermogenesis, fat oxidation. fat oxidation. fat oxidation. Whereas low-level intensity exercise, Whereas low-level intensity exercise, Whereas low-level intensity exercise, low or moderate intensity exercise, you low or moderate intensity exercise, you low or moderate intensity exercise, you know, walking, running, biking, where know, walking, running, biking, where know, walking, running, biking, where you can do that easily, there's not very you can do that easily, there's not very you can do that easily, there's not very much adrenaline release. So, much adrenaline release. So, much adrenaline release. So, adrenaline and aka epinephrine is really adrenaline and aka epinephrine is really adrenaline and aka epinephrine is really the final common path by which movement the final common path by which movement the final common path by which movement of any kind, whether or not it's of any kind, whether or not it's of any kind, whether or not it's low-level shiver or whether or not it's low-level shiver or whether or not it's low-level shiver or whether or not it's lifting a barbell, sprinting up a hill, lifting a barbell, sprinting up a hill, lifting a barbell, sprinting up a hill, or doing a long bike ride, adrenaline is or doing a long bike ride, adrenaline is or doing a long bike ride, adrenaline is the effector of fat loss. It's the effector of fat loss. It's the effector of fat loss. It's the trigger, and it's the effector. So, now trigger, and it's the effector. So, now trigger, and it's the effector. So, now I want to turn our attention to I want to turn our attention to I want to turn our attention to compounds that increase epinephrine and compounds that increase epinephrine and compounds that increase epinephrine and adrenaline, as well as compounds that adrenaline, as well as compounds that adrenaline, as well as compounds that work outside the adrenaline work outside the adrenaline work outside the adrenaline epinephrine pathway to increase the epinephrine pathway to increase the epinephrine pathway to increase the rates of fat loss. rates of fat loss. rates of fat loss. I almost always save compounds and I almost always save compounds and I almost always save compounds and supplements and things of that sort supplements and things of that sort supplements and things of that sort to the end because I do believe that to the end because I do believe that to the end because I do believe that people should look first toward people should look first toward people should look first toward behavioral tools and an understanding of behavioral tools and an understanding of behavioral tools and an understanding of the science before they look toward a uh the science before they look toward a uh the science before they look toward a uh supplement or a particular thing that supplement or a particular thing that supplement or a particular thing that they can extract from diet. they can extract from diet. they can extract from diet. This is mainly to try and shift people This is mainly to try and shift people This is mainly to try and shift people away from the kind of magic pill away from the kind of magic pill away from the kind of magic pill phenomenon or the uh the idea that there phenomenon or the uh the idea that there phenomenon or the uh the idea that there is a magic pill because there really is a magic pill because there really is a magic pill because there really isn't, and frankly, there never will be. isn't, and frankly, there never will be. isn't, and frankly, there never will be. But, there are some compounds that can But, there are some compounds that can But, there are some compounds that can greatly increase fat oxidation and greatly increase fat oxidation and greatly increase fat oxidation and mobilization, and understanding which mobilization, and understanding which mobilization, and understanding which compounds increase oxidation or compounds increase oxidation or compounds increase oxidation or mobilization can be very useful if your goal is to can be very useful if your goal is to can be very useful if your goal is to accelerate fat loss. There are things accelerate fat loss. There are things accelerate fat loss. There are things that people can ingest that will allow that people can ingest that will allow that people can ingest that will allow them to oxidize more fat. them to oxidize more fat. them to oxidize more fat. And that occurs mainly by increasing the And that occurs mainly by increasing the And that occurs mainly by increasing the amount of epinephrine that is released amount of epinephrine that is released amount of epinephrine that is released from neurons that innervate fat tissue. from neurons that innervate fat tissue. from neurons that innervate fat tissue. One of the more common ones is one that One of the more common ones is one that One of the more common ones is one that you may already be using, which is you may already be using, which is you may already be using, which is caffeine. It's well-established that caffeine can It's well-established that caffeine can It's well-established that caffeine can enhance performance enhance performance enhance performance if you're caffeine adapted. Now, if you're caffeine adapted. Now, if you're caffeine adapted. Now, caffeine for burning more fat, for caffeine for burning more fat, for caffeine for burning more fat, for oxidizing and mobilizing more fat, is an oxidizing and mobilizing more fat, is an oxidizing and mobilizing more fat, is an interesting one. It can be effective at interesting one. It can be effective at interesting one. It can be effective at dosages up to 400 mg. 400 mg is uh dosages up to 400 mg. 400 mg is uh dosages up to 400 mg. 400 mg is uh roughly a cup and a half of coffee, or roughly a cup and a half of coffee, or roughly a cup and a half of coffee, or two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a lot more caffeine in coffee, so if you lot more caffeine in coffee, so if you lot more caffeine in coffee, so if you go to uh typical go to uh typical go to uh typical um cafe, and you were to get their um cafe, and you were to get their um cafe, and you were to get their um medium size, that would have close to a medium size, that would have close to a medium size, that would have close to a gram of caffeine, which is why if you're gram of caffeine, which is why if you're gram of caffeine, which is why if you're a regular caffeine consumer and you a regular caffeine consumer and you a regular caffeine consumer and you don't get that gram of caffeine in your don't get that gram of caffeine in your don't get that gram of caffeine in your coffee each day, you will get a coffee each day, you will get a coffee each day, you will get a headache. It can cause constriction and headache. It can cause constriction and headache. It can cause constriction and dilation of blood vessels in ways that's dilation of blood vessels in ways that's dilation of blood vessels in ways that's complicated, but you'll get a headache. complicated, but you'll get a headache. complicated, but you'll get a headache. Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat that you burn in any duration of that you burn in any duration of that you burn in any duration of exercise and it can shift the percentage exercise and it can shift the percentage exercise and it can shift the percentage of fat that you oxidize compared to of fat that you oxidize compared to of fat that you oxidize compared to glycogen. Unless you take that caffeine and it Unless you take that caffeine and it Unless you take that caffeine and it ramps you up so much that you're ramps you up so much that you're ramps you up so much that you're training really, really intensely. The training really, really intensely. The training really, really intensely. The bottom line is, if you like caffeine and bottom line is, if you like caffeine and bottom line is, if you like caffeine and you can use it safely, you can use it safely, you can use it safely, ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 mg of caffeine prior to exercise, mg of caffeine prior to exercise, mg of caffeine prior to exercise, somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes before exercise, before exercise, before exercise, can be beneficial if we're talking about can be beneficial if we're talking about can be beneficial if we're talking about fat oxidation, burning more body fat. fat oxidation, burning more body fat. fat oxidation, burning more body fat. And if caffeine is the kind of the And if caffeine is the kind of the And if caffeine is the kind of the entry point for most people of using entry point for most people of using entry point for most people of using compounds to increase the rate or compounds to increase the rate or compounds to increase the rate or percentage of fat loss in exercise and percentage of fat loss in exercise and percentage of fat loss in exercise and even at rest, what are some of the other even at rest, what are some of the other even at rest, what are some of the other things that are useful and things that are useful and things that are useful and interesting? Well, in terms of tools interesting? Well, in terms of tools interesting? Well, in terms of tools that are actionable and have reasonable that are actionable and have reasonable that are actionable and have reasonable safety margins, safety margins, safety margins, I've talked before about uh something I've talked before about uh something I've talked before about uh something called GLP-1. called GLP-1. called GLP-1. This is something that uh can be This is something that uh can be This is something that uh can be triggered by the ingestion of yerba triggered by the ingestion of yerba triggered by the ingestion of yerba mate. Mate increases GLP-1. mate. Mate increases GLP-1. mate. Mate increases GLP-1. GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. So, GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. So, GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. So, let's just quickly return to our let's just quickly return to our let's just quickly return to our biochemistry. As you recall, fat is biochemistry. As you recall, fat is biochemistry. As you recall, fat is mobilized from body fat stores mobilized from body fat stores mobilized from body fat stores and then it's burned up. It's oxidized and then it's burned up. It's oxidized and then it's burned up. It's oxidized in cells. It actually needs to be in cells. It actually needs to be in cells. It actually needs to be converted into ATP and those fatty acids converted into ATP and those fatty acids converted into ATP and those fatty acids uh are essentially converted into ATP in the essentially converted into ATP in the essentially converted into ATP in the mitochondria of the cell. mitochondria of the cell. mitochondria of the cell. High insulin prevents that from High insulin prevents that from High insulin prevents that from happening and glucagon facilitates that happening and glucagon facilitates that happening and glucagon facilitates that process. Glucagon facilitates that process Glucagon facilitates that process Glucagon facilitates that process through increases in GLP-1. through increases in GLP-1. through increases in GLP-1. The short takeaway is The short takeaway is The short takeaway is mate increases GLP-1 and yes, increases the increases GLP-1 and yes, increases the increases GLP-1 and yes, increases the percentage of fat that you'll burn. It percentage of fat that you'll burn. It percentage of fat that you'll burn. It increases fat burning. And that is increases fat burning. And that is increases fat burning. And that is especially true, it turns out from the especially true, it turns out from the especially true, it turns out from the scientific literature, if you ingest scientific literature, if you ingest scientific literature, if you ingest mate prior to exercise of any kind. So, mate prior to exercise of any kind. So, mate prior to exercise of any kind. So, if you want to burn more fat if you want to burn more fat if you want to burn more fat drinking mate before exercise is good. drinking mate before exercise is good. drinking mate before exercise is good. Drinking it at rest, when you're not Drinking it at rest, when you're not Drinking it at rest, when you're not exercising, will also help shift your metabolism will also help shift your metabolism will also help shift your metabolism toward enhanced burning of fat by toward enhanced burning of fat by toward enhanced burning of fat by increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a whole category of pharmaceuticals that's whole category of pharmaceuticals that's whole category of pharmaceuticals that's being developed right now that are in being developed right now that are in being developed right now that are in late-stage trials or are in use for the late-stage trials or are in use for the late-stage trials or are in use for the treatment of diabetes, which treatment of diabetes, which treatment of diabetes, which capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. They go by various names and there are They go by various names and there are They go by various names and there are people on the internet who are selling people on the internet who are selling people on the internet who are selling these things. They are prescription these things. They are prescription these things. They are prescription drugs and I want to emphasize that they drugs and I want to emphasize that they drugs and I want to emphasize that they are prescription drugs and you obviously are prescription drugs and you obviously are prescription drugs and you obviously wouldn't want to use any of these with wouldn't want to use any of these with wouldn't want to use any of these with without a prescription and a without a prescription and a without a prescription and a requirement. They does seem that they requirement. They does seem that they requirement. They does seem that they are effective for the treatment of are effective for the treatment of are effective for the treatment of certain kinds of diabetes and lead to certain kinds of diabetes and lead to certain kinds of diabetes and lead to fairly significant fairly significant fairly significant weight loss and reduction in appetite. weight loss and reduction in appetite. weight loss and reduction in appetite. So, this is kind of the modern version So, this is kind of the modern version So, this is kind of the modern version of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 metabolism are drugs such as semaglutide metabolism are drugs such as semaglutide metabolism are drugs such as semaglutide I can never pronounce this. Can't seem I can never pronounce this. Can't seem I can never pronounce this. Can't seem to pronounce many things, it seems. to pronounce many things, it seems. to pronounce many things, it seems. Semaglutide is the way I would Semaglutide is the way I would Semaglutide is the way I would pronounce it. In any case, this compound pronounce it. In any case, this compound pronounce it. In any case, this compound increases GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 increases GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 increases GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 analog in some cases and they go by analog in some cases and they go by analog in some cases and they go by various types of trade names. various types of trade names. various types of trade names. And again, the semaglutide And again, the semaglutide And again, the semaglutide is the prescription version where of the is the prescription version where of the is the prescription version where of the that's kind of the heavy artillery that's kind of the heavy artillery that's kind of the heavy artillery GLP-1 stimulant and again, should be GLP-1 stimulant and again, should be GLP-1 stimulant and again, should be only explored with a prescription. So, only explored with a prescription. So, only explored with a prescription. So, those are the compounds that those are the compounds that those are the compounds that really increase fat oxidation that really increase fat oxidation that really increase fat oxidation directly. There are going to be a number directly. There are going to be a number directly. There are going to be a number of things that impact insulin and of things that impact insulin and of things that impact insulin and glucagon that are going to shift the body that are going to shift the body that are going to shift the body toward more fat burning. And so, for toward more fat burning. And so, for toward more fat burning. And so, for instance, berberine, which comes from a instance, berberine, which comes from a instance, berberine, which comes from a plant, or metformin are compounds that plant, or metformin are compounds that plant, or metformin are compounds that are now in um kind of growing use for are now in um kind of growing use for are now in um kind of growing use for reducing blood glucose. They are very reducing blood glucose. They are very reducing blood glucose. They are very potent at reducing blood glucose, which potent at reducing blood glucose, which potent at reducing blood glucose, which will reduce insulin, because the job of will reduce insulin, because the job of will reduce insulin, because the job of the hormone insulin is to essentially the hormone insulin is to essentially the hormone insulin is to essentially manage glucose in the bloodstream. So, manage glucose in the bloodstream. So, manage glucose in the bloodstream. So, there are huge gallery of compounds that there are huge gallery of compounds that there are huge gallery of compounds that will reduce insulin, and thereby can will reduce insulin, and thereby can will reduce insulin, and thereby can increase fat oxidation. And that's because, as I fat oxidation. And that's because, as I fat oxidation. And that's because, as I mentioned before, fat oxidation, this mentioned before, fat oxidation, this mentioned before, fat oxidation, this conversion of fatty acids into ATP in conversion of fatty acids into ATP in conversion of fatty acids into ATP in the mitochondria, is inhibited by the mitochondria, is inhibited by the mitochondria, is inhibited by insulin. So, if you keep insulin low, insulin. So, if you keep insulin low, insulin. So, if you keep insulin low, you're going to increase that process. you're going to increase that process. you're going to increase that process. Which brings us full circle back to the Which brings us full circle back to the Which brings us full circle back to the issue of diet and nutrition. issue of diet and nutrition. issue of diet and nutrition. There is There is There is really solid evidence really solid evidence really solid evidence from the from the from the Gardner lab at Stanford and from other Gardner lab at Stanford and from other Gardner lab at Stanford and from other labs showing that when you look at labs showing that when you look at labs showing that when you look at different diets, you look at low-fat different diets, you look at low-fat different diets, you look at low-fat diets, high-fat diets, keto diets, high-fat diets, keto diets, high-fat diets, keto diets, intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, provided people stick to their provided people stick to their provided people stick to their particular diet, it doesn't really particular diet, it doesn't really particular diet, it doesn't really matter which diet you follow. You can still get which diet you follow. You can still get which diet you follow. You can still get a caloric deficit and you get weight a caloric deficit and you get weight a caloric deficit and you get weight loss. Adherence, however, is always an issue. Adherence, however, is always an issue. Adherence, however, is always an issue. And so, what I always say is And so, what I always say is And so, what I always say is that you want to use the eating plan that you want to use the eating plan that you want to use the eating plan that is obviously beneficial to your that is obviously beneficial to your that is obviously beneficial to your health, but the one that allows you to health, but the one that allows you to health, but the one that allows you to adhere to whatever it is that the adhere to whatever it is that the adhere to whatever it is that the particular nutrition protocol is, right? particular nutrition protocol is, right? particular nutrition protocol is, right? If you can't stick with something, then If you can't stick with something, then If you can't stick with something, then it's not very worthwhile. But, from the it's not very worthwhile. But, from the it's not very worthwhile. But, from the purely scientific standpoint, there's purely scientific standpoint, there's purely scientific standpoint, there's also an advantage to keeping insulin also an advantage to keeping insulin also an advantage to keeping insulin low. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked before my preferred way of eating is to before my preferred way of eating is to before my preferred way of eating is to go low or no carbohydrate throughout the go low or no carbohydrate throughout the go low or no carbohydrate throughout the day for alertness, to get that day for alertness, to get that day for alertness, to get that adrenaline release and the focus that adrenaline release and the focus that adrenaline release and the focus that goes with it, etc., and the ability and goes with it, etc., and the ability and goes with it, etc., and the ability and to think and move and do all the things to think and move and do all the things to think and move and do all the things I need to do during the day, and then I need to do during the day, and then I need to do during the day, and then I eat carbohydrates at night cuz it eat carbohydrates at night cuz it eat carbohydrates at night cuz it facilitates the transition to sleep. facilitates the transition to sleep. facilitates the transition to sleep. That's what works for me. That's what works for me. That's what works for me. But, when insulin is low, you do place your when insulin is low, you do place your when insulin is low, you do place your system in a position to oxidize more fat. And in a position to oxidize more fat. And in a position to oxidize more fat. And so, that's why I think a lot of people so, that's why I think a lot of people so, that's why I think a lot of people do see benefit from lower carbohydrate do see benefit from lower carbohydrate do see benefit from lower carbohydrate or moderate carbohydrate diets because or moderate carbohydrate diets because or moderate carbohydrate diets because when insulin is low, you are in a when insulin is low, you are in a when insulin is low, you are in a position to oxidize more fat. position to oxidize more fat. position to oxidize more fat. Both from exercise and at rest. So, once Both from exercise and at rest. So, once Both from exercise and at rest. So, once again, we've covered an enormous amount again, we've covered an enormous amount again, we've covered an enormous amount of material. of material. of material. We've talked about the science of fat We've talked about the science of fat We've talked about the science of fat loss, and in particular, we've explored loss, and in particular, we've explored loss, and in particular, we've explored this topic from the perspective of the this topic from the perspective of the this topic from the perspective of the nervous system. How neurons and in nervous system. How neurons and in nervous system. How neurons and in particular, the release of things like particular, the release of things like particular, the release of things like adrenaline, epinephrine, adrenaline, epinephrine, adrenaline, epinephrine, can facilitate fat mobilization and can facilitate fat mobilization and can facilitate fat mobilization and oxidation. We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this non-exercise type movement that can greatly increase type movement that can greatly increase type movement that can greatly increase caloric burn, caloric burn, caloric burn, and why that is. We talked about shiver, and why that is. We talked about shiver, and why that is. We talked about shiver, another form of non-exercise another form of non-exercise another form of non-exercise movement that can really increase both movement that can really increase both movement that can really increase both caloric expenditure due to the shiver, caloric expenditure due to the shiver, caloric expenditure due to the shiver, due to the movement, as well as increase due to the movement, as well as increase due to the movement, as well as increase thermogenesis, the heating up of the thermogenesis, the heating up of the thermogenesis, the heating up of the body through things like brown fat, and body through things like brown fat, and body through things like brown fat, and even the conversion of white fat to even the conversion of white fat to even the conversion of white fat to brown fat, which is a good thing if you brown fat, which is a good thing if you brown fat, which is a good thing if you want to oxidize fat. want to oxidize fat. want to oxidize fat. We talked about cold as a particular We talked about cold as a particular We talked about cold as a particular stimulus to induce shiver, and how to stimulus to induce shiver, and how to stimulus to induce shiver, and how to use getting into and out of cold as a way to getting into and out of cold as a way to getting into and out of cold as a way to stimulate shiver and avoid cold stimulate shiver and avoid cold stimulate shiver and avoid cold adaptation so that you continue to adaptation so that you continue to adaptation so that you continue to oxidize and burn fat if that's your oxidize and burn fat if that's your oxidize and burn fat if that's your goal. Talked about exercise, goal. Talked about exercise, goal. Talked about exercise, how rather than thinking about how rather than thinking about how rather than thinking about cardiovascular or weight training cardiovascular or weight training cardiovascular or weight training exercise, that we should perhaps look exercise, that we should perhaps look exercise, that we should perhaps look through the lens of this adrenaline through the lens of this adrenaline through the lens of this adrenaline system and how it interacts with fat system and how it interacts with fat system and how it interacts with fat stores. And think about low, medium, or And think about low, medium, or And think about low, medium, or high-intensity exercise. Whether or not high-intensity exercise. Whether or not high-intensity exercise. Whether or not we show up to that fasted or not. Turns we show up to that fasted or not. Turns we show up to that fasted or not. Turns out showing up to that fasted can be out showing up to that fasted can be out showing up to that fasted can be useful if you start with high-intensity useful if you start with high-intensity useful if you start with high-intensity movements and then move into movements and then move into movements and then move into lower-intensity type exercise. lower-intensity type exercise. lower-intensity type exercise. If you're going to go long duration, it If you're going to go long duration, it If you're going to go long duration, it probably doesn't matter unless you're probably doesn't matter unless you're probably doesn't matter unless you're exercising longer than 90 minutes, exercising longer than 90 minutes, exercising longer than 90 minutes, whether or not you eat or not. whether or not you eat or not. whether or not you eat or not. We talked about caffeine as a stimulant We talked about caffeine as a stimulant We talked about caffeine as a stimulant and a stimulus for epinephrine and a stimulus for epinephrine and a stimulus for epinephrine and adrenaline release adrenaline release adrenaline release as a way to access more fat metabolism. as a way to access more fat metabolism. as a way to access more fat metabolism. And last but not least, I want to thank And last but not least, I want to thank And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention today, you for your time and attention today, you for your time and attention today, and thank you for your interest in and thank you for your interest in and thank you for your interest in science.