Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing creativity. Creativity is are discussing creativity. Creativity is are discussing creativity. Creativity is a topic that to many people is very a topic that to many people is very a topic that to many people is very abstract. That is, we know when abstract. That is, we know when abstract. That is, we know when something seems creative, some of us something seems creative, some of us something seems creative, some of us know people who are creative or perhaps know people who are creative or perhaps know people who are creative or perhaps are creative, and yet the ability to be are creative, and yet the ability to be are creative, and yet the ability to be creative resides in everybody. And we creative resides in everybody. And we creative resides in everybody. And we know that because the neural circuits know that because the neural circuits know that because the neural circuits that underlie creativity have been that underlie creativity have been that underlie creativity have been somewhat defined and the steps and somewhat defined and the steps and somewhat defined and the steps and processes within the brain and body that processes within the brain and body that processes within the brain and body that lead to creativity are well known. That lead to creativity are well known. That lead to creativity are well known. That said, most people don't know how to said, most people don't know how to said, most people don't know how to access creativity. And if they do know access creativity. And if they do know access creativity. And if they do know how to access creativity, they are only how to access creativity, they are only how to access creativity, they are only able to access creativity in a fairly able to access creativity in a fairly able to access creativity in a fairly limited number of domains of life. For limited number of domains of life. For limited number of domains of life. For instance, in the visual arts or in music instance, in the visual arts or in music instance, in the visual arts or in music or within science or engineering or any or within science or engineering or any or within science or engineering or any number of different domains ranging from number of different domains ranging from number of different domains ranging from the kitchen to sport to the kitchen to sport to the kitchen to sport to childhood interactions, that is, childhood interactions, that is, childhood interactions, that is, childhood games. In other words, some childhood games. In other words, some childhood games. In other words, some adults are able to access their creative adults are able to access their creative adults are able to access their creative spirit when engaging in childlike play spirit when engaging in childlike play spirit when engaging in childlike play with children or for that matter, with children or for that matter, with children or for that matter, with adults. But as it turns out, all of creativity But as it turns out, all of creativity But as it turns out, all of creativity stems from just a small subset of neural stems from just a small subset of neural stems from just a small subset of neural structures in the brain that need to be structures in the brain that need to be structures in the brain that need to be activated in a particular sequence or activated in a particular sequence or activated in a particular sequence or order. Today we'll talk about what those order. Today we'll talk about what those order. Today we'll talk about what those neural structures are, what particular neural structures are, what particular neural structures are, what particular order they need to be activated in order they need to be activated in order they need to be activated in order to come up with, for instance, new order to come up with, for instance, new order to come up with, for instance, new ideas that are creative, and then how to ideas that are creative, and then how to ideas that are creative, and then how to implement those creative strategies. We implement those creative strategies. We implement those creative strategies. We will also talk about different ways to will also talk about different ways to will also talk about different ways to access creativity that include narrative access creativity that include narrative access creativity that include narrative and storytelling, as well as applying and storytelling, as well as applying and storytelling, as well as applying new rule sets or even entirely new world new rule sets or even entirely new world new rule sets or even entirely new world views. And we will do this in a views. And we will do this in a views. And we will do this in a structured way that will allow anyone, structured way that will allow anyone, structured way that will allow anyone, whether or not you consider yourself whether or not you consider yourself whether or not you consider yourself creative or not, to be able to apply creative or not, to be able to apply creative or not, to be able to apply these tools in different domains of these tools in different domains of these tools in different domains of life, work, family, play, and on and on. life, work, family, play, and on and on. life, work, family, play, and on and on. By the end of today's episode, you will By the end of today's episode, you will By the end of today's episode, you will have a better understanding of what have a better understanding of what have a better understanding of what creativity is and how to access it and, creativity is and how to access it and, creativity is and how to access it and, if you like, to bring others into your if you like, to bring others into your if you like, to bring others into your creative endeavors, which, as you'll creative endeavors, which, as you'll creative endeavors, which, as you'll soon learn, can massively expand the soon learn, can massively expand the soon learn, can massively expand the extent to which you yourself can express extent to which you yourself can express extent to which you yourself can express your creative talents. As is the case your creative talents. As is the case your creative talents. As is the case with all episodes of the Huberman Lab with all episodes of the Huberman Lab with all episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, today we will discuss both Podcast, today we will discuss both Podcast, today we will discuss both scientific mechanisms and nomenclature, scientific mechanisms and nomenclature, scientific mechanisms and nomenclature, and I promise to make all of that clear and I promise to make all of that clear and I promise to make all of that clear to you even if you don't have a to you even if you don't have a to you even if you don't have a background in biology or psychology, background in biology or psychology, background in biology or psychology, but we will also, of course, discuss but we will also, of course, discuss but we will also, of course, discuss tools. That is, specific steps that you tools. That is, specific steps that you tools. That is, specific steps that you can take in order to be more creative. can take in order to be more creative. can take in order to be more creative. One particular tool that I'm excited to One particular tool that I'm excited to One particular tool that I'm excited to share with you involves a meditation, share with you involves a meditation, share with you involves a meditation, but this is a very unusual meditation. but this is a very unusual meditation. but this is a very unusual meditation. This is not sitting with eyes closed, This is not sitting with eyes closed, This is not sitting with eyes closed, focusing on your breath, or focusing on focusing on your breath, or focusing on focusing on your breath, or focusing on a chime, or some other feature in your a chime, or some other feature in your a chime, or some other feature in your sensory environment, or even in your sensory environment, or even in your sensory environment, or even in your body. Later, we will talk about open body. Later, we will talk about open body. Later, we will talk about open monitoring meditations. Open monitoring meditations. Open monitoring meditations. Open monitoring meditations are very distinct from other meditations are very distinct from other meditations are very distinct from other forms of meditation and involve learning forms of meditation and involve learning forms of meditation and involve learning how to sit back and simply observe your how to sit back and simply observe your how to sit back and simply observe your thoughts while intentionally varying thoughts while intentionally varying thoughts while intentionally varying where your thoughts go. So, for those of where your thoughts go. So, for those of where your thoughts go. So, for those of you that find it a struggle to focus or you that find it a struggle to focus or you that find it a struggle to focus or to refocus in more traditional forms of to refocus in more traditional forms of to refocus in more traditional forms of meditation or maybe even in your work, meditation or maybe even in your work, meditation or maybe even in your work, and even for those of you that may and even for those of you that may and even for those of you that may suffer from things like ADHD or similar, suffer from things like ADHD or similar, suffer from things like ADHD or similar, open monitoring meditation can be an open monitoring meditation can be an open monitoring meditation can be an extremely valuable tool for accessing extremely valuable tool for accessing extremely valuable tool for accessing your creative abilities because of the your creative abilities because of the your creative abilities because of the ways that it allows you to tap into ways that it allows you to tap into ways that it allows you to tap into specific circuits within the frontal specific circuits within the frontal specific circuits within the frontal networks of your brain. So, these are networks of your brain. So, these are networks of your brain. So, these are networks of the brain that include the networks of the brain that include the networks of the brain that include the areas just behind your forehead and that areas just behind your forehead and that areas just behind your forehead and that allow you to evaluate new and novel rule allow you to evaluate new and novel rule allow you to evaluate new and novel rule sets in a very unconstrained way. sets in a very unconstrained way. sets in a very unconstrained way. Because if you think about it, Because if you think about it, Because if you think about it, creativity is really the ability to take creativity is really the ability to take creativity is really the ability to take existing elements from the physical existing elements from the physical existing elements from the physical world or from the thought world, if you world or from the thought world, if you world or from the thought world, if you will, or from any domain of life, mood, or from any domain of life, mood, or from any domain of life, mood, thinking, and information, and to thinking, and information, and to thinking, and information, and to reorder those into novel combinations reorder those into novel combinations reorder those into novel combinations that are useful for something. And as that are useful for something. And as that are useful for something. And as we'll also find out later, creativity we'll also find out later, creativity we'll also find out later, creativity has this incredible aspect to it, which has this incredible aspect to it, which has this incredible aspect to it, which is that when we see or create or is that when we see or create or is that when we see or create or experience something that is truly experience something that is truly experience something that is truly creative, it reveals to us something creative, it reveals to us something creative, it reveals to us something fundamental about the way that the fundamental about the way that the fundamental about the way that the natural world and indeed the way that natural world and indeed the way that natural world and indeed the way that our brains work. If that sounds very our brains work. If that sounds very our brains work. If that sounds very mysterious and abstract to you now, I mysterious and abstract to you now, I mysterious and abstract to you now, I promise that by the end of today's promise that by the end of today's promise that by the end of today's episode, you will not only understand episode, you will not only understand episode, you will not only understand what that means, but you will also what that means, but you will also what that means, but you will also understand how to use open monitoring understand how to use open monitoring understand how to use open monitoring meditations as well as other forms of meditations as well as other forms of meditations as well as other forms of tools in order to access your creative tools in order to access your creative tools in order to access your creative ability. Before we begin, I'd like to ability. Before we begin, I'd like to ability. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The the absolute highest quality. The the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two All-American company was founded by two All-American company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything swimmers from Stanford, and everything swimmers from Stanford, and everything about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. were designed with performance in mind. were designed with performance in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the I've spent a lifetime working on the I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system, and I can biology of the visual system, and I can biology of the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to tell you that your visual system has to tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of contend with an enormous number of contend with an enormous number of challenges for you to be able to see challenges for you to be able to see challenges for you to be able to see clearly. For instance, when you move clearly. For instance, when you move clearly. For instance, when you move from a shady area to a sunny area, there from a shady area to a sunny area, there from a shady area to a sunny area, there are all sorts of adaptations that have are all sorts of adaptations that have are all sorts of adaptations that have to occur in your eye and brain. Roka to occur in your eye and brain. Roka to occur in your eye and brain. Roka understands these kinds of adaptations understands these kinds of adaptations understands these kinds of adaptations and the other ones required to see and the other ones required to see and the other ones required to see clearly, and those are built into the clearly, and those are built into the clearly, and those are built into the engineering of their sunglasses and engineering of their sunglasses and engineering of their sunglasses and eyeglasses. One of the things that makes eyeglasses. One of the things that makes eyeglasses. One of the things that makes Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses so Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses so Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses so terrific is that they are extremely terrific is that they are extremely terrific is that they are extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time I lightweight. In fact, most of the time I lightweight. In fact, most of the time I don't even realize that they're on my don't even realize that they're on my don't even realize that they're on my face. I wear sunglasses when I drive and face. I wear sunglasses when I drive and face. I wear sunglasses when I drive and whenever I need to throughout the day, whenever I need to throughout the day, whenever I need to throughout the day, and I wear readers at night. I do not and I wear readers at night. I do not and I wear readers at night. I do not wear sunglasses when I get my morning wear sunglasses when I get my morning wear sunglasses when I get my morning sunlight, which I do every single sunlight, which I do every single sunlight, which I do every single morning, as you should be doing also, morning, as you should be doing also, morning, as you should be doing also, as is covered many times on this as is covered many times on this as is covered many times on this podcast. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses podcast. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses podcast. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are also unique in that, unlike a lot of are also unique in that, unlike a lot of are also unique in that, unlike a lot of so-called performance eyeglasses out so-called performance eyeglasses out so-called performance eyeglasses out there, they don't make you look like a there, they don't make you look like a there, they don't make you look like a cyborg. They have some of the styles cyborg. They have some of the styles cyborg. They have some of the styles that make you look like a cyborg if that make you look like a cyborg if that make you look like a cyborg if that's your thing, but if you want to that's your thing, but if you want to that's your thing, but if you want to wear glasses or sunglasses out to dinner wear glasses or sunglasses out to dinner wear glasses or sunglasses out to dinner or around for social reasons, or around for social reasons, or around for social reasons, they have many different aesthetic they have many different aesthetic they have many different aesthetic styles to choose from. If you'd like to styles to choose from. If you'd like to styles to choose from. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses or sunglasses, go to try Roka eyeglasses or sunglasses, go to try Roka eyeglasses or sunglasses, go to roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your code Huberman to save 20% off your code Huberman to save 20% off your order. Again, that's roka.com order. Again, that's roka.com order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. And as you may have heard me say before, And as you may have heard me say before, And as you may have heard me say before, I am not a fan of the word nootropics I am not a fan of the word nootropics I am not a fan of the word nootropics because it means smart drugs. And because it means smart drugs. And because it means smart drugs. And frankly, there is no neural circuit in frankly, there is no neural circuit in frankly, there is no neural circuit in the brain for being {quote} {unquote} the brain for being {quote} {unquote} the brain for being {quote} {unquote} smart. There are neural circuits for smart. There are neural circuits for smart. There are neural circuits for focus. There are neural circuits for focus. There are neural circuits for focus. There are neural circuits for task switching. There are neural task switching. There are neural task switching. There are neural circuits for today's topic, which is circuits for today's topic, which is circuits for today's topic, which is creativity. Nootropics, therefore, is not a great Nootropics, therefore, is not a great Nootropics, therefore, is not a great word to describe any sort of supplement word to describe any sort of supplement word to describe any sort of supplement or drug that can enhance brain function or drug that can enhance brain function or drug that can enhance brain function because it lacks specificity. Thesis because it lacks specificity. Thesis because it lacks specificity. Thesis understands this and therefore has understands this and therefore has understands this and therefore has designed custom nootropics that are designed custom nootropics that are designed custom nootropics that are tailored to your specific needs and that tailored to your specific needs and that tailored to your specific needs and that allow you to enter the brain and bodily allow you to enter the brain and bodily allow you to enter the brain and bodily states that are optimal for things like states that are optimal for things like states that are optimal for things like focus, energy, creativity, and so on. If focus, energy, creativity, and so on. If focus, energy, creativity, and so on. If you'd like to try your own personalized you'd like to try your own personalized you'd like to try your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to nootropic starter kit, go online to nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take their brief 3-minute quiz, and take their brief 3-minute quiz, and take their brief 3-minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different Thesis will send you four different Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. formulas to try in your first month. formulas to try in your first month. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout and use the code Huberman at checkout and use the code Huberman at checkout for 10% off your first box. Today's for 10% off your first box. Today's for 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by episode is also brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that contains everything you need, that contains everything you need, that contains everything you need, that is sodium, magnesium, and potassium in is sodium, magnesium, and potassium in is sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the precise ratios that you need without the precise ratios that you need without the precise ratios that you need without sugar. As I've talked about many times sugar. As I've talked about many times sugar. As I've talked about many times before on this podcast and elsewhere, before on this podcast and elsewhere, before on this podcast and elsewhere, every cell in your body requires every cell in your body requires every cell in your body requires hydration and electrolytes in order to hydration and electrolytes in order to hydration and electrolytes in order to function properly. And a key example of function properly. And a key example of function properly. And a key example of this are the neurons, the nerve cells of this are the neurons, the nerve cells of this are the neurons, the nerve cells of your brain that allow you to think your brain that allow you to think your brain that allow you to think clearly, to exercise hard, etc. clearly, to exercise hard, etc. clearly, to exercise hard, etc. Neurons require sodium in order to fire Neurons require sodium in order to fire Neurons require sodium in order to fire what are called action potentials or what are called action potentials or what are called action potentials or electrical signaling between neurons, electrical signaling between neurons, electrical signaling between neurons, and they require potassium and they require potassium and they require potassium and magnesium, and those have to be present magnesium, and those have to be present magnesium, and those have to be present in the correct ratios in order for your in the correct ratios in order for your in the correct ratios in order for your brain and body to function optimally. brain and body to function optimally. brain and body to function optimally. Element is formulated to help anyone Element is formulated to help anyone Element is formulated to help anyone with their electrolyte needs, and is with their electrolyte needs, and is with their electrolyte needs, and is perfectly suited to anyone following a perfectly suited to anyone following a perfectly suited to anyone following a ketogenic, low-carbohydrate, or ketogenic, low-carbohydrate, or ketogenic, low-carbohydrate, or paleolithic diet, or a basic omnivore paleolithic diet, or a basic omnivore paleolithic diet, or a basic omnivore diet, which is the one that I follow. If diet, which is the one that I follow. If diet, which is the one that I follow. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to you'd like to try Element, you can go to you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement, that's drinkelement, that's drinkelement, that's element.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with your purchase. And right now, Element your purchase. And right now, Element your purchase. And right now, Element has two special flavors for the has two special flavors for the has two special flavors for the holidays, chocolate caramel and mint holidays, chocolate caramel and mint holidays, chocolate caramel and mint chocolate, which I should mention taste chocolate, which I should mention taste chocolate, which I should mention taste especially good if you actually heat it especially good if you actually heat it especially good if you actually heat it up. So, if you uh treat it sort of like up. So, if you uh treat it sort of like up. So, if you uh treat it sort of like a tea, it works, or if you drink it a tea, it works, or if you drink it a tea, it works, or if you drink it cold, it's delicious. All the flavors of cold, it's delicious. All the flavors of cold, it's delicious. All the flavors of Element, I find delicious. Again, you Element, I find delicious. Again, you Element, I find delicious. Again, you can go to drinkelement, that's lmn can go to drinkelement, that's lmn can go to drinkelement, that's lmn t.com/huberman. The Huberman Lab Podcast is now The Huberman Lab Podcast is now The Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. To partnered with Momentous Supplements. To partnered with Momentous Supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the find the supplements we discuss on the find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled o u s, livemomentous, spelled o u s, livemomentous, spelled o u s, livemomentous.com/huberman. And I should just mention that the And I should just mention that the And I should just mention that the library of those supplements is library of those supplements is library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's constantly expanding. Again, that's constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Let's talk about creativity. Now, on the Let's talk about creativity. Now, on the Let's talk about creativity. Now, on the face of it, the word creativity and face of it, the word creativity and face of it, the word creativity and creative acts might seem somewhat creative acts might seem somewhat creative acts might seem somewhat abstract to us. That is, abstract to us. That is, abstract to us. That is, we know when we see something that we know when we see something that we know when we see something that we consider creative, consider creative, consider creative, and we know when we see something that and we know when we see something that and we know when we see something that is not creative. Things that aren't is not creative. Things that aren't is not creative. Things that aren't creative are things that we see every creative are things that we see every creative are things that we see every day. Uh car with four tires, for day. Uh car with four tires, for day. Uh car with four tires, for instance, a bicycle with two tires, not instance, a bicycle with two tires, not instance, a bicycle with two tires, not creative. However, we also see things that are However, we also see things that are However, we also see things that are novel, that are different, and that we novel, that are different, and that we novel, that are different, and that we don't really think of as creative. In don't really think of as creative. In don't really think of as creative. In fact, they can be downright trivial. For fact, they can be downright trivial. For fact, they can be downright trivial. For instance, if I were to take a fish tank instance, if I were to take a fish tank instance, if I were to take a fish tank and put wings on it, that's a novel and put wings on it, that's a novel and put wings on it, that's a novel combination of things, which is one of combination of things, which is one of combination of things, which is one of the key criteria for an act or an object the key criteria for an act or an object the key criteria for an act or an object or a piece of music that is creative, or a piece of music that is creative, or a piece of music that is creative, and yet neither of us, I believe, would and yet neither of us, I believe, would and yet neither of us, I believe, would find it very creative or very find it very creative or very find it very creative or very interesting that a fish tank has wings interesting that a fish tank has wings interesting that a fish tank has wings on it. Why? Or why not, I should say. on it. Why? Or why not, I should say. on it. Why? Or why not, I should say. Well, it turns out that for something to Well, it turns out that for something to Well, it turns out that for something to be creative, it actually has to reveal be creative, it actually has to reveal be creative, it actually has to reveal to us something fundamental about the to us something fundamental about the to us something fundamental about the world or about how we work. world or about how we work. world or about how we work. And I must say that often times the most And I must say that often times the most And I must say that often times the most creative and the most interesting and creative and the most interesting and creative and the most interesting and the most beloved creative acts reveal to the most beloved creative acts reveal to the most beloved creative acts reveal to us something fundamental about the world us something fundamental about the world us something fundamental about the world or the way that we work in a way that or the way that we work in a way that or the way that we work in a way that delights and thrills and surprises us, delights and thrills and surprises us, delights and thrills and surprises us, but that we aren't even aware what that but that we aren't even aware what that but that we aren't even aware what that fundamental rule is. I'll return to this fundamental rule is. I'll return to this fundamental rule is. I'll return to this in a few minutes, but for the time being in a few minutes, but for the time being in a few minutes, but for the time being let's just build up from first let's just build up from first let's just build up from first principles what constitutes something principles what constitutes something principles what constitutes something creative and what does not constitute creative and what does not constitute creative and what does not constitute something creative. something creative. something creative. Creativity is a way of interacting with Creativity is a way of interacting with Creativity is a way of interacting with the world or combining or recombining the world or combining or recombining the world or combining or recombining things in the world in a way that things in the world in a way that things in the world in a way that appears novel to us and to other people. appears novel to us and to other people. appears novel to us and to other people. My example of a fish tank with wings on My example of a fish tank with wings on My example of a fish tank with wings on it is novel, but frankly, it's not very it is novel, but frankly, it's not very it is novel, but frankly, it's not very creative and it's not very interesting. creative and it's not very interesting. creative and it's not very interesting. It doesn't reveal anything new to us. It doesn't reveal anything new to us. It doesn't reveal anything new to us. Sure, there are flying fish, although, Sure, there are flying fish, although, Sure, there are flying fish, although, you know, they just kind of jump far, you know, they just kind of jump far, you know, they just kind of jump far, they don't really fly. And as a they don't really fly. And as a they don't really fly. And as a consequence, putting wings on a fish consequence, putting wings on a fish consequence, putting wings on a fish tank could be used as a metaphor for the tank could be used as a metaphor for the tank could be used as a metaphor for the fact that fish don't fly, but you fact that fish don't fly, but you fact that fish don't fly, but you already knew and I already knew that already knew and I already knew that already knew and I already knew that fish don't fly. And so, there's nothing fish don't fly. And so, there's nothing fish don't fly. And so, there's nothing novel revealed to us about the world novel revealed to us about the world novel revealed to us about the world except something we already knew. except something we already knew. except something we already knew. Now, creative acts, on the other hand, Now, creative acts, on the other hand, Now, creative acts, on the other hand, of course, involve novel combinations of course, involve novel combinations of course, involve novel combinations of existing rule sets. existing rule sets. existing rule sets. That could be different combinations of That could be different combinations of That could be different combinations of music or colors or shapes music or colors or shapes music or colors or shapes or technology, etc. or technology, etc. or technology, etc. But it does so in a way that tells us But it does so in a way that tells us But it does so in a way that tells us something fundamental and different. Let something fundamental and different. Let something fundamental and different. Let me give an example of a few truly me give an example of a few truly me give an example of a few truly creative artistic acts. creative artistic acts. creative artistic acts. And I'll do that in the domain of visual And I'll do that in the domain of visual And I'll do that in the domain of visual arts, but of course, there are many arts, but of course, there are many arts, but of course, there are many examples that could come from music or examples that could come from music or examples that could come from music or from other domains, sport, etc. from other domains, sport, etc. from other domains, sport, etc. Examples I'll give Examples I'll give Examples I'll give rather than a fish tank with wings are rather than a fish tank with wings are rather than a fish tank with wings are for instance for instance for instance the comparison between a drawing or a the comparison between a drawing or a the comparison between a drawing or a very accurate painting of a face very accurate painting of a face very accurate painting of a face an Escher painting and a Banksy. Okay, an Escher painting and a Banksy. Okay, an Escher painting and a Banksy. Okay, if you don't know what those are, I'll if you don't know what those are, I'll if you don't know what those are, I'll explain. First of all, let's talk about an First of all, let's talk about an First of all, let's talk about an accurate representation of a face. If I accurate representation of a face. If I accurate representation of a face. If I were to sit you down or if you were to were to sit you down or if you were to were to sit you down or if you were to send me a photograph and then I were to send me a photograph and then I were to send me a photograph and then I were to paint or draw a picture of your face in paint or draw a picture of your face in paint or draw a picture of your face in a way that faithfully represented the a way that faithfully represented the a way that faithfully represented the position and shape of your nose relative position and shape of your nose relative position and shape of your nose relative to the eyes, maybe a to the eyes, maybe a to the eyes, maybe a you know, a curl of the lip, maybe a few you know, a curl of the lip, maybe a few you know, a curl of the lip, maybe a few you know, hairs of your eyebrows in a you know, hairs of your eyebrows in a you know, hairs of your eyebrows in a particular way that really captured you particular way that really captured you particular way that really captured you accurately. I think most people would say, "Okay, I think most people would say, "Okay, I think most people would say, "Okay, it's accurate. It looks a lot like the it's accurate. It looks a lot like the it's accurate. It looks a lot like the photograph of the person." And on the photograph of the person." And on the photograph of the person." And on the one hand, while that could be one hand, while that could be one hand, while that could be interesting it's not particularly interesting it's not particularly interesting it's not particularly creative because it faithfully creative because it faithfully creative because it faithfully represents what's already there. represents what's already there. represents what's already there. In contrast In contrast In contrast a painting or a picture like an Escher a painting or a picture like an Escher a painting or a picture like an Escher and for those of you that aren't and for those of you that aren't and for those of you that aren't familiar with Eschers familiar with Eschers familiar with Eschers involves a lot of repeating patterns. So involves a lot of repeating patterns. So involves a lot of repeating patterns. So for instance, a bird image that's for instance, a bird image that's for instance, a bird image that's repeated over and over and over and over repeated over and over and over and over repeated over and over and over and over again, sometimes in partially again, sometimes in partially again, sometimes in partially overlapping manner overlapping manner overlapping manner and perhaps a building that's repeated and perhaps a building that's repeated and perhaps a building that's repeated over and over and over again or stones over and over and over again or stones over and over and over again or stones repeated over and over again or repeated over and over again or repeated over and over again or staircases over and over again. staircases over and over again. staircases over and over again. Eschers capture elements from the outside world capture elements from the outside world capture elements from the outside world and faithfully represent them, but and faithfully represent them, but and faithfully represent them, but faithfully represent them over and over faithfully represent them over and over faithfully represent them over and over and over again, which is not typically and over again, which is not typically and over again, which is not typically seen in the natural world. In fact most seen in the natural world. In fact most seen in the natural world. In fact most of what our visual system does is to of what our visual system does is to of what our visual system does is to eliminate repetitive patterns when we eliminate repetitive patterns when we eliminate repetitive patterns when we see them. In fact, most of what our see them. In fact, most of what our see them. In fact, most of what our visual system does is try and make us a visual system does is try and make us a visual system does is try and make us a blind to repetitive patterns in our blind to repetitive patterns in our blind to repetitive patterns in our visual environment and only allow us to visual environment and only allow us to visual environment and only allow us to see things that are unusual in that see things that are unusual in that see things that are unusual in that visual environment. Now, this is visual environment. Now, this is visual environment. Now, this is especially true at visual scales. What I especially true at visual scales. What I especially true at visual scales. What I mean by that is if you were to go to the mean by that is if you were to go to the mean by that is if you were to go to the beach and lie on your towel and look beach and lie on your towel and look beach and lie on your towel and look down at the sand, you would start to down at the sand, you would start to down at the sand, you would start to notice that the sand is a very, very notice that the sand is a very, very notice that the sand is a very, very repetitive pattern. So, at very small repetitive pattern. So, at very small repetitive pattern. So, at very small scales and in particular at molecular scales and in particular at molecular scales and in particular at molecular scales, when you get down to the level scales, when you get down to the level scales, when you get down to the level of atoms and so forth, everything is of atoms and so forth, everything is of atoms and so forth, everything is repetitive. It's the same thing, it's repetitive. It's the same thing, it's repetitive. It's the same thing, it's just reproduced in different just reproduced in different just reproduced in different combinations over and over again. But, combinations over and over again. But, combinations over and over again. But, as we move through our world, typically as we move through our world, typically as we move through our world, typically we're not looking down at pebbles on the we're not looking down at pebbles on the we're not looking down at pebbles on the ground or little grains of sand, ground or little grains of sand, ground or little grains of sand, or the pattern of leaves in a particular the pattern of leaves in a particular the pattern of leaves in a particular clover or something of that sort. clover or something of that sort. clover or something of that sort. Most of the time we're looking out on Most of the time we're looking out on Most of the time we're looking out on landscapes or at people's faces, etc. landscapes or at people's faces, etc. landscapes or at people's faces, etc. And very seldom do we see highly repetitive very seldom do we see highly repetitive very seldom do we see highly repetitive patterns at that scale. patterns at that scale. patterns at that scale. So, what Eschers do is they essentially So, what Eschers do is they essentially So, what Eschers do is they essentially reveal to us a fundamental feature about reveal to us a fundamental feature about reveal to us a fundamental feature about the way that our visual system works, the way that our visual system works, the way that our visual system works, which is that repetitive patterns tend which is that repetitive patterns tend which is that repetitive patterns tend to become noise in our visual system. to become noise in our visual system. to become noise in our visual system. That is, our brain encodes repetition as That is, our brain encodes repetition as That is, our brain encodes repetition as things not to be interested in. And the things not to be interested in. And the things not to be interested in. And the things that stand out against that things that stand out against that things that stand out against that repetition as the things to be repetition as the things to be repetition as the things to be interested in, so-called signal to interested in, so-called signal to interested in, so-called signal to noise. What Eschers do is they invert the What Eschers do is they invert the What Eschers do is they invert the relationship between signal and noise, relationship between signal and noise, relationship between signal and noise, and they make the repetitive patterns and they make the repetitive patterns and they make the repetitive patterns the signal, the signal, the signal, and the unusual patterns the noise. In and the unusual patterns the noise. In and the unusual patterns the noise. In fact, in every Escher there are unusual fact, in every Escher there are unusual fact, in every Escher there are unusual patterns, and those completely disappear patterns, and those completely disappear patterns, and those completely disappear to us. to us. to us. Now, when you look at an Escher, what Now, when you look at an Escher, what Now, when you look at an Escher, what you probably see and what I see are just you probably see and what I see are just you probably see and what I see are just a bunch of birds repeated over and over a bunch of birds repeated over and over a bunch of birds repeated over and over again, or buildings or staircases again, or buildings or staircases again, or buildings or staircases repeated over and over again. repeated over and over again. repeated over and over again. And you may like Eschers and you may And you may like Eschers and you may And you may like Eschers and you may not, that's not the point. Today we're not, that's not the point. Today we're not, that's not the point. Today we're not talking about taste in particular not talking about taste in particular not talking about taste in particular creative acts. What we're trying to creative acts. What we're trying to creative acts. What we're trying to identify here are the rules and identify here are the rules and identify here are the rules and mechanisms of what constitutes something mechanisms of what constitutes something mechanisms of what constitutes something creative and why it's creative. And the creative and why it's creative. And the creative and why it's creative. And the key element here is that what's revealed key element here is that what's revealed key element here is that what's revealed by an Escher through these repetition by an Escher through these repetition by an Escher through these repetition patterns is an inversion of the way that our is an inversion of the way that our is an inversion of the way that our brain normally encodes visual images, brain normally encodes visual images, brain normally encodes visual images, and therefore the rule that repetition and therefore the rule that repetition and therefore the rule that repetition is suppressed in our visual system, and is suppressed in our visual system, and is suppressed in our visual system, and that unusual visual features that unusual visual features that unusual visual features are revealed to us. That rule is what are revealed to us. That rule is what are revealed to us. That rule is what pops out to us when we look at an pops out to us when we look at an pops out to us when we look at an Escher. Now, when I say pops out, I Escher. Now, when I say pops out, I Escher. Now, when I say pops out, I don't mean that you look at an Escher don't mean that you look at an Escher don't mean that you look at an Escher and go, "Oh, normally I don't see and go, "Oh, normally I don't see and go, "Oh, normally I don't see repetition, normally I see the unusual repetition, normally I see the unusual repetition, normally I see the unusual stuff, etc., etc. But, there seems to be stuff, etc., etc. But, there seems to be stuff, etc., etc. But, there seems to be something about truly creative acts that something about truly creative acts that something about truly creative acts that capture the attention and sometimes the capture the attention and sometimes the capture the attention and sometimes the delight of many, many people. It's that delight of many, many people. It's that delight of many, many people. It's that they reveal a fundamental rule about how they reveal a fundamental rule about how they reveal a fundamental rule about how the brain or the world work. Let me give the brain or the world work. Let me give the brain or the world work. Let me give you a different example, also from the you a different example, also from the you a different example, also from the visual art world. Let me give you the visual art world. Let me give you the visual art world. Let me give you the example of Banksy. Banksy is an artist example of Banksy. Banksy is an artist example of Banksy. Banksy is an artist that many of you are probably familiar that many of you are probably familiar that many of you are probably familiar with and probably some of you are not with and probably some of you are not with and probably some of you are not familiar with. So, for those of you that familiar with. So, for those of you that familiar with. So, for those of you that are not familiar with Banksy, Banksy is are not familiar with Banksy, Banksy is are not familiar with Banksy, Banksy is an artist that most often does an artist that most often does an artist that most often does two-dimensional artwork. So, these would two-dimensional artwork. So, these would two-dimensional artwork. So, these would be stencils or paintings or drawings, be stencils or paintings or drawings, be stencils or paintings or drawings, like many artists, and does them in an like many artists, and does them in an like many artists, and does them in an urban landscape, an actual city or urban landscape, an actual city or urban landscape, an actual city or suburban landscape. That is, he draws or suburban landscape. That is, he draws or suburban landscape. That is, he draws or stencils or graffitis stencils or graffitis stencils or graffitis in a very cryptic way, I should say. No in a very cryptic way, I should say. No in a very cryptic way, I should say. No one really knows who Banksy is or when one really knows who Banksy is or when one really knows who Banksy is or when he does his art. He just reveals his art he does his art. He just reveals his art he does his art. He just reveals his art by putting it up. But, he does this in by putting it up. But, he does this in by putting it up. But, he does this in the context of cities and on the context of cities and on the context of cities and on three-dimensional objects. So, a good three-dimensional objects. So, a good three-dimensional objects. So, a good example would be example would be example would be he will stencil next to a phone booth a he will stencil next to a phone booth a he will stencil next to a phone booth a police officer. Or, he will graffiti police officer. Or, he will graffiti police officer. Or, he will graffiti next to an actual fire hydrant a dog next to an actual fire hydrant a dog next to an actual fire hydrant a dog lifting its leg to urinate on that fire lifting its leg to urinate on that fire lifting its leg to urinate on that fire hydrant. Now, hydrant. Now, hydrant. Now, what's interesting about Banksy's is not what's interesting about Banksy's is not what's interesting about Banksy's is not simply the fact that he puts simply the fact that he puts simply the fact that he puts two-dimensional art onto two-dimensional art onto two-dimensional art onto three-dimensional surfaces in the urban three-dimensional surfaces in the urban three-dimensional surfaces in the urban and suburban landscape, because if you and suburban landscape, because if you and suburban landscape, because if you think about it, that's been done many, think about it, that's been done many, think about it, that's been done many, many times before. All graffiti is that. many times before. All graffiti is that. many times before. All graffiti is that. All city art and murals is that. So, All city art and murals is that. So, All city art and murals is that. So, what's unique about Banksy? What's what's unique about Banksy? What's what's unique about Banksy? What's unique about Banksy, unique about Banksy, unique about Banksy, or I should say Banksy's, the actual or I should say Banksy's, the actual or I should say Banksy's, the actual art, is that he combines two-dimensional art, is that he combines two-dimensional art, is that he combines two-dimensional art with a three-dimensional landscape art with a three-dimensional landscape art with a three-dimensional landscape in a way that the concept in a way that the concept in a way that the concept pops out at you. What do I mean by that? pops out at you. What do I mean by that? pops out at you. What do I mean by that? Well, in the case of the dog lifting its Well, in the case of the dog lifting its Well, in the case of the dog lifting its leg to urinate on the fire hydrant, leg to urinate on the fire hydrant, leg to urinate on the fire hydrant, that's a scene that most people and in that's a scene that most people and in that's a scene that most people and in fact most children are familiar with fact most children are familiar with fact most children are familiar with from cartoons or from our basic from cartoons or from our basic from cartoons or from our basic understanding of the stereotype of dogs. understanding of the stereotype of dogs. understanding of the stereotype of dogs. I must tell you, having owned a male I must tell you, having owned a male I must tell you, having owned a male dog, a bulldog Costello for many years, dog, a bulldog Costello for many years, dog, a bulldog Costello for many years, hydrants were a particular target for hydrants were a particular target for hydrants were a particular target for Costello. Of course, everything was a Costello. Of course, everything was a Costello. Of course, everything was a particular target for Costello urinating particular target for Costello urinating particular target for Costello urinating outdoors. Nonetheless, he liked to pee on fire Nonetheless, he liked to pee on fire Nonetheless, he liked to pee on fire hydrants. That itself is not interesting. Seeing a That itself is not interesting. Seeing a That itself is not interesting. Seeing a photograph of a dog raising its leg to photograph of a dog raising its leg to photograph of a dog raising its leg to pee on a fire hydrant is not pee on a fire hydrant is not pee on a fire hydrant is not interesting. Seeing a painting of that isn't Seeing a painting of that isn't Seeing a painting of that isn't interesting. Seeing an actual dog interesting. Seeing an actual dog interesting. Seeing an actual dog urinating on a fire hydrant isn't urinating on a fire hydrant isn't urinating on a fire hydrant isn't interesting. In fact, seeing a painting interesting. In fact, seeing a painting interesting. In fact, seeing a painting in two dimensions of a dog raising its in two dimensions of a dog raising its in two dimensions of a dog raising its leg to Of course, it can't actually leg to Of course, it can't actually leg to Of course, it can't actually urinate, but urinate, but urinate, but give you the impression that it would give you the impression that it would give you the impression that it would urinate on that fire hydrant isn't urinate on that fire hydrant isn't urinate on that fire hydrant isn't particularly interesting except for the particularly interesting except for the particularly interesting except for the fact that it reveals to us something fact that it reveals to us something fact that it reveals to us something fundamental, which is that we tend to fundamental, which is that we tend to fundamental, which is that we tend to pair visual relationships between pair visual relationships between pair visual relationships between different objects that share a common different objects that share a common different objects that share a common theme, and then the theme tends to pop theme, and then the theme tends to pop theme, and then the theme tends to pop out at us. So, for instance, the dog out at us. So, for instance, the dog out at us. So, for instance, the dog raising its leg next to a fire hydrant, raising its leg next to a fire hydrant, raising its leg next to a fire hydrant, even if the dog is drawn in two even if the dog is drawn in two even if the dog is drawn in two dimensions and the fire hydrant is in dimensions and the fire hydrant is in dimensions and the fire hydrant is in three dimensions, allows the concept of three dimensions, allows the concept of three dimensions, allows the concept of dog and fire hydrant to emerge or pop dog and fire hydrant to emerge or pop dog and fire hydrant to emerge or pop out at us, which reveals to us something out at us, which reveals to us something out at us, which reveals to us something fundamental about how our brain works, fundamental about how our brain works, fundamental about how our brain works, which is that our brain encodes concepts which is that our brain encodes concepts which is that our brain encodes concepts and entire stories as symbols of and entire stories as symbols of and entire stories as symbols of interaction between different objects. interaction between different objects. interaction between different objects. Let me give you a different example just Let me give you a different example just Let me give you a different example just to make sure that this hits home. to make sure that this hits home. to make sure that this hits home. One of Banksy's more famous paintings is One of Banksy's more famous paintings is One of Banksy's more famous paintings is a rather politically charged one, which a rather politically charged one, which a rather politically charged one, which is of a girl holding a bouquet of is of a girl holding a bouquet of is of a girl holding a bouquet of balloons, and this two-dimensional drawing was put and this two-dimensional drawing was put and this two-dimensional drawing was put onto the West Wall dividing onto the West Wall dividing onto the West Wall dividing territories in the Middle East, a very territories in the Middle East, a very territories in the Middle East, a very controversial issue. controversial issue. controversial issue. The controversies of that issue are not The controversies of that issue are not The controversies of that issue are not what I want to get into, but I don't what I want to get into, but I don't what I want to get into, but I don't think anyone would doubt that it is a think anyone would doubt that it is a think anyone would doubt that it is a controversial issue. controversial issue. controversial issue. The two-dimensional drawing of the girl The two-dimensional drawing of the girl The two-dimensional drawing of the girl with the balloons on the actual wall with the balloons on the actual wall with the balloons on the actual wall turns out to be quite interesting as an turns out to be quite interesting as an turns out to be quite interesting as an art piece because what it reveals to us art piece because what it reveals to us art piece because what it reveals to us is the entire controversy around the is the entire controversy around the is the entire controversy around the presence of that wall and the desire for presence of that wall and the desire for presence of that wall and the desire for certain people to breach that wall and certain people to breach that wall and certain people to breach that wall and the desire for other people to insist the desire for other people to insist the desire for other people to insist that wall not be breached for that wall not be breached for that wall not be breached for whatever reason. Again, this is not whatever reason. Again, this is not whatever reason. Again, this is not about the particular controversy. The about the particular controversy. The about the particular controversy. The point is that a two-dimensional image point is that a two-dimensional image point is that a two-dimensional image combined with a three-dimensional combined with a three-dimensional combined with a three-dimensional structure allows the purpose of that structure allows the purpose of that structure allows the purpose of that three-dimensional structure three-dimensional structure three-dimensional structure and the controversy around that and the controversy around that and the controversy around that three-dimensional structure to pop out three-dimensional structure to pop out three-dimensional structure to pop out at us in a way that if, for instance, we at us in a way that if, for instance, we at us in a way that if, for instance, we had just seen a photograph of somebody had just seen a photograph of somebody had just seen a photograph of somebody next to that wall or with a ladder or if next to that wall or with a ladder or if next to that wall or with a ladder or if we just seen a drawing of we just seen a drawing of we just seen a drawing of a girl holding a bouquet of balloons on a girl holding a bouquet of balloons on a girl holding a bouquet of balloons on a drawing of that wall to not emerge. In a drawing of that wall to not emerge. In a drawing of that wall to not emerge. In other words, it captures two fundamental other words, it captures two fundamental other words, it captures two fundamental features of the visual system, our features of the visual system, our features of the visual system, our ability to encode things in two ability to encode things in two ability to encode things in two dimensions and understand symbols, and dimensions and understand symbols, and dimensions and understand symbols, and our ability to understand things in our ability to understand things in our ability to understand things in three dimensions, and in particular, the three dimensions, and in particular, the three dimensions, and in particular, the wall as a three-dimensional object is wall as a three-dimensional object is wall as a three-dimensional object is really interesting because it's an really interesting because it's an really interesting because it's an actual physical barrier. So, showing it actual physical barrier. So, showing it actual physical barrier. So, showing it as the actual physical barrier that it as the actual physical barrier that it as the actual physical barrier that it is in real space in three dimensions is in real space in three dimensions is in real space in three dimensions turns out to allow the interaction turns out to allow the interaction turns out to allow the interaction between those two things, the concept, between those two things, the concept, between those two things, the concept, the controversy, to pop out at us and the controversy, to pop out at us and the controversy, to pop out at us and make us think about that particular make us think about that particular make us think about that particular controversy and perhaps where we each controversy and perhaps where we each controversy and perhaps where we each individually stand on that controversy. individually stand on that controversy. individually stand on that controversy. Now, there are many examples of what I Now, there are many examples of what I Now, there are many examples of what I just gave in the visual domain. just gave in the visual domain. just gave in the visual domain. For instance, uh Rothkos, which are just For instance, uh Rothkos, which are just For instance, uh Rothkos, which are just color on canvas, are particularly color on canvas, are particularly color on canvas, are particularly interesting source of information about interesting source of information about interesting source of information about the way that the brain encodes color. the way that the brain encodes color. the way that the brain encodes color. Later, I'll fill in what exactly what Later, I'll fill in what exactly what Later, I'll fill in what exactly what that information is. You may like that information is. You may like that information is. You may like Rothkos, you may not, but I'll tell you Rothkos, you may not, but I'll tell you Rothkos, you may not, but I'll tell you one thing. When you look at a Rothko, one thing. When you look at a Rothko, one thing. When you look at a Rothko, you are seeing colors in a very you are seeing colors in a very you are seeing colors in a very different way than you would ever see different way than you would ever see different way than you would ever see colors in any other context. The fact colors in any other context. The fact colors in any other context. The fact that they don't have a frame, typically, that they don't have a frame, typically, that they don't have a frame, typically, and the fact that there's no white and the fact that there's no white and the fact that there's no white canvas allows the colors that you see to be allows the colors that you see to be allows the colors that you see to be novel hues of those colors that you will novel hues of those colors that you will novel hues of those colors that you will not see in any other context. And in not see in any other context. And in not see in any other context. And in doing so, reveals to you doing so, reveals to you doing so, reveals to you what your brain does in order to what your brain does in order to what your brain does in order to understand and extract color. Now, in understand and extract color. Now, in understand and extract color. Now, in the context of music, for instance, you the context of music, for instance, you the context of music, for instance, you will sometimes hear a street musician will sometimes hear a street musician will sometimes hear a street musician play a song, maybe a Bob Dylan song, or play a song, maybe a Bob Dylan song, or play a song, maybe a Bob Dylan song, or a Led Zeppelin song, or a Pink Floyd a Led Zeppelin song, or a Pink Floyd a Led Zeppelin song, or a Pink Floyd song, pretty closely, pretty accurately to the pretty closely, pretty accurately to the pretty closely, pretty accurately to the way that song is played. But, of course, way that song is played. But, of course, way that song is played. But, of course, that's not creative. That's just like that's not creative. That's just like that's not creative. That's just like the photograph or the accurate portrait the photograph or the accurate portrait the photograph or the accurate portrait of somebody's face. of somebody's face. of somebody's face. Or you may hear an acoustic version of Or you may hear an acoustic version of Or you may hear an acoustic version of what's normally an electric guitar song, what's normally an electric guitar song, what's normally an electric guitar song, or electrical song, or vice versa. or electrical song, or vice versa. or electrical song, or vice versa. Somewhat creative, sometimes sounds even Somewhat creative, sometimes sounds even Somewhat creative, sometimes sounds even better than the original, but not better than the original, but not better than the original, but not particularly creative. However, particularly creative. However, particularly creative. However, each and every one of us has a each and every one of us has a each and every one of us has a particular taste in music. Maybe it's particular taste in music. Maybe it's particular taste in music. Maybe it's classical, maybe it's rock, maybe it's classical, maybe it's rock, maybe it's classical, maybe it's rock, maybe it's punk, maybe it's hip-hop. punk, maybe it's hip-hop. punk, maybe it's hip-hop. Within each of those genres, I think all Within each of those genres, I think all Within each of those genres, I think all of us are familiar with hearing of us are familiar with hearing of us are familiar with hearing something for the first time, and maybe even every for the first time, and maybe even every for the first time, and maybe even every time, and there's something about the and there's something about the and there's something about the combination of the words and the music, combination of the words and the music, combination of the words and the music, or sometimes just the music, or just the or sometimes just the music, or just the or sometimes just the music, or just the words, that allows some feature of it to words, that allows some feature of it to words, that allows some feature of it to pop out at us as particularly exciting. pop out at us as particularly exciting. pop out at us as particularly exciting. And when we feel that excitement, and we And when we feel that excitement, and we And when we feel that excitement, and we feel that it's really novel, it's feel that it's really novel, it's feel that it's really novel, it's different than what we've heard before, different than what we've heard before, different than what we've heard before, I assure you what it's revealing to you I assure you what it's revealing to you I assure you what it's revealing to you is the way that your auditory system, is the way that your auditory system, is the way that your auditory system, and often your auditory and your and often your auditory and your and often your auditory and your emotional system, encodes information emotional system, encodes information emotional system, encodes information that you hear. And again, the rule that you hear. And again, the rule that you hear. And again, the rule that it's revealing is not splayed out for it's revealing is not splayed out for it's revealing is not splayed out for you. For instance, it's not told to you, you. For instance, it's not told to you, you. For instance, it's not told to you, "Oh, this is the way you normally hear, "Oh, this is the way you normally hear, "Oh, this is the way you normally hear, and now you're hearing things and now you're hearing things and now you're hearing things differently." Sometimes it's the change differently." Sometimes it's the change differently." Sometimes it's the change in, for instance, in the way that words in, for instance, in the way that words in, for instance, in the way that words are accented, or the way that sentences are accented, or the way that sentences are accented, or the way that sentences are constructed. This often you'll hear are constructed. This often you'll hear are constructed. This often you'll hear in hip-hop the way that sentences are in hip-hop the way that sentences are in hip-hop the way that sentences are constructed can be divided up not as constructed can be divided up not as constructed can be divided up not as normal declarative sentences, the way normal declarative sentences, the way normal declarative sentences, the way that they're typically written, but the that they're typically written, but the that they're typically written, but the way that sentences are chopped up and way that sentences are chopped up and way that sentences are chopped up and fractured reveals to us new meaning, and fractured reveals to us new meaning, and fractured reveals to us new meaning, and in fact enhanced meaning about and in fact enhanced meaning about and in fact enhanced meaning about particular words that we wouldn't see if particular words that we wouldn't see if particular words that we wouldn't see if it was written out as a paragraph, and it was written out as a paragraph, and it was written out as a paragraph, and then sung as a script that would be the then sung as a script that would be the then sung as a script that would be the same as the one that we would read. same as the one that we would read. same as the one that we would read. Again, the point is that what is Again, the point is that what is Again, the point is that what is exciting and novel to you is just the exciting and novel to you is just the exciting and novel to you is just the way that you hear it, but it's exciting way that you hear it, but it's exciting way that you hear it, but it's exciting and novel to you because there are and novel to you because there are and novel to you because there are circuits within the brain circuits within the brain circuits within the brain that when we hear or see or feel or that when we hear or see or feel or that when we hear or see or feel or experience known elements in new ways that are known elements in new ways that are known elements in new ways that are truly creative truly creative truly creative the way that those neural circuits the way that those neural circuits the way that those neural circuits function is changed. And when neural circuits is changed. And when neural circuits is changed. And when neural circuits change the way that they function simply change the way that they function simply change the way that they function simply by way of what comes into our eyes, our by way of what comes into our eyes, our by way of what comes into our eyes, our ears, and the way that we experience our ears, and the way that we experience our ears, and the way that we experience our feelings there is the release of chemicals there is the release of chemicals there is the release of chemicals including the release of the chemical including the release of the chemical including the release of the chemical dopamine and other neuromodulators as dopamine and other neuromodulators as dopamine and other neuromodulators as well that make us feel both surprised, well that make us feel both surprised, well that make us feel both surprised, delighted, and this is very key delighted, and this is very key delighted, and this is very key excited in anticipation that we might excited in anticipation that we might excited in anticipation that we might see it again. So with the understanding see it again. So with the understanding see it again. So with the understanding in mind that true creativity involves in mind that true creativity involves in mind that true creativity involves the novel combination of some elements. the novel combination of some elements. the novel combination of some elements. Could be notes of music could be numbers Could be notes of music could be numbers Could be notes of music could be numbers could be visual elements like lines or could be visual elements like lines or could be visual elements like lines or colors, could be physical movements, colors, could be physical movements, colors, could be physical movements, etc. But novel combinations of some things But novel combinations of some things But novel combinations of some things that reveal to us something fundamental that reveal to us something fundamental that reveal to us something fundamental about the way that our brain and or the about the way that our brain and or the about the way that our brain and or the world work. And of course, as I world work. And of course, as I world work. And of course, as I mentioned before that fundamental thing mentioned before that fundamental thing mentioned before that fundamental thing may or may not be consciously accessible may or may not be consciously accessible may or may not be consciously accessible to us. We may not know what exactly it to us. We may not know what exactly it to us. We may not know what exactly it is that's novel to us, but it feels is that's novel to us, but it feels is that's novel to us, but it feels novel and it feels true. novel and it feels true. novel and it feels true. Well, with that understanding in mind, Well, with that understanding in mind, Well, with that understanding in mind, we therefore can ask what are the we therefore can ask what are the we therefore can ask what are the underlying principles and neural underlying principles and neural underlying principles and neural circuits that underlie the creative circuits that underlie the creative circuits that underlie the creative process? And the word process here is process? And the word process here is process? And the word process here is especially important. especially important. especially important. In fact if there's one thing I'd really In fact if there's one thing I'd really In fact if there's one thing I'd really like to impress on everybody is that like to impress on everybody is that like to impress on everybody is that when thinking about biology, it's almost when thinking about biology, it's almost when thinking about biology, it's almost always better to think about verbs as always better to think about verbs as always better to think about verbs as opposed to nouns. So rather than think opposed to nouns. So rather than think opposed to nouns. So rather than think of creativity as a noun or somebody of creativity as a noun or somebody of creativity as a noun or somebody being creative as an adjective, think being creative as an adjective, think being creative as an adjective, think about the verb creativity. That is what about the verb creativity. That is what about the verb creativity. That is what are the steps required and therefore are the steps required and therefore are the steps required and therefore what are the cells and circuits and what are the cells and circuits and what are the cells and circuits and thoughts, etc. required in order to be thoughts, etc. required in order to be thoughts, etc. required in order to be creative. This element of thinking about verbs This element of thinking about verbs This element of thinking about verbs then allows us to say, "Okay, what are then allows us to say, "Okay, what are then allows us to say, "Okay, what are the various steps in coming up with a the various steps in coming up with a the various steps in coming up with a creative idea, in testing a creative idea, in testing a creative idea, in testing a creative idea, and then implementing that idea, and then implementing that idea, and then implementing that creative idea?" And in doing so, we creative idea?" And in doing so, we creative idea?" And in doing so, we find, based on the scientific find, based on the scientific find, based on the scientific literature, that there are basically literature, that there are basically literature, that there are basically three major networks within the brain, three major networks within the brain, three major networks within the brain, each of which is responsible for each of each of which is responsible for each of each of which is responsible for each of the three steps to arrive at something the three steps to arrive at something the three steps to arrive at something truly creative. The first neural circuit truly creative. The first neural circuit truly creative. The first neural circuit involved in creativity is the so-called involved in creativity is the so-called involved in creativity is the so-called executive network. executive network. executive network. This is kind of a goofy name because the This is kind of a goofy name because the This is kind of a goofy name because the neural circuits that I'm about to neural circuits that I'm about to neural circuits that I'm about to describe do a bunch of other things as describe do a bunch of other things as describe do a bunch of other things as well, but they certainly control what well, but they certainly control what well, but they certainly control what are called executive functions. are called executive functions. are called executive functions. Executive functions are functions that Executive functions are functions that Executive functions are functions that you and I both have, which is our you and I both have, which is our you and I both have, which is our ability to govern our thinking and our ability to govern our thinking and our ability to govern our thinking and our behavior in very deliberate ways. And behavior in very deliberate ways. And behavior in very deliberate ways. And that is largely accomplished that is largely accomplished that is largely accomplished through the use of the neural circuitry through the use of the neural circuitry through the use of the neural circuitry that sits right behind the forebrain, that sits right behind the forebrain, that sits right behind the forebrain, the so-called prefrontal cortex. Now, the so-called prefrontal cortex. Now, the so-called prefrontal cortex. Now, the prefrontal cortex the prefrontal cortex the prefrontal cortex involves many different subregions. It involves many different subregions. It involves many different subregions. It has a bunch of different parts, just has a bunch of different parts, just has a bunch of different parts, just like any country has different states, like any country has different states, like any country has different states, etc. and provinces. etc. and provinces. etc. and provinces. Executive function involves the Executive function involves the Executive function involves the prefrontal cortex and some other neural prefrontal cortex and some other neural prefrontal cortex and some other neural structures, but for sake of this structures, but for sake of this structures, but for sake of this discussion, executive function and the prefrontal executive function and the prefrontal executive function and the prefrontal cortex are mainly responsible for cortex are mainly responsible for cortex are mainly responsible for suppressing action, that is, for suppressing action, that is, for suppressing action, that is, for eliminating choices eliminating choices eliminating choices among the infinite number of choices among the infinite number of choices among the infinite number of choices that exist, for instance, of what colors that exist, for instance, of what colors that exist, for instance, of what colors to combine on a painting, or what lines to combine on a painting, or what lines to combine on a painting, or what lines to draw, or what notes to play, or what to draw, or what notes to play, or what to draw, or what notes to play, or what movements to make in a sports endeavor, movements to make in a sports endeavor, movements to make in a sports endeavor, what numbers to include in a mathematics what numbers to include in a mathematics what numbers to include in a mathematics endeavor, or what words and letters and endeavor, or what words and letters and endeavor, or what words and letters and syllables and sentences syllables and sentences syllables and sentences to include in writing a creative to include in writing a creative to include in writing a creative passage. The second network is the so-called The second network is the so-called The second network is the so-called default mode network. There's a lot of default mode network. There's a lot of default mode network. There's a lot of discussion nowadays about the default discussion nowadays about the default discussion nowadays about the default mode network as it relates to mode network as it relates to mode network as it relates to consciousness and meditation, etc. The consciousness and meditation, etc. The consciousness and meditation, etc. The default mode network does many different default mode network does many different default mode network does many different things, but in the context of our things, but in the context of our things, but in the context of our discussion about creativity, the default discussion about creativity, the default discussion about creativity, the default mode network is really the network that mode network is really the network that mode network is really the network that starts being engaged when you close your starts being engaged when you close your starts being engaged when you close your eyes and start paying attention to eyes and start paying attention to eyes and start paying attention to what's going on in terms of your what's going on in terms of your what's going on in terms of your thinking as opposed to the sensory thinking as opposed to the sensory thinking as opposed to the sensory outside world. And the default mode outside world. And the default mode outside world. And the default mode network is especially important for network is especially important for network is especially important for what's called spontaneous imagination. what's called spontaneous imagination. what's called spontaneous imagination. Now, spontaneous imagination is Now, spontaneous imagination is Now, spontaneous imagination is something that you can try at any something that you can try at any something that you can try at any moment. If you were to close your eyes moment. If you were to close your eyes moment. If you were to close your eyes and to try and not pay attention to the and to try and not pay attention to the and to try and not pay attention to the sounds around you, but even if you do, sounds around you, but even if you do, sounds around you, but even if you do, to just to just to just pay attention to whatever thoughts or pay attention to whatever thoughts or pay attention to whatever thoughts or feelings emerge when your eyes are feelings emerge when your eyes are feelings emerge when your eyes are closed, okay? By closing your eyes and closed, okay? By closing your eyes and closed, okay? By closing your eyes and shutting yourself off to the outside shutting yourself off to the outside shutting yourself off to the outside sensory world, sensory world, sensory world, you start to engage much more of your you start to engage much more of your you start to engage much more of your brain machinery dedicated towards what's brain machinery dedicated towards what's brain machinery dedicated towards what's going on inside you, so-called going on inside you, so-called going on inside you, so-called interoception, but also what you're interoception, but also what you're interoception, but also what you're thinking about your thinking, whether or thinking about your thinking, whether or thinking about your thinking, whether or not your thoughts are complete or not your thoughts are complete or not your thoughts are complete or incomplete, whether or not they are incomplete, whether or not they are incomplete, whether or not they are fragmentary in a way that goes from one fragmentary in a way that goes from one fragmentary in a way that goes from one thought to another distantly in the past thought to another distantly in the past thought to another distantly in the past or present or future, et cetera. or present or future, et cetera. or present or future, et cetera. Depending on time of day, how Depending on time of day, how Depending on time of day, how well-rested you are, how stressed you well-rested you are, how stressed you well-rested you are, how stressed you are, how happy you are, the default mode are, how happy you are, the default mode are, how happy you are, the default mode network will take you through a journey network will take you through a journey network will take you through a journey of different types of thoughts, of different types of thoughts, of different types of thoughts, different types of feelings, et cetera. different types of feelings, et cetera. different types of feelings, et cetera. The specific types of thoughts and The specific types of thoughts and The specific types of thoughts and feelings are not as interesting as the feelings are not as interesting as the feelings are not as interesting as the fact that when you close your eyes, fact that when you close your eyes, fact that when you close your eyes, you're essentially engaging this default you're essentially engaging this default you're essentially engaging this default mode network, which is essentially the mode network, which is essentially the mode network, which is essentially the network associated with imagination, and network associated with imagination, and network associated with imagination, and imagination based on elements that exist imagination based on elements that exist imagination based on elements that exist only within your head, that is within only within your head, that is within only within your head, that is within your brain, okay? your brain, okay? your brain, okay? And therefore must rely on memory of And therefore must rely on memory of And therefore must rely on memory of previous experiences. As soon as you previous experiences. As soon as you previous experiences. As soon as you close your eyes, you are shutting close your eyes, you are shutting close your eyes, you are shutting yourself off from the sensory world. So, yourself off from the sensory world. So, yourself off from the sensory world. So, by definition, you can no longer be by definition, you can no longer be by definition, you can no longer be bringing in novel experiences in that bringing in novel experiences in that bringing in novel experiences in that moment. You're relying on your library moment. You're relying on your library moment. You're relying on your library of existing experiences and your memory of existing experiences and your memory of existing experiences and your memory of those in order to imagine new things. of those in order to imagine new things. of those in order to imagine new things. And you're doing this in a very in a And you're doing this in a very in a And you're doing this in a very in a free associative way. You're not trying free associative way. You're not trying free associative way. You're not trying to imagine new things, it's just to imagine new things, it's just to imagine new things, it's just whatever geysers to the surface, okay? whatever geysers to the surface, okay? whatever geysers to the surface, okay? So, we've got the executive network, So, we've got the executive network, So, we've got the executive network, which is involved in suppressing which is involved in suppressing which is involved in suppressing particular thoughts or actions. We have particular thoughts or actions. We have particular thoughts or actions. We have the default mode network, the default mode network, the default mode network, which is involved in imagination. And which is involved in imagination. And which is involved in imagination. And the default mode network, I should the default mode network, I should the default mode network, I should mention, also involves a subregion of mention, also involves a subregion of mention, also involves a subregion of the prefrontal cortex. It's called the prefrontal cortex. It's called the prefrontal cortex. It's called the medial prefrontal cortex, but other medial prefrontal cortex, but other medial prefrontal cortex, but other brain regions as well. brain regions as well. brain regions as well. And then the final element within the And then the final element within the And then the final element within the circuits underlying creativity is the circuits underlying creativity is the circuits underlying creativity is the so-called salience network. The salience so-called salience network. The salience so-called salience network. The salience network is a network of brain regions that is a network of brain regions that is a network of brain regions that involves areas such as the insula, which involves areas such as the insula, which involves areas such as the insula, which actually has a complete map of your body actually has a complete map of your body actually has a complete map of your body surface as well as some information surface as well as some information surface as well as some information mapped there about what's going on in mapped there about what's going on in mapped there about what's going on in the outside world and how those combine the outside world and how those combine the outside world and how those combine with what's going on in your internal with what's going on in your internal with what's going on in your internal landscape, that is within your body. landscape, that is within your body. landscape, that is within your body. Also brain region called the ACC or Also brain region called the ACC or Also brain region called the ACC or Excuse me, anterior cingulate cortex and Excuse me, anterior cingulate cortex and Excuse me, anterior cingulate cortex and the amygdala. So a lot of information is the amygdala. So a lot of information is the amygdala. So a lot of information is mapped within the salience network about mapped within the salience network about mapped within the salience network about how we feel and how we feel in relation how we feel and how we feel in relation how we feel and how we feel in relation to things that are happening around us to things that are happening around us to things that are happening around us and within us. And the salience network and within us. And the salience network and within us. And the salience network has one main job, which is to pay has one main job, which is to pay has one main job, which is to pay attention to what's most interesting attention to what's most interesting attention to what's most interesting either in the world or inside us in either in the world or inside us in either in the world or inside us in terms of feelings or experiences. terms of feelings or experiences. terms of feelings or experiences. Okay, so we've got three networks. Okay, so we've got three networks. Okay, so we've got three networks. Executive network, which is there to Executive network, which is there to Executive network, which is there to suppress choices in terms of actions we suppress choices in terms of actions we suppress choices in terms of actions we could take but decide not to or things could take but decide not to or things could take but decide not to or things we could think about but choose not to we could think about but choose not to we could think about but choose not to or try not to. The default mode network, or try not to. The default mode network, or try not to. The default mode network, which is basically the catalog or which is basically the catalog or which is basically the catalog or library of previous experiences that we library of previous experiences that we library of previous experiences that we have available to us that would have available to us that would have available to us that would act as sort of the paints on a palette act as sort of the paints on a palette act as sort of the paints on a palette or the possible or the possible or the possible ingredients that could go into a recipe. ingredients that could go into a recipe. ingredients that could go into a recipe. All of that has to again arise from All of that has to again arise from All of that has to again arise from previous experience, right? We can't previous experience, right? We can't previous experience, right? We can't close our eyes and suddenly be able to close our eyes and suddenly be able to close our eyes and suddenly be able to access all the melodies that we've never access all the melodies that we've never access all the melodies that we've never heard before or all the our ideas and heard before or all the our ideas and heard before or all the our ideas and concepts and knowledge about music if we concepts and knowledge about music if we concepts and knowledge about music if we don't have musical understanding or don't have musical understanding or don't have musical understanding or visual understanding. So we're really visual understanding. So we're really visual understanding. So we're really drawing up the library and that library drawing up the library and that library drawing up the library and that library tends to be rather disorganized. It kind tends to be rather disorganized. It kind tends to be rather disorganized. It kind of swirls around. It's not very of swirls around. It's not very of swirls around. It's not very structured unless we're actively trying to think unless we're actively trying to think unless we're actively trying to think about something. about something. about something. And then we have the salience network, And then we have the salience network, And then we have the salience network, which is the networks within the brain which is the networks within the brain which is the networks within the brain that decide or make choices about what's that decide or make choices about what's that decide or make choices about what's most interesting to pay attention to in most interesting to pay attention to in most interesting to pay attention to in a given moment. Okay, so those three a given moment. Okay, so those three a given moment. Okay, so those three networks work together to create things. networks work together to create things. networks work together to create things. And when I say create things, we again And when I say create things, we again And when I say create things, we again have to really underscore our definition have to really underscore our definition have to really underscore our definition of creativity. Creativity is a of creativity. Creativity is a of creativity. Creativity is a rearrangement of existing elements into rearrangement of existing elements into rearrangement of existing elements into novel combinations that reveal something novel combinations that reveal something novel combinations that reveal something fundamental about how we or the world fundamental about how we or the world fundamental about how we or the world works. And this is very important, it tends to And this is very important, it tends to And this is very important, it tends to be things that are useful. Now, they can be things that are useful. Now, they can be things that are useful. Now, they can merely be useful because they're merely be useful because they're merely be useful because they're entertaining or thrilling. They can also entertaining or thrilling. They can also entertaining or thrilling. They can also have a particular utility or use in the have a particular utility or use in the have a particular utility or use in the world like a piece of technology that is world like a piece of technology that is world like a piece of technology that is actually useful like an actually useful like an actually useful like an app or a smartphone or a computer app or a smartphone or a computer app or a smartphone or a computer actually has utility or a vehicle. You actually has utility or a vehicle. You actually has utility or a vehicle. You know, there are creative acts that led know, there are creative acts that led know, there are creative acts that led to the formation of vehicles and to the formation of vehicles and to the formation of vehicles and computers etc. computers etc. computers etc. But the point is that just merely coming But the point is that just merely coming But the point is that just merely coming up with novel combinations of things up with novel combinations of things up with novel combinations of things like wings on a fish tank, that's not like wings on a fish tank, that's not like wings on a fish tank, that's not creative or it's not creative in any creative or it's not creative in any creative or it's not creative in any kind of meaningful way because it's kind of meaningful way because it's kind of meaningful way because it's simply not useful. It doesn't reveal simply not useful. It doesn't reveal simply not useful. It doesn't reveal anything fundamental new or purposeful. anything fundamental new or purposeful. anything fundamental new or purposeful. It doesn't allow us to think about or It doesn't allow us to think about or It doesn't allow us to think about or interact with the world or ourselves in interact with the world or ourselves in interact with the world or ourselves in novel ways. Whereas things, people, novel ways. Whereas things, people, novel ways. Whereas things, people, actions, and ideas that are truly creative really and ideas that are truly creative really and ideas that are truly creative really change the way that we are able to change the way that we are able to change the way that we are able to access the world. They act as portals access the world. They act as portals access the world. They act as portals to the world and to ourselves. I'd like to the world and to ourselves. I'd like to the world and to ourselves. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge to take a quick break and acknowledge to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational covers all of your foundational covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking nutritional needs. I've been taking nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the delighted that they're sponsoring the delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking podcast. The reason I started taking podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still Athletic Greens and the reason I still Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually take Athletic Greens once or usually take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets to me the twice a day is that it gets to me the twice a day is that it gets to me the probiotics that I need for gut health. probiotics that I need for gut health. probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's Our gut is very important. It's Our gut is very important. It's populated by populated by populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the gut microbiota that communicate with the gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically brain, the immune system, and basically brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body all the biological systems of our body all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and to strongly impact our immediate and to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health. long-term health. long-term health. And those probiotics in Athletic Greens And those probiotics in Athletic Greens And those probiotics in Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic are optimal and vital for microbiotic are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens health. In addition, Athletic Greens health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, contains a number of adaptogens, contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure vitamins, and minerals that make sure vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional that all of my foundational nutritional that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met, and needs are met, and needs are met, and it tastes great. If you'd like to try it tastes great. If you'd like to try it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to Athletic Greens, you can go to Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and they'll give you five free travel and they'll give you five free travel and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up packs that make it really easy to mix up packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the Athletic Greens while you're on the Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, etc. And road, in the car, on the plane, etc. And road, in the car, on the plane, etc. And they'll give you a year supply of they'll give you a year supply of they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and to get the five free travel packs and to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. So, the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. So, the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. So, now you have some idea about the brain now you have some idea about the brain now you have some idea about the brain areas and networks involved in areas and networks involved in areas and networks involved in creativity. But, I want to be very clear creativity. But, I want to be very clear creativity. But, I want to be very clear that anytime we talk about mechanisms that anytime we talk about mechanisms that anytime we talk about mechanisms and brain areas, what's far more and brain areas, what's far more and brain areas, what's far more important than the names of those brain important than the names of those brain important than the names of those brain areas is an understanding of what they areas is an understanding of what they areas is an understanding of what they do. So, if you couldn't remember the do. So, if you couldn't remember the do. So, if you couldn't remember the anterior cingulate cortex or the fact anterior cingulate cortex or the fact anterior cingulate cortex or the fact that the prefrontal cortex is involved that the prefrontal cortex is involved that the prefrontal cortex is involved in executive function, etc., in executive function, etc., in executive function, etc., that's fine. It's less important that that's fine. It's less important that that's fine. It's less important that you know the names of things than you know the names of things than you know the names of things than you understand the action steps that those understand the action steps that those understand the action steps that those things take. That is, the verb actions things take. That is, the verb actions things take. That is, the verb actions that those particular brain areas engage that those particular brain areas engage that those particular brain areas engage in order to arrive at a particular in order to arrive at a particular in order to arrive at a particular endpoint, and the endpoint we're talking endpoint, and the endpoint we're talking endpoint, and the endpoint we're talking about today is creativity. about today is creativity. about today is creativity. I want to discuss creativity in terms of I want to discuss creativity in terms of I want to discuss creativity in terms of what actually goes into being creative. what actually goes into being creative. what actually goes into being creative. And it turns out there are just two And it turns out there are just two And it turns out there are just two elements, and those two elements are now elements, and those two elements are now elements, and those two elements are now well understood from the perspective of well understood from the perspective of well understood from the perspective of psychology, and fortunately, the psychology, and fortunately, the psychology, and fortunately, the neuroscience well supports what the neuroscience well supports what the neuroscience well supports what the psychology says and vice versa. And psychology says and vice versa. And psychology says and vice versa. And those two elements that go into coming those two elements that go into coming those two elements that go into coming up with a creative idea and then up with a creative idea and then up with a creative idea and then implementing or developing that creative implementing or developing that creative implementing or developing that creative idea into something real that you and idea into something real that you and idea into something real that you and the rest of the world can experience the rest of the world can experience the rest of the world can experience are divergent thinking and convergent are divergent thinking and convergent are divergent thinking and convergent thinking. And divergent thinking and thinking. And divergent thinking and thinking. And divergent thinking and convergent thinking convergent thinking convergent thinking are very straightforward to understand. are very straightforward to understand. are very straightforward to understand. Divergent thinking is taking some known Divergent thinking is taking some known Divergent thinking is taking some known object or event in the world or sport, object or event in the world or sport, object or event in the world or sport, or concept. It could be running, it or concept. It could be running, it or concept. It could be running, it could be a musical note, it could be could be a musical note, it could be could be a musical note, it could be jumping, it could be a particular color jumping, it could be a particular color jumping, it could be a particular color on a piece of paper. on a piece of paper. on a piece of paper. And asking yourself, And asking yourself, And asking yourself, "How many different things could that "How many different things could that "How many different things could that thing actually be?" You might say, thing actually be?" You might say, thing actually be?" You might say, "Well, running is running." But let's "Well, running is running." But let's "Well, running is running." But let's use divergent thinking as a way to use divergent thinking as a way to use divergent thinking as a way to illustrate what divergent thinking is. illustrate what divergent thinking is. illustrate what divergent thinking is. If I show you a picture of somebody If I show you a picture of somebody If I show you a picture of somebody running, I say, "What do you see?" And running, I say, "What do you see?" And running, I say, "What do you see?" And you say, "I see somebody running." And you say, "I see somebody running." And you say, "I see somebody running." And then I might give divergent thinking then I might give divergent thinking then I might give divergent thinking task, and these tasks are the same ones task, and these tasks are the same ones task, and these tasks are the same ones used in various experiments. And I'd used in various experiments. And I'd used in various experiments. And I'd say, "How many different things can you say, "How many different things can you say, "How many different things can you think about think about think about based on this picture that you see of based on this picture that you see of based on this picture that you see of somebody running?" Now, if you are able somebody running?" Now, if you are able somebody running?" Now, if you are able to engage divergent thinking, you could to engage divergent thinking, you could to engage divergent thinking, you could say, "Running to the store, running away say, "Running to the store, running away say, "Running to the store, running away from a lion, running towards somebody I from a lion, running towards somebody I from a lion, running towards somebody I love." Or maybe you have a more love." Or maybe you have a more love." Or maybe you have a more elaborate imagination, and you could elaborate imagination, and you could elaborate imagination, and you could say, "Running in front of a bus to grab a kid "Running in front of a bus to grab a kid "Running in front of a bus to grab a kid so the kid doesn't get hit by the bus." so the kid doesn't get hit by the bus." so the kid doesn't get hit by the bus." Or running toward a concert because I'm Or running toward a concert because I'm Or running toward a concert because I'm so excited about the particular concert, so excited about the particular concert, so excited about the particular concert, and then it starts to spool into a and then it starts to spool into a and then it starts to spool into a story. In other words, story. In other words, story. In other words, divergent thinking involves taking one divergent thinking involves taking one divergent thinking involves taking one simple, what we would call in simple, what we would call in simple, what we would call in neuroscience or psychology, stimulus, neuroscience or psychology, stimulus, neuroscience or psychology, stimulus, one image or sound, etc., and trying to one image or sound, etc., and trying to one image or sound, etc., and trying to radiate out from that as many different radiate out from that as many different radiate out from that as many different divergent situations, properties, characteristics, events, properties, characteristics, events, properties, characteristics, events, things from that one specific element. things from that one specific element. things from that one specific element. So, any divergent thinking task would So, any divergent thinking task would So, any divergent thinking task would involve exactly that. I'd show you involve exactly that. I'd show you involve exactly that. I'd show you pictures or play you sounds, pictures or play you sounds, pictures or play you sounds, or words, or notes, or describe to you or words, or notes, or describe to you or words, or notes, or describe to you events in history, and try and see how events in history, and try and see how events in history, and try and see how many things can radiate out from that many things can radiate out from that many things can radiate out from that into diverse, even distant into diverse, even distant into diverse, even distant types of concepts and pictures. Okay, so types of concepts and pictures. Okay, so types of concepts and pictures. Okay, so that's divergent thinking. Divergent that's divergent thinking. Divergent that's divergent thinking. Divergent thinking is really the process that thinking is really the process that thinking is really the process that underlies idea generation, and the basis underlies idea generation, and the basis underlies idea generation, and the basis of divergent thinking is that more than of divergent thinking is that more than of divergent thinking is that more than one idea is correct. In fact, the more one idea is correct. In fact, the more one idea is correct. In fact, the more ideas that you have about one thing, the ideas that you have about one thing, the ideas that you have about one thing, the better your divergent thinking. better your divergent thinking. better your divergent thinking. So, if I were to give you So, if I were to give you So, if I were to give you 3 minutes to list off all the things you 3 minutes to list off all the things you 3 minutes to list off all the things you can think about related to this pen that can think about related to this pen that can think about related to this pen that I'm holding up. For those of you I'm holding up. For those of you I'm holding up. For those of you listening, I'm just holding up a pen in listening, I'm just holding up a pen in listening, I'm just holding up a pen in front of me. front of me. front of me. And you just write them out or say them And you just write them out or say them And you just write them out or say them out over the next 3 minutes, that would out over the next 3 minutes, that would out over the next 3 minutes, that would be an example of divergent thinking. be an example of divergent thinking. be an example of divergent thinking. However, if you just said black pen, red However, if you just said black pen, red However, if you just said black pen, red pen, white pen, green pen, etc., that's pen, white pen, green pen, etc., that's pen, white pen, green pen, etc., that's not very divergent thing. It's only not very divergent thing. It's only not very divergent thing. It's only divergent in the context of color space. divergent in the context of color space. divergent in the context of color space. When I say space, that's just a kind When I say space, that's just a kind When I say space, that's just a kind of nerd speak for one particular domain of nerd speak for one particular domain of nerd speak for one particular domain of thinking. Whereas, if you said um of thinking. Whereas, if you said um of thinking. Whereas, if you said um red pen, white pen red pen, white pen red pen, white pen essay um pen in a door to hold the door essay um pen in a door to hold the door essay um pen in a door to hold the door open so that someone can return to a open so that someone can return to a open so that someone can return to a building and you started spooling off a building and you started spooling off a building and you started spooling off a story related to that and why that was story related to that and why that was story related to that and why that was important, well, there you go. important, well, there you go. important, well, there you go. Divergent thinking is essentially taking Divergent thinking is essentially taking Divergent thinking is essentially taking one element and coming up with many, one element and coming up with many, one element and coming up with many, many answers. And in the context of many answers. And in the context of many answers. And in the context of divergent thinking, any answer goes, but divergent thinking, any answer goes, but divergent thinking, any answer goes, but as we'll soon learn, not every answer is as we'll soon learn, not every answer is as we'll soon learn, not every answer is interesting and relevant. That is, not interesting and relevant. That is, not interesting and relevant. That is, not every answer helps solve something or every answer helps solve something or every answer helps solve something or reveal something fundamental and reveal something fundamental and reveal something fundamental and therefore, not every divergent answer is therefore, not every divergent answer is therefore, not every divergent answer is truly creative. The other aspect of truly creative. The other aspect of truly creative. The other aspect of divergent thinking that's really divergent thinking that's really divergent thinking that's really important to understand is that the important to understand is that the important to understand is that the selection criteria are extremely vague selection criteria are extremely vague selection criteria are extremely vague and vast. That is, there are no and vast. That is, there are no and vast. That is, there are no constraints on what you come up with. constraints on what you come up with. constraints on what you come up with. So, if I hold up this pen and you say So, if I hold up this pen and you say So, if I hold up this pen and you say orangutan that's a perfectly valid orangutan that's a perfectly valid orangutan that's a perfectly valid divergent idea from this pen because you thought idea from this pen because you thought idea from this pen because you thought of it and it's distantly related. of it and it's distantly related. of it and it's distantly related. However, we have to remember our earlier rule. If we have to remember our earlier rule. If we have to remember our earlier rule. If black pen and orangutan are not linked black pen and orangutan are not linked black pen and orangutan are not linked up in our brain, in the observer's brain up in our brain, in the observer's brain up in our brain, in the observer's brain in any kind of meaningful way, it's only in any kind of meaningful way, it's only in any kind of meaningful way, it's only interesting to you because you are the interesting to you because you are the interesting to you because you are the only one that understands the rule that only one that understands the rule that only one that understands the rule that underlies the link between this pen and underlies the link between this pen and underlies the link between this pen and orangutan. Whereas, if you come up with orangutan. Whereas, if you come up with orangutan. Whereas, if you come up with something different that somehow tells something different that somehow tells something different that somehow tells me and everybody else something me and everybody else something me and everybody else something interesting about pens or orangutans, interesting about pens or orangutans, interesting about pens or orangutans, now that's a truly creative idea. Now, I now that's a truly creative idea. Now, I now that's a truly creative idea. Now, I don't have such an example in mind, but don't have such an example in mind, but don't have such an example in mind, but later I'll give you some examples of how later I'll give you some examples of how later I'll give you some examples of how you can actually march down the path of you can actually march down the path of you can actually march down the path of divergent thinking and use that divergent thinking and use that divergent thinking and use that executive network to suppress certain executive network to suppress certain executive network to suppress certain options, to cross off certain answers. options, to cross off certain answers. options, to cross off certain answers. Cuz again, any answer's valid, but not Cuz again, any answer's valid, but not Cuz again, any answer's valid, but not all valid answers are interesting or all valid answers are interesting or all valid answers are interesting or useful, and you can cross those off and useful, and you can cross those off and useful, and you can cross those off and arrive at the most interesting and truly arrive at the most interesting and truly arrive at the most interesting and truly creative answer. creative answer. creative answer. A couple more things about divergent A couple more things about divergent A couple more things about divergent thinking. Divergent thinking largely thinking. Divergent thinking largely thinking. Divergent thinking largely taps into the networks of the brain that taps into the networks of the brain that taps into the networks of the brain that are involved in mental flexibility. So, are involved in mental flexibility. So, are involved in mental flexibility. So, this is a different aspect of our this is a different aspect of our this is a different aspect of our prefrontal cortexes, which is not based prefrontal cortexes, which is not based prefrontal cortexes, which is not based on executive function and our ability to on executive function and our ability to on executive function and our ability to reduce options, but rather areas of the reduce options, but rather areas of the reduce options, but rather areas of the prefrontal cortex that are available to prefrontal cortex that are available to prefrontal cortex that are available to generate multiple options and actually generate multiple options and actually generate multiple options and actually suppress context, right? To forget that suppress context, right? To forget that suppress context, right? To forget that pens are just for writing, for instance, pens are just for writing, for instance, pens are just for writing, for instance, and that pens can do other things like and that pens can do other things like and that pens can do other things like hold the door open. It's really kind of hold the door open. It's really kind of hold the door open. It's really kind of an unusual use of a pen. an unusual use of a pen. an unusual use of a pen. Again, none of these examples that I'm Again, none of these examples that I'm Again, none of these examples that I'm giving are particularly interesting. giving are particularly interesting. giving are particularly interesting. They're just designed to get you to They're just designed to get you to They're just designed to get you to understand the underlying concept of understand the underlying concept of understand the underlying concept of divergent thinking. divergent thinking. divergent thinking. And then, the last thing that I'd like And then, the last thing that I'd like And then, the last thing that I'd like you to know about divergent thinking you to know about divergent thinking you to know about divergent thinking is that divergent thinking involves a is that divergent thinking involves a is that divergent thinking involves a sort of exploration. It's a wandering sort of exploration. It's a wandering sort of exploration. It's a wandering through of ideas that you already had in through of ideas that you already had in through of ideas that you already had in your library, in your memory banks about your library, in your memory banks about your library, in your memory banks about pens and what pens could be related to pens and what pens could be related to pens and what pens could be related to and what pens ought not to be related and what pens ought not to be related and what pens ought not to be related to. So, again, what's really important about So, again, what's really important about So, again, what's really important about creativity is that there has to be the creativity is that there has to be the creativity is that there has to be the basic building blocks already existing basic building blocks already existing basic building blocks already existing within us. This is why it's so important within us. This is why it's so important within us. This is why it's so important to understand that if you are somebody to understand that if you are somebody to understand that if you are somebody who really seeks to be creative, who really seeks to be creative, who really seeks to be creative, you really do need to be somebody who you really do need to be somebody who you really do need to be somebody who forages for information and structured forages for information and structured forages for information and structured information in particular if you are to information in particular if you are to information in particular if you are to be creative. The architect simply can't be creative. The architect simply can't be creative. The architect simply can't come up with incredible drawings or come up with incredible drawings or come up with incredible drawings or plans for buildings without plans for buildings without plans for buildings without understanding how buildings are put understanding how buildings are put understanding how buildings are put together and the various rules that together and the various rules that together and the various rules that govern buildings. In other words, you govern buildings. In other words, you govern buildings. In other words, you can't break rules that you don't can't break rules that you don't can't break rules that you don't understand. I think in understand. I think in understand. I think in movies, especially, we have this idea in movies, especially, we have this idea in movies, especially, we have this idea in mind that of this limitless concept in mind that of this limitless concept in mind that of this limitless concept that or that we have these hidden that or that we have these hidden that or that we have these hidden geniuses that somehow have access to all geniuses that somehow have access to all geniuses that somehow have access to all the math knowledge without ever having the math knowledge without ever having the math knowledge without ever having done any formal math. Actually, um I was done any formal math. Actually, um I was done any formal math. Actually, um I was flying back uh from Texas recently and flying back uh from Texas recently and flying back uh from Texas recently and Goodwill Hunting was on somebody's Goodwill Hunting was on somebody's Goodwill Hunting was on somebody's screen. I don't tend to watch movies on screen. I don't tend to watch movies on screen. I don't tend to watch movies on the plane very often, sometimes but not the plane very often, sometimes but not the plane very often, sometimes but not often. And I was remembering in that often. And I was remembering in that often. And I was remembering in that movie, you know, you've got this math movie, you know, you've got this math movie, you know, you've got this math genius uh who is a janitor at MIT, etc., and uh who is a janitor at MIT, etc., and uh who is a janitor at MIT, etc., and apparently just has access to all this apparently just has access to all this apparently just has access to all this knowledge. It's a wonderful concept, um knowledge. It's a wonderful concept, um knowledge. It's a wonderful concept, um a very, I would say even a very, I would say even a very, I would say even exceedingly rare thing to occur in the exceedingly rare thing to occur in the exceedingly rare thing to occur in the world. Sure, there are people who seem world. Sure, there are people who seem world. Sure, there are people who seem to have a natural talent for mathematics to have a natural talent for mathematics to have a natural talent for mathematics or for something else, but this idea or for something else, but this idea or for something else, but this idea that there are that there are that there are um incredible geniuses among us that um incredible geniuses among us that um incredible geniuses among us that just spontaneously have so much just spontaneously have so much just spontaneously have so much knowledge, that's knowledge, that's knowledge, that's by far the exception rather than the by far the exception rather than the by far the exception rather than the rule, of course, and may not even rule, of course, and may not even rule, of course, and may not even actually exist. I'm sure someone will actually exist. I'm sure someone will actually exist. I'm sure someone will put in the comments examples where this put in the comments examples where this put in the comments examples where this actually exists. More often than not, actually exists. More often than not, actually exists. More often than not, what you find is that people who have what you find is that people who have what you find is that people who have extreme virtuosity in a given area put extreme virtuosity in a given area put extreme virtuosity in a given area put many, many years into developing the many, many years into developing the many, many years into developing the basic substrates, the basic building basic substrates, the basic building basic substrates, the basic building blocks of whatever it is their craft blocks of whatever it is their craft blocks of whatever it is their craft happens to be where they demonstrate happens to be where they demonstrate happens to be where they demonstrate virtuosity. This is very important to virtuosity. This is very important to virtuosity. This is very important to understand. Nonetheless, divergent understand. Nonetheless, divergent understand. Nonetheless, divergent thinking is the critical element for thinking is the critical element for thinking is the critical element for initiating the creative process, again, initiating the creative process, again, initiating the creative process, again, thinking about creativity as a verb. And thinking about creativity as a verb. And thinking about creativity as a verb. And divergent thinking involves taking some divergent thinking involves taking some divergent thinking involves taking some starting point, in this case a pen, and starting point, in this case a pen, and starting point, in this case a pen, and then radiating out from that in a fairly then radiating out from that in a fairly then radiating out from that in a fairly unconstrained, what biologists call a unconstrained, what biologists call a unconstrained, what biologists call a random walk, just kind of wandering random walk, just kind of wandering random walk, just kind of wandering through your thought space and memory through your thought space and memory through your thought space and memory space about what could be related to space about what could be related to space about what could be related to this pen. Now, on the flip side of this pen. Now, on the flip side of this pen. Now, on the flip side of creativity is the implementation of creativity is the implementation of creativity is the implementation of specific combinations of things specific combinations of things specific combinations of things and testing those to see whether or not and testing those to see whether or not and testing those to see whether or not they are interesting, relevant, or they are interesting, relevant, or they are interesting, relevant, or delight us or other people, or scare us delight us or other people, or scare us delight us or other people, or scare us or other people, or thrill us or other or other people, or thrill us or other or other people, or thrill us or other people. In other words, people. In other words, people. In other words, a testing of whether or not there's some a testing of whether or not there's some a testing of whether or not there's some fundamental rule to emerge. Now, again, fundamental rule to emerge. Now, again, fundamental rule to emerge. Now, again, I I'm going to repeat this many, many I I'm going to repeat this many, many I I'm going to repeat this many, many times throughout this episode, and I'm times throughout this episode, and I'm times throughout this episode, and I'm not going to apologize for that because not going to apologize for that because not going to apologize for that because I think it's so important to understand I think it's so important to understand I think it's so important to understand that creativity is not just novel that creativity is not just novel that creativity is not just novel combinations. They're novel combinations combinations. They're novel combinations combinations. They're novel combinations of things that reveal something of things that reveal something of things that reveal something fundamental and that often pop out to fundamental and that often pop out to fundamental and that often pop out to us. If not every time, certainly most of the If not every time, certainly most of the If not every time, certainly most of the time that we see that thing. It almost time that we see that thing. It almost time that we see that thing. It almost never seems to be the case that never seems to be the case that never seems to be the case that something truly creative dulls in its something truly creative dulls in its something truly creative dulls in its expression, and that's because what it's expression, and that's because what it's expression, and that's because what it's repeating to us over and over again is repeating to us over and over again is repeating to us over and over again is this fundamental rule that normally we this fundamental rule that normally we this fundamental rule that normally we can't see or hear or experience in the can't see or hear or experience in the can't see or hear or experience in the absence of this creative act. So, absence of this creative act. So, absence of this creative act. So, the second part of creativity where the second part of creativity where the second part of creativity where things are tested and where truly things are tested and where truly things are tested and where truly creative elements are discovered is in creative elements are discovered is in creative elements are discovered is in convergent thinking. And convergent thinking. And convergent thinking. And convergent thinking is, as the name suggests, just thinking is, as the name suggests, just thinking is, as the name suggests, just the opposite of divergent thinking. the opposite of divergent thinking. the opposite of divergent thinking. Convergent thinking Convergent thinking Convergent thinking would be, for example, if I give you an would be, for example, if I give you an would be, for example, if I give you an image or I tell you the following image or I tell you the following image or I tell you the following things. I say, "Wing, things. I say, "Wing, things. I say, "Wing, water, an engine." an engine." an engine." The concept that I happen to have in The concept that I happen to have in The concept that I happen to have in mind is that of a plane that can land on mind is that of a plane that can land on mind is that of a plane that can land on water, right? Most planes don't land on water, right? Most planes don't land on water, right? Most planes don't land on water or not intended to land on water. water or not intended to land on water. water or not intended to land on water. One would hope that their plane doesn't One would hope that their plane doesn't One would hope that their plane doesn't land on water unless it's a plane land on water unless it's a plane land on water unless it's a plane designed to land on water. But in this designed to land on water. But in this designed to land on water. But in this case, a plane that can land on water is a plane that can land on water is a plane that can land on water is one of the very few answers that can one of the very few answers that can one of the very few answers that can combine wing, water, and engine. wing, water, and engine. wing, water, and engine. Right? I'm sure there are other answers. Right? I'm sure there are other answers. Right? I'm sure there are other answers. There are other convergent thinking There are other convergent thinking There are other convergent thinking modes that can take you to an answer modes that can take you to an answer modes that can take you to an answer that would be valid, but there are not that would be valid, but there are not that would be valid, but there are not many. And here, what's really most many. And here, what's really most many. And here, what's really most important is that I'm not asking you to important is that I'm not asking you to important is that I'm not asking you to spool out or to radiate out from these spool out or to radiate out from these spool out or to radiate out from these three things. three things. three things. Rather, I'm asking you to combine them Rather, I'm asking you to combine them Rather, I'm asking you to combine them in some way that makes sense in some way that makes sense in some way that makes sense in the real world. And indeed, there are in the real world. And indeed, there are in the real world. And indeed, there are planes that can land on water. planes that can land on water. planes that can land on water. And wing, water, and engine combined within wing, water, and engine combined within wing, water, and engine combined within those things, they are fundamental those things, they are fundamental those things, they are fundamental features. They are in fact necessary, features. They are in fact necessary, features. They are in fact necessary, but not sufficient for having a plane but not sufficient for having a plane but not sufficient for having a plane that can land on water. Okay, so that's that can land on water. Okay, so that's that can land on water. Okay, so that's just one example of convergent thinking. just one example of convergent thinking. just one example of convergent thinking. And a convergent thinking task would And a convergent thinking task would And a convergent thinking task would involve you being given a list of two or involve you being given a list of two or involve you being given a list of two or three or maybe even five different three or maybe even five different three or maybe even five different things. And then for each of those two things. And then for each of those two things. And then for each of those two or three or five different things, as or three or five different things, as or three or five different things, as quickly as you can to come up with a quickly as you can to come up with a quickly as you can to come up with a single answer that binds all of those in single answer that binds all of those in single answer that binds all of those in a real-world concept that obey the laws a real-world concept that obey the laws a real-world concept that obey the laws of nature or physics in some way. For of nature or physics in some way. For of nature or physics in some way. For instance, you couldn't just come up with instance, you couldn't just come up with instance, you couldn't just come up with some uh you know, answer that said uh some uh you know, answer that said uh some uh you know, answer that said uh a bird that um swallowed an engine and a bird that um swallowed an engine and a bird that um swallowed an engine and that happens to be a seabird. You could that happens to be a seabird. You could that happens to be a seabird. You could come up with that, but that actually is come up with that, but that actually is come up with that, but that actually is not something that happens or is that a not something that happens or is that a not something that happens or is that a very typical at all. And so, it seems very typical at all. And so, it seems very typical at all. And so, it seems like kind of a mishmash of things that like kind of a mishmash of things that like kind of a mishmash of things that are really just designed for you to try are really just designed for you to try are really just designed for you to try and accomplish an answer rather than and accomplish an answer rather than and accomplish an answer rather than something real such as a plane that something real such as a plane that something real such as a plane that lands on water. Okay? lands on water. Okay? lands on water. Okay? The point here is that divergent The point here is that divergent The point here is that divergent thinking is one aspect of our cognition, thinking is one aspect of our cognition, thinking is one aspect of our cognition, of our thinking, and convergent thinking of our thinking, and convergent thinking of our thinking, and convergent thinking is a very distinct aspect of our is a very distinct aspect of our is a very distinct aspect of our cognition. In fact, one of the critical cognition. In fact, one of the critical cognition. In fact, one of the critical requirements for convergent thinking is requirements for convergent thinking is requirements for convergent thinking is also to access our memory banks and our also to access our memory banks and our also to access our memory banks and our understanding about the outside world understanding about the outside world understanding about the outside world just as it were with divergent thinking. just as it were with divergent thinking. just as it were with divergent thinking. But it requires more focus and more But it requires more focus and more But it requires more focus and more persistence. In fact, if we were to come persistence. In fact, if we were to come persistence. In fact, if we were to come up with a key rule for divergent up with a key rule for divergent up with a key rule for divergent thinking, it would be you almost want to thinking, it would be you almost want to thinking, it would be you almost want to have just enough focus to remember what have just enough focus to remember what have just enough focus to remember what the initial object or thing that was the initial object or thing that was the initial object or thing that was mentioned was, to keep that in mind, so mentioned was, to keep that in mind, so mentioned was, to keep that in mind, so that your answers don't become that your answers don't become that your answers don't become completely random, but completely random, but completely random, but the more distant and everywhere in the more distant and everywhere in the more distant and everywhere in between that you can generate answers, between that you can generate answers, between that you can generate answers, that is that is that is the things that are very close to pens, the things that are very close to pens, the things that are very close to pens, you know, black pen, red pen, versus, you know, black pen, red pen, versus, you know, black pen, red pen, versus, you know, pen and doorstop, pen acting you know, pen and doorstop, pen acting you know, pen and doorstop, pen acting as a door stop. Those are as a door stop. Those are as a door stop. Those are One is very close. One is very close. One is very close. Red pen is very close to black pen. Red pen is very close to black pen. Red pen is very close to black pen. Door stop is pretty far from black pen. Door stop is pretty far from black pen. Door stop is pretty far from black pen. So, that's the idea is that you want to So, that's the idea is that you want to So, that's the idea is that you want to explore and undergo a range of explore and undergo a range of explore and undergo a range of exploration of different ideas. Whereas exploration of different ideas. Whereas exploration of different ideas. Whereas with convergent thinking, you're really with convergent thinking, you're really with convergent thinking, you're really trying to bind these things together and trying to bind these things together and trying to bind these things together and so the key element for convergent so the key element for convergent so the key element for convergent thinking is the aspect of persistence and focus. is the aspect of persistence and focus. is the aspect of persistence and focus. And that's why convergent thinking in many that's why convergent thinking in many that's why convergent thinking in many ways feels harder than divergent ways feels harder than divergent ways feels harder than divergent thinking. It feels like there's an thinking. It feels like there's an thinking. It feels like there's an answer and I want to get the answer and I want to get the answer and I want to get the answer right and I can't solve it. It's a right and I can't solve it. It's a right and I can't solve it. It's a puzzle and it's a puzzle that relies on puzzle and it's a puzzle that relies on puzzle and it's a puzzle that relies on very distinct brain circuits from very distinct brain circuits from very distinct brain circuits from divergent thinking. Which brain divergent thinking. Which brain divergent thinking. Which brain circuits? Well, that's what we're going circuits? Well, that's what we're going circuits? Well, that's what we're going to describe next. And again, this is not to describe next. And again, this is not to describe next. And again, this is not just going to be a list of different just going to be a list of different just going to be a list of different brain circuits with different names brain circuits with different names brain circuits with different names doing different things. That wouldn't be doing different things. That wouldn't be doing different things. That wouldn't be useful to you or to me. Rather, what useful to you or to me. Rather, what useful to you or to me. Rather, what you're about to learn you're about to learn you're about to learn is truly incredible. What it is we're is truly incredible. What it is we're is truly incredible. What it is we're going to talk about one single molecule, going to talk about one single molecule, going to talk about one single molecule, dopamine, which is a molecule most dopamine, which is a molecule most dopamine, which is a molecule most typically associated with motivation and typically associated with motivation and typically associated with motivation and desire and drive and feelings of desire and drive and feelings of desire and drive and feelings of pleasure in some cases, but that pleasure in some cases, but that pleasure in some cases, but that actually resides within four different actually resides within four different actually resides within four different networks in the brain. Today, we're networks in the brain. Today, we're networks in the brain. Today, we're going to talk about two of those going to talk about two of those going to talk about two of those networks. And dopamine acting in one network And dopamine acting in one network And dopamine acting in one network directly underlies divergent thinking. directly underlies divergent thinking. directly underlies divergent thinking. Whereas dopamine in another brain Whereas dopamine in another brain Whereas dopamine in another brain network underlies convergent thinking. network underlies convergent thinking. network underlies convergent thinking. And if at this point in this episode And if at this point in this episode And if at this point in this episode you're thinking, "Okay, when am I going you're thinking, "Okay, when am I going you're thinking, "Okay, when am I going to get the tools to understand to get the tools to understand to get the tools to understand creativity and how to be creative?" What creativity and how to be creative?" What creativity and how to be creative?" What I can assure you is that if you I can assure you is that if you I can assure you is that if you understand divergent thinking, which understand divergent thinking, which understand divergent thinking, which hopefully now you do, and you can hopefully now you do, and you can hopefully now you do, and you can understand what convergent thinking is, understand what convergent thinking is, understand what convergent thinking is, and you can understand that dopamine is and you can understand that dopamine is and you can understand that dopamine is responsible for both divergent thinking responsible for both divergent thinking responsible for both divergent thinking and convergent thinking, but through and convergent thinking, but through and convergent thinking, but through separate pathways, well, then if you can separate pathways, well, then if you can separate pathways, well, then if you can understand how those two separate understand how those two separate understand how those two separate pathways work and how to engage them pathways work and how to engage them pathways work and how to engage them differentially, therein lie the tools that you can use therein lie the tools that you can use therein lie the tools that you can use both to explore ideas, both to explore ideas, both to explore ideas, in other words, find what it is that in other words, find what it is that in other words, find what it is that could be creative, and then could be creative, and then could be creative, and then systematically test each of those ideas systematically test each of those ideas systematically test each of those ideas for what is truly creative. That is what for what is truly creative. That is what for what is truly creative. That is what meets the criteria for something that is meets the criteria for something that is meets the criteria for something that is novel and truly useful and informs us novel and truly useful and informs us novel and truly useful and informs us about something that we've never seen, about something that we've never seen, about something that we've never seen, heard, or felt before. Let's just take a heard, or felt before. Let's just take a heard, or felt before. Let's just take a moment to talk about the incredible moment to talk about the incredible moment to talk about the incredible molecule that is dopamine. molecule that is dopamine. molecule that is dopamine. Many people are familiar with dopamine Many people are familiar with dopamine Many people are familiar with dopamine from the concept of {quote} dopamine from the concept of {quote} dopamine from the concept of {quote} dopamine hits, which is popular language describing which is popular language describing which is popular language describing the feeling of pleasure that we get from the feeling of pleasure that we get from the feeling of pleasure that we get from pretty much anything pretty much anything pretty much anything that we like or that we continue to that we like or that we continue to that we like or that we continue to engage in repeatedly. So, some people engage in repeatedly. So, some people engage in repeatedly. So, some people talk about the dopamine hit that they talk about the dopamine hit that they talk about the dopamine hit that they get from somebody attractive that they get from somebody attractive that they get from somebody attractive that they like texting them back or the dopamine like texting them back or the dopamine like texting them back or the dopamine hit that they get from social media or hit that they get from social media or hit that they get from social media or the dopamine hit that they get from the dopamine hit that they get from the dopamine hit that they get from sugar or the dopamine hit that they get sugar or the dopamine hit that they get sugar or the dopamine hit that they get from this or from that. from this or from that. from this or from that. To be honest, the concept of dopamine To be honest, the concept of dopamine To be honest, the concept of dopamine hits is not one that I favor because in is not one that I favor because in is not one that I favor because in general, whenever people talk about general, whenever people talk about general, whenever people talk about dopamine hits, typically they're talking dopamine hits, typically they're talking dopamine hits, typically they're talking about activities such as social media, about activities such as social media, about activities such as social media, which dopamine may be involved at some which dopamine may be involved at some which dopamine may be involved at some level, but often it's the case that the but often it's the case that the but often it's the case that the behavior associated with that thing, in behavior associated with that thing, in behavior associated with that thing, in this case social media, is more of the this case social media, is more of the this case social media, is more of the compulsive nature rather than an active compulsive nature rather than an active compulsive nature rather than an active seeking of something with positive seeking of something with positive seeking of something with positive anticipation. And that's really what anticipation. And that's really what anticipation. And that's really what dopamine is about, at least in the dopamine is about, at least in the dopamine is about, at least in the context of one of its major functions in context of one of its major functions in context of one of its major functions in the brain. Dopamine is really about the brain. Dopamine is really about the brain. Dopamine is really about motivation and desire and movement. And motivation and desire and movement. And motivation and desire and movement. And it makes sense why motivation, desire, it makes sense why motivation, desire, it makes sense why motivation, desire, and movement would be linked up through and movement would be linked up through and movement would be linked up through a common a common a common in this case neuromodulator chemical in this case neuromodulator chemical in this case neuromodulator chemical like dopamine, like dopamine, like dopamine, because throughout evolution, if we were excited throughout evolution, if we were excited throughout evolution, if we were excited for or motivated to pursue something, we for or motivated to pursue something, we for or motivated to pursue something, we had to move in order to get it, to had to move in order to get it, to had to move in order to get it, to obtain it. And in general, we can frame obtain it. And in general, we can frame obtain it. And in general, we can frame dopamine under the umbrella of dopamine under the umbrella of dopamine under the umbrella of dopamine tends to be involved in neural circuits tends to be involved in neural circuits tends to be involved in neural circuits in the brain that are involved in the brain that are involved in the brain that are involved in processes that are processes that are processes that are taking us beyond the confines of our taking us beyond the confines of our taking us beyond the confines of our skin. That is, that motivate us to go do skin. That is, that motivate us to go do skin. That is, that motivate us to go do something in terms of action in the something in terms of action in the something in terms of action in the world. Now, that statement might seem world. Now, that statement might seem world. Now, that statement might seem distantly placed from a discussion about distantly placed from a discussion about distantly placed from a discussion about creativity, but as we'll learn a little creativity, but as we'll learn a little creativity, but as we'll learn a little bit later, one of the most useful tools bit later, one of the most useful tools bit later, one of the most useful tools for engaging creativity and becoming for engaging creativity and becoming for engaging creativity and becoming more creative is to think about action more creative is to think about action more creative is to think about action elements within a narrative. That is things that within a narrative. That is things that within a narrative. That is things that we and others can do in order to we and others can do in order to we and others can do in order to discover new rules through actual discover new rules through actual discover new rules through actual movement. That's a little bit cryptic. movement. That's a little bit cryptic. movement. That's a little bit cryptic. Um forgive me, but I promise I'll return Um forgive me, but I promise I'll return Um forgive me, but I promise I'll return to it later and I will make it crystal to it later and I will make it crystal to it later and I will make it crystal clear. There are four major circuits in the There are four major circuits in the There are four major circuits in the brain that use dopamine. Although I brain that use dopamine. Although I brain that use dopamine. Although I should mention there are additional should mention there are additional should mention there are additional circuits as well. In fact, your eye even circuits as well. In fact, your eye even circuits as well. In fact, your eye even contains neurons that release dopamine contains neurons that release dopamine contains neurons that release dopamine that control the sensitivity of your eye that control the sensitivity of your eye that control the sensitivity of your eye at different times of day to light, etc. at different times of day to light, etc. at different times of day to light, etc. The four major circuits in the brain The four major circuits in the brain The four major circuits in the brain that utilize dopamine, however, are used that utilize dopamine, however, are used that utilize dopamine, however, are used for four major purposes and I'll for four major purposes and I'll for four major purposes and I'll describe what those are. First of all is describe what those are. First of all is describe what those are. First of all is a neural circuit that uses dopamine a neural circuit that uses dopamine a neural circuit that uses dopamine among other things, but certainly relies among other things, but certainly relies among other things, but certainly relies on dopamine in a critical way to engage on dopamine in a critical way to engage on dopamine in a critical way to engage movement including eye movements. And we movement including eye movements. And we movement including eye movements. And we will return to eye movements and why will return to eye movements and why will return to eye movements and why they're so important for understanding they're so important for understanding they're so important for understanding creativity and maybe even for generating creativity and maybe even for generating creativity and maybe even for generating creativity a little bit later. The name creativity a little bit later. The name creativity a little bit later. The name of the circuit, again, is less important of the circuit, again, is less important of the circuit, again, is less important than what it does, but the name of the than what it does, but the name of the than what it does, but the name of the circuit for those that want to know circuit for those that want to know circuit for those that want to know is the so-called nigrostriatal pathway. is the so-called nigrostriatal pathway. is the so-called nigrostriatal pathway. Okay, the substantia is a brain Okay, the substantia is a brain Okay, the substantia is a brain area that is very dark that projects to area that is very dark that projects to area that is very dark that projects to an area called the dorsal striatum. It an area called the dorsal striatum. It an area called the dorsal striatum. It contains a bunch of subregions. So contains a bunch of subregions. So contains a bunch of subregions. So again, for those of you that really geek again, for those of you that really geek again, for those of you that really geek out on this stuff, great. You can learn out on this stuff, great. You can learn out on this stuff, great. You can learn these names and retain them in your these names and retain them in your these names and retain them in your memory. If you don't care about names, memory. If you don't care about names, memory. If you don't care about names, don't worry about it. Just discard the don't worry about it. Just discard the don't worry about it. Just discard the names. But areas of the brain like the names. But areas of the brain like the names. But areas of the brain like the caudate and putamen in the dorsal caudate and putamen in the dorsal caudate and putamen in the dorsal striatum receive input from the striatum receive input from the striatum receive input from the substantia In neuroanatomy, when we name something, In neuroanatomy, when we name something, In neuroanatomy, when we name something, we say the origin of that thing and we say the origin of that thing and we say the origin of that thing and where it connects to. So nigrostriatal where it connects to. So nigrostriatal where it connects to. So nigrostriatal tells you that there is a connection tells you that there is a connection tells you that there is a connection between the substantia cuz as between the substantia cuz as between the substantia cuz as came first, nigrostriatal, and then came first, nigrostriatal, and then came first, nigrostriatal, and then striatal is where it ends up. So, striatal is where it ends up. So, striatal is where it ends up. So, nigrostriatal pathway is involved in nigrostriatal pathway is involved in nigrostriatal pathway is involved in generating bodily movements, it's generating bodily movements, it's generating bodily movements, it's involved in eye movements, and it is involved in eye movements, and it is involved in eye movements, and it is actually a brain area that's engaged actually a brain area that's engaged actually a brain area that's engaged when you think about movement. You even when you think about movement. You even when you think about movement. You even just have a story in your mind about just have a story in your mind about just have a story in your mind about walking or a story in your mind about walking or a story in your mind about walking or a story in your mind about running or story in your mind about running or story in your mind about running or story in your mind about driving, this area is engaged. Very driving, this area is engaged. Very driving, this area is engaged. Very interesting brain area. interesting brain area. interesting brain area. Okay, so that's the first circuit. Very Okay, so that's the first circuit. Very Okay, so that's the first circuit. Very important to understand. And I'll tell important to understand. And I'll tell important to understand. And I'll tell you right now, that is the brain circuit you right now, that is the brain circuit you right now, that is the brain circuit that is engaged when you undergo that is engaged when you undergo that is engaged when you undergo divergent thinking. divergent thinking. divergent thinking. Now, that itself should be interesting, Now, that itself should be interesting, Now, that itself should be interesting, right? Even if you don't remember any of right? Even if you don't remember any of right? Even if you don't remember any of the names of the things I just told you, the names of the things I just told you, the names of the things I just told you, that you have a brain circuit that even that you have a brain circuit that even that you have a brain circuit that even if you just think about walking, it if you just think about walking, it if you just think about walking, it becomes more active and the dopamine is becomes more active and the dopamine is becomes more active and the dopamine is involved in that brain activity. involved in that brain activity. involved in that brain activity. And if you recall, divergent thinking And if you recall, divergent thinking And if you recall, divergent thinking involves taking a concept as boring as a involves taking a concept as boring as a involves taking a concept as boring as a pen and thinking about other concepts that and thinking about other concepts that and thinking about other concepts that could link up with that pen in some sort could link up with that pen in some sort could link up with that pen in some sort of way, logical or illogical, right? The of way, logical or illogical, right? The of way, logical or illogical, right? The bridge could be completely abstract and bridge could be completely abstract and bridge could be completely abstract and really fantastical with a bunch of and really fantastical with a bunch of and really fantastical with a bunch of different ideas in between, like a pen different ideas in between, like a pen different ideas in between, like a pen acting as a doorstop because of some acting as a doorstop because of some acting as a doorstop because of some situation where you need to run situation where you need to run situation where you need to run downstairs in a fire and get back downstairs in a fire and get back downstairs in a fire and get back upstairs quickly to rescue somebody, upstairs quickly to rescue somebody, upstairs quickly to rescue somebody, very divergent, or as divergent as black very divergent, or as divergent as black very divergent, or as divergent as black pen to red pen. pen to red pen. pen to red pen. But, what's amazing is that same But, what's amazing is that same But, what's amazing is that same circuit is the one that's involved in circuit is the one that's involved in circuit is the one that's involved in physical movement, in generating and physical movement, in generating and physical movement, in generating and thinking about physical movement. That thinking about physical movement. That thinking about physical movement. That turns out to be vitally important for turns out to be vitally important for turns out to be vitally important for tapping into the creativity process. tapping into the creativity process. tapping into the creativity process. Really frame that up in your mind or Really frame that up in your mind or Really frame that up in your mind or commit it to memory. Now, the second commit it to memory. Now, the second commit it to memory. Now, the second dopamine circuit associated with dopamine circuit associated with dopamine circuit associated with creativity is the one associated with creativity is the one associated with creativity is the one associated with convergent thinking, which again is the convergent thinking, which again is the convergent thinking, which again is the kind of thinking where there's a kind of thinking where there's a kind of thinking where there's a specific correct answer. It requires specific correct answer. It requires specific correct answer. It requires focus and it requires persistence. And focus and it requires persistence. And focus and it requires persistence. And the name of that circuit, again, the name of that circuit, again, the name of that circuit, again, the name isn't as important as what it does, name isn't as important as what it does, name isn't as important as what it does, but the name of that circuit is the but the name of that circuit is the but the name of that circuit is the mesocortical pathway. The mesocortical pathway The mesocortical pathway The mesocortical pathway is involved in motivation and it has an is involved in motivation and it has an is involved in motivation and it has an emotional component, too. emotional component, too. emotional component, too. Now, it will become clear in a few Now, it will become clear in a few Now, it will become clear in a few minutes why that emotional component is minutes why that emotional component is minutes why that emotional component is vital. But, this is a circuit that vital. But, this is a circuit that vital. But, this is a circuit that originates in a brain structure called originates in a brain structure called originates in a brain structure called the lateral ventral tegmental area. the lateral ventral tegmental area. the lateral ventral tegmental area. Again, a bunch of words, you can Again, a bunch of words, you can Again, a bunch of words, you can remember it if you want, lateral ventral remember it if you want, lateral ventral remember it if you want, lateral ventral tegmental area, or you can not ventral tegmental area, or you can not ventral tegmental area, or you can not worry about the name. And it connects to worry about the name. And it connects to worry about the name. And it connects to the prefrontal cortex, that area just the prefrontal cortex, that area just the prefrontal cortex, that area just behind the forehead. And this behind the forehead. And this behind the forehead. And this mesocortical area is involved in mesocortical area is involved in mesocortical area is involved in motivation and emotion, and is critical motivation and emotion, and is critical motivation and emotion, and is critical for focus and persistence. It is for focus and persistence. It is for focus and persistence. It is distinct from a very nearby area, just distinct from a very nearby area, just distinct from a very nearby area, just sitting right next door, the so-called sitting right next door, the so-called sitting right next door, the so-called mesolimbic area, which is involved in mesolimbic area, which is involved in mesolimbic area, which is involved in desire and feelings of reward. And this desire and feelings of reward. And this desire and feelings of reward. And this is the area that is associated more is the area that is associated more is the area that is associated more typically with addictive behaviors or typically with addictive behaviors or typically with addictive behaviors or compulsive behaviors. compulsive behaviors. compulsive behaviors. We're going to leave out the discussion We're going to leave out the discussion We're going to leave out the discussion about the mesolimbic pathway for now, about the mesolimbic pathway for now, about the mesolimbic pathway for now, because it's not critical to divergent because it's not critical to divergent because it's not critical to divergent or convergent thinking, and it's not or convergent thinking, and it's not or convergent thinking, and it's not critical to the process of creativity, critical to the process of creativity, critical to the process of creativity, at least as far as we know. at least as far as we know. at least as far as we know. But, I mention it because it is the But, I mention it because it is the But, I mention it because it is the third and the fourth dopaminergic third and the fourth dopaminergic third and the fourth dopaminergic circuits, and then the fourth circuit, circuits, and then the fourth circuit, circuits, and then the fourth circuit, certainly one I've never talked about certainly one I've never talked about certainly one I've never talked about before on this podcast, before on this podcast, before on this podcast, which is which is which is doesn't mean anything except that we doesn't mean anything except that we doesn't mean anything except that we haven't gotten to it yet, is the haven't gotten to it yet, is the haven't gotten to it yet, is the tuberoinfundibular pathway. And that is the pathway pathway. And that is the pathway pathway. And that is the pathway associated with dopamine and your associated with dopamine and your associated with dopamine and your pituitary gland and the release of pituitary gland and the release of pituitary gland and the release of hormones in particular that travel to hormones in particular that travel to hormones in particular that travel to the ovary, if you have ovaries, or to the ovary, if you have ovaries, or to the ovary, if you have ovaries, or to your testes, if you have testes, and your testes, if you have testes, and your testes, if you have testes, and trigger the release of things like trigger the release of things like trigger the release of things like estrogen and testosterone, etc. Dopamine estrogen and testosterone, etc. Dopamine estrogen and testosterone, etc. Dopamine is intimately involved in that is intimately involved in that is intimately involved in that circuitry. Again, not the topic of circuitry. Again, not the topic of circuitry. Again, not the topic of today's discussion. For today's discussion. For today's discussion. For today's discussion, we want to remember that discussion, we want to remember that discussion, we want to remember that there's a dopamine circuit called the there's a dopamine circuit called the there's a dopamine circuit called the nigrostriatal circuit, which is involved nigrostriatal circuit, which is involved nigrostriatal circuit, which is involved in movement and divergent thinking. in movement and divergent thinking. in movement and divergent thinking. And that alone should set a flag up for And that alone should set a flag up for And that alone should set a flag up for you, like, "Wow, just thinking about new you, like, "Wow, just thinking about new you, like, "Wow, just thinking about new ideas has something to do with movement, ideas has something to do with movement, ideas has something to do with movement, with physical movement." And with physical movement." And with physical movement." And the dopamine circuit that is the dopamine circuit that is the dopamine circuit that is the mesocortical pathway, which is the one mesocortical pathway, which is the one mesocortical pathway, which is the one that's associated with motivation and that's associated with motivation and that's associated with motivation and emotion, and that's the one required for emotion, and that's the one required for emotion, and that's the one required for persistence and focus for convergent persistence and focus for convergent persistence and focus for convergent thinking. Why am I telling you all of thinking. Why am I telling you all of thinking. Why am I telling you all of this about dopamine? this about dopamine? this about dopamine? Well, it turns out that dopamine Well, it turns out that dopamine Well, it turns out that dopamine creates a certain number of responses in creates a certain number of responses in creates a certain number of responses in the brain and body when it is active in the brain and body when it is active in the brain and body when it is active in one or the other of these circuits. And one or the other of these circuits. And one or the other of these circuits. And just for sake of simplicity, so I don't just for sake of simplicity, so I don't just for sake of simplicity, so I don't have to keep saying nigrostriatal and have to keep saying nigrostriatal and have to keep saying nigrostriatal and mesocortical, here going forward, I'm going to talk here going forward, I'm going to talk here going forward, I'm going to talk about the dopamine circuit that's about the dopamine circuit that's about the dopamine circuit that's associated with divergent thinking or associated with divergent thinking or associated with divergent thinking or the dopamine circuit associated with the dopamine circuit associated with the dopamine circuit associated with convergent thinking. And again, convergent thinking. And again, convergent thinking. And again, divergent thinking and convergent divergent thinking and convergent divergent thinking and convergent thinking are the two processes that have thinking are the two processes that have thinking are the two processes that have to occur to occur to occur usually first divergent, then convergent usually first divergent, then convergent usually first divergent, then convergent thinking, then back and forth, and back thinking, then back and forth, and back thinking, then back and forth, and back and forth in order to arrive at and forth in order to arrive at and forth in order to arrive at something creative. Divergent thinking something creative. Divergent thinking something creative. Divergent thinking is about exploration, convergent is about exploration, convergent is about exploration, convergent thinking is about testing things and thinking is about testing things and thinking is about testing things and coming up with things that are the right coming up with things that are the right coming up with things that are the right answer, that feel right. And we will answer, that feel right. And we will answer, that feel right. And we will better define what right means a little better define what right means a little better define what right means a little bit later, but you already sort of know. bit later, but you already sort of know. bit later, but you already sort of know. Right in this context is when you have Right in this context is when you have Right in this context is when you have some combination of elements or some combination of elements or some combination of elements or some idea or some written passage or some idea or some written passage or some idea or some written passage or some music or some physical action music or some physical action music or some physical action that you just know, this is really novel that you just know, this is really novel that you just know, this is really novel and really cool. and really cool. and really cool. Or people see it or hear it Or people see it or hear it Or people see it or hear it or taste it and say this is really novel or taste it and say this is really novel or taste it and say this is really novel and really cool, and they don't and really cool, and they don't and really cool, and they don't necessarily know why. It's just necessarily know why. It's just necessarily know why. It's just different in a way that feels true. I'd different in a way that feels true. I'd different in a way that feels true. I'd like to take a brief break and thank our like to take a brief break and thank our like to take a brief break and thank our sponsor InsideTracker. sponsor InsideTracker. sponsor InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been reach your health goals. I've long been reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work a believer in getting regular blood work a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of done for the simple reason that many of done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. The analyzed from a quality blood test. The analyzed from a quality blood test. The problem with a lot of blood and DNA problem with a lot of blood and DNA problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests out there, however, is that you tests out there, however, is that you tests out there, however, is that you get data back about metabolic factors, get data back about metabolic factors, get data back about metabolic factors, lipids, and hormones, and so forth, but lipids, and hormones, and so forth, but lipids, and hormones, and so forth, but you don't know what to do with those you don't know what to do with those you don't know what to do with those data. InsideTracker solves that problem data. InsideTracker solves that problem data. InsideTracker solves that problem and makes it very easy for you to and makes it very easy for you to and makes it very easy for you to understand what sorts of nutritional, understand what sorts of nutritional, understand what sorts of nutritional, behavioral, maybe even behavioral, maybe even behavioral, maybe even supplementation-based interventions you supplementation-based interventions you supplementation-based interventions you might want to take on in order to adjust might want to take on in order to adjust might want to take on in order to adjust the numbers of those metabolic factors, the numbers of those metabolic factors, the numbers of those metabolic factors, hormones, lipids, and other things that hormones, lipids, and other things that hormones, lipids, and other things that impact your immediate and long-term impact your immediate and long-term impact your immediate and long-term health to bring those numbers into the health to bring those numbers into the health to bring those numbers into the ranges that are appropriate and indeed ranges that are appropriate and indeed ranges that are appropriate and indeed optimal for you. If you'd like to try optimal for you. If you'd like to try optimal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker.com/huberman and get 20% off any of InsideTracker's and get 20% off any of InsideTracker's and get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's InsideTracker.com/huberman plans. That's InsideTracker.com/huberman plans. That's InsideTracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Now, I realize that for to get 20% off. Now, I realize that for to get 20% off. Now, I realize that for some of you listening to this episode, some of you listening to this episode, some of you listening to this episode, we are probably at the point along the we are probably at the point along the we are probably at the point along the pathway of concept and definition and pathway of concept and definition and pathway of concept and definition and mechanism that leaves you in a place of real that leaves you in a place of real that leaves you in a place of real wanting a tool. And so, I promise that wanting a tool. And so, I promise that wanting a tool. And so, I promise that I'm going to get into more tools, but to I'm going to get into more tools, but to I'm going to get into more tools, but to satisfy you and to make sure that you do satisfy you and to make sure that you do satisfy you and to make sure that you do indeed understand that there are tools indeed understand that there are tools indeed understand that there are tools that can emerge from the information that can emerge from the information that can emerge from the information that you already now have in mind, I do that you already now have in mind, I do that you already now have in mind, I do want to share with you one particular want to share with you one particular want to share with you one particular tool from the literature that has been tool from the literature that has been tool from the literature that has been demonstrated over and over again to demonstrated over and over again to demonstrated over and over again to support and build and enhance divergent support and build and enhance divergent support and build and enhance divergent thinking. And I also want to share with you a tool And I also want to share with you a tool And I also want to share with you a tool that has been shown from the scientific that has been shown from the scientific that has been shown from the scientific literature to enhance convergent literature to enhance convergent literature to enhance convergent thinking because both convergent and thinking because both convergent and thinking because both convergent and divergent thinking are critical for the divergent thinking are critical for the divergent thinking are critical for the creative process. Now, I should creative process. Now, I should creative process. Now, I should emphasize that some people out there, emphasize that some people out there, emphasize that some people out there, either by training or by genetics or by either by training or by genetics or by either by training or by genetics or by both, will be naturally better both, will be naturally better both, will be naturally better at divergent or convergent thinking. And at divergent or convergent thinking. And at divergent or convergent thinking. And in fact, we now know in a kind of in fact, we now know in a kind of in fact, we now know in a kind of almost poetic kind of way almost poetic kind of way almost poetic kind of way that naturally-occurring variations in that naturally-occurring variations in that naturally-occurring variations in genes, which underlie genes, which underlie genes, which underlie naturally-occurring variations in the naturally-occurring variations in the naturally-occurring variations in the percentage of dopamine in percentage of dopamine in percentage of dopamine in one set of brain circuits versus one set of brain circuits versus one set of brain circuits versus another, do seem to relate to whether or another, do seem to relate to whether or another, do seem to relate to whether or not people are naturally good at not people are naturally good at not people are naturally good at divergent thinking or convergent divergent thinking or convergent divergent thinking or convergent thinking. Now, that's a very nature thinking. Now, that's a very nature thinking. Now, that's a very nature based explanation for why some people based explanation for why some people based explanation for why some people are better at divergent thinking and are better at divergent thinking and are better at divergent thinking and other people are better convergent other people are better convergent other people are better convergent thinking. Nature and nurture is something that can Nature and nurture is something that can Nature and nurture is something that can never really be teased apart exactly never really be teased apart exactly never really be teased apart exactly because of course if someone has a because of course if someone has a because of course if someone has a natural proclivity for something based natural proclivity for something based natural proclivity for something based on their genes, you can't often separate on their genes, you can't often separate on their genes, you can't often separate that from their parents that from their parents that from their parents because we inherit our genes from our parents. we inherit our genes from our parents. we inherit our genes from our parents. Although even in cases where people are Although even in cases where people are Although even in cases where people are raised away from their parents through raised away from their parents through raised away from their parents through adoption and cetera, adoption and cetera, adoption and cetera, it's very hard to separate nature and it's very hard to separate nature and it's very hard to separate nature and nurture because somebody with a natural nurture because somebody with a natural nurture because somebody with a natural proclivity for things might engage in proclivity for things might engage in proclivity for things might engage in those things more etc. those things more etc. those things more etc. The point is that for those of you that The point is that for those of you that The point is that for those of you that are very good at divergent thinking are very good at divergent thinking are very good at divergent thinking or very good at convergent or very good at convergent or very good at convergent thinking, some of that might have been thinking, some of that might have been thinking, some of that might have been inherited but more than likely some of that but more than likely some of that but more than likely some of that depended on the kinds of activities that depended on the kinds of activities that depended on the kinds of activities that you engaged in your early years. In you engaged in your early years. In you engaged in your early years. In particular in the years between age 5 particular in the years between age 5 particular in the years between age 5 and 25. And for those of you that are and 25. And for those of you that are and 25. And for those of you that are aged between 5 and 25, all I can say is aged between 5 and 25, all I can say is aged between 5 and 25, all I can say is please learn to engage both divergent please learn to engage both divergent please learn to engage both divergent and convergent thinking as much as and convergent thinking as much as and convergent thinking as much as possible because you will enhance your possible because you will enhance your possible because you will enhance your ability for both. For those of you 25 ability for both. For those of you 25 ability for both. For those of you 25 and older, you can still enhance your and older, you can still enhance your and older, you can still enhance your ability to engage divergent and ability to engage divergent and ability to engage divergent and convergent thinking and convergent thinking and convergent thinking and the fortunate news, the equalizer I the fortunate news, the equalizer I the fortunate news, the equalizer I should say, should say, should say, is that regardless of whether or not you is that regardless of whether or not you is that regardless of whether or not you are naturally better at divergent or are naturally better at divergent or are naturally better at divergent or convergent thinking or you acquired it convergent thinking or you acquired it convergent thinking or you acquired it through activities, you need both in through activities, you need both in through activities, you need both in order to be creative. So, what we know order to be creative. So, what we know order to be creative. So, what we know is that in order to engage divergent is that in order to engage divergent is that in order to engage divergent thinking, we need access to our memory thinking, we need access to our memory thinking, we need access to our memory banks. We need to come up with banks. We need to come up with banks. We need to come up with possibilities and those possibilities and those possibilities and those possibilities can only come from what's contained can only come from what's contained can only come from what's contained within our memory systems of our brain. within our memory systems of our brain. within our memory systems of our brain. Areas like the hippocampus etc. But the Areas like the hippocampus etc. But the Areas like the hippocampus etc. But the names again don't matter. We just know names again don't matter. We just know names again don't matter. We just know that if we are going to come up with that if we are going to come up with that if we are going to come up with novel combinations of things or novel combinations of things or novel combinations of things or novel uses of things or totally new ideas uses of things or totally new ideas uses of things or totally new ideas about how objects or notes of music or about how objects or notes of music or about how objects or notes of music or foods or tastes or whatever can be foods or tastes or whatever can be foods or tastes or whatever can be combined, we have to do that with combined, we have to do that with combined, we have to do that with pre-existing knowledge. And yet what we pre-existing knowledge. And yet what we pre-existing knowledge. And yet what we need to do in order to engage divergent need to do in order to engage divergent need to do in order to engage divergent thinking is suppress thinking is suppress thinking is suppress what is called what is called what is called autobiographical narratives. And in autobiographical narratives. And in autobiographical narratives. And in particular, autobiographical narratives. particular, autobiographical narratives. particular, autobiographical narratives. We need to discard with judgements about We need to discard with judgements about We need to discard with judgements about how certain combinations of things how certain combinations of things how certain combinations of things impacted us in the past. This is I think impacted us in the past. This is I think impacted us in the past. This is I think is what people mean when they encourage is what people mean when they encourage is what people mean when they encourage the exploration of creativity by the exploration of creativity by the exploration of creativity by so-called boundary exploration. You hear so-called boundary exploration. You hear so-called boundary exploration. You hear about this a lot in kind of the about this a lot in kind of the about this a lot in kind of the self-help and psychology literature. And self-help and psychology literature. And self-help and psychology literature. And I'm not at all disparaging of that I'm not at all disparaging of that I'm not at all disparaging of that literature, although rarely does it literature, although rarely does it literature, although rarely does it define exactly how and why to go about define exactly how and why to go about define exactly how and why to go about being more creative in the or in this being more creative in the or in this being more creative in the or in this case to be case to be case to be more divergent in our thinking. more divergent in our thinking. more divergent in our thinking. So, they'll say, you know, you have to So, they'll say, you know, you have to So, they'll say, you know, you have to take risks or you have to suppress take risks or you have to suppress take risks or you have to suppress judgement. But, how do you actually do judgement. But, how do you actually do judgement. But, how do you actually do that? Well, there's a wonderful paper that? Well, there's a wonderful paper that? Well, there's a wonderful paper that talks about one way to do it. One that talks about one way to do it. One that talks about one way to do it. One way to do it is what's called open way to do it is what's called open way to do it is what's called open monitoring meditation or even just open monitoring meditation or even just open monitoring meditation or even just open monitoring thinking. And just to make monitoring thinking. And just to make monitoring thinking. And just to make what could otherwise be a somewhat what could otherwise be a somewhat what could otherwise be a somewhat complex section here very simple, what complex section here very simple, what complex section here very simple, what I'll also tell you is that if you want I'll also tell you is that if you want I'll also tell you is that if you want to enhance convergent thinking, you can to enhance convergent thinking, you can to enhance convergent thinking, you can do that a number of ways, but you can do that a number of ways, but you can do that a number of ways, but you can do that in particular by doing a different that in particular by doing a different that in particular by doing a different type of meditation or thought process, type of meditation or thought process, type of meditation or thought process, which is called focused attention which is called focused attention which is called focused attention meditation. So, let's talk about open meditation. So, let's talk about open meditation. So, let's talk about open monitoring meditation and why it's so monitoring meditation and why it's so monitoring meditation and why it's so useful for enhancing divergent thinking, useful for enhancing divergent thinking, useful for enhancing divergent thinking, this critical element of the creative this critical element of the creative this critical element of the creative process. First of all, open monitoring meditation First of all, open monitoring meditation First of all, open monitoring meditation and focused attention meditation can be and focused attention meditation can be and focused attention meditation can be performed the exact same way physically. performed the exact same way physically. performed the exact same way physically. You can sit there, eyes closed. I don't You can sit there, eyes closed. I don't You can sit there, eyes closed. I don't care if you're in a lotus position, it care if you're in a lotus position, it care if you're in a lotus position, it doesn't really matter. You're lying doesn't really matter. You're lying doesn't really matter. You're lying down, you're standing up. down, you're standing up. down, you're standing up. You could in theory do open monitoring You could in theory do open monitoring You could in theory do open monitoring meditation with eyes open, and that meditation with eyes open, and that meditation with eyes open, and that would be an interesting variant on it. would be an interesting variant on it. would be an interesting variant on it. But, for sake of But, for sake of But, for sake of the discussion right now, let's just the discussion right now, let's just the discussion right now, let's just focus on the study that talks about focus on the study that talks about focus on the study that talks about these specific tools these specific tools these specific tools and the way that they were used in the and the way that they were used in the and the way that they were used in the study. The title of the paper that I'm The title of the paper that I'm The title of the paper that I'm essentially summarizing is called open essentially summarizing is called open essentially summarizing is called open monitoring meditation reduces the monitoring meditation reduces the monitoring meditation reduces the involvement of brain regions related to involvement of brain regions related to involvement of brain regions related to memory function. Now, right off the bat, memory function. Now, right off the bat, memory function. Now, right off the bat, that should cue you to something that should cue you to something that should cue you to something interesting. Something about divergent interesting. Something about divergent interesting. Something about divergent thinking and open monitoring is related thinking and open monitoring is related thinking and open monitoring is related to suppressing memory. to suppressing memory. to suppressing memory. But, as you recall, just a few moments But, as you recall, just a few moments But, as you recall, just a few moments ago I said that in order to engage in ago I said that in order to engage in ago I said that in order to engage in divergent thinking, you need to kind of divergent thinking, you need to kind of divergent thinking, you need to kind of kill off the narratives of what has to kill off the narratives of what has to kill off the narratives of what has to be related to what and come up with new be related to what and come up with new be related to what and come up with new narratives. You still need to understand narratives. You still need to understand narratives. You still need to understand possibilities, but you need to forget possibilities, but you need to forget possibilities, but you need to forget yet prior understanding of what those yet prior understanding of what those yet prior understanding of what those possibilities have to be and start possibilities have to be and start possibilities have to be and start thinking about what those possibilities thinking about what those possibilities thinking about what those possibilities could be. And so that, it turns out, could be. And so that, it turns out, could be. And so that, it turns out, involves suppression of certain brain involves suppression of certain brain involves suppression of certain brain areas. Open monitoring meditation is typically Open monitoring meditation is typically Open monitoring meditation is typically done for about 10 to 30 minutes, done for about 10 to 30 minutes, done for about 10 to 30 minutes, although it could be longer. although it could be longer. although it could be longer. And unlike other forms of meditation And unlike other forms of meditation And unlike other forms of meditation where you sit and concentrate on your where you sit and concentrate on your where you sit and concentrate on your breathing and try and redirect your breathing and try and redirect your breathing and try and redirect your thinking back to your breathing or to thinking back to your breathing or to thinking back to your breathing or to your posture or to a chant or a mantra, your posture or to a chant or a mantra, your posture or to a chant or a mantra, open monitoring meditation is simply a open monitoring meditation is simply a open monitoring meditation is simply a matter of having you sit there or lie matter of having you sit there or lie matter of having you sit there or lie down, close your eyes, and to allow down, close your eyes, and to allow down, close your eyes, and to allow whatever surfaces in your mind to whatever surfaces in your mind to whatever surfaces in your mind to surface. And what you practice is the surface. And what you practice is the surface. And what you practice is the practice of non-judgment. Now, practice of non-judgment. Now, practice of non-judgment. Now, non-judgment itself is a little bit of non-judgment itself is a little bit of non-judgment itself is a little bit of an abstract thing because, of course, an abstract thing because, of course, an abstract thing because, of course, the moment you say don't judge, you and the moment you say don't judge, you and the moment you say don't judge, you and others start to judge. It's just the way others start to judge. It's just the way others start to judge. It's just the way that the brain works. You say don't that the brain works. You say don't that the brain works. You say don't think about an elephant, you think about think about an elephant, you think about think about an elephant, you think about an elephant. That's a perfectly natural. an elephant. That's a perfectly natural. an elephant. That's a perfectly natural. You go to You go to You go to an edge of a bridge or a cliff and you an edge of a bridge or a cliff and you an edge of a bridge or a cliff and you think about jumping off even though you think about jumping off even though you think about jumping off even though you don't. Please don't. jump off, and don't. Please don't. jump off, and don't. Please don't. jump off, and that's because it's part of the that's because it's part of the that's because it's part of the circuitry that's keeping you from circuitry that's keeping you from circuitry that's keeping you from jumping off is the thought about what jumping off is the thought about what jumping off is the thought about what would happen if you did, okay? So, open would happen if you did, okay? So, open would happen if you did, okay? So, open monitoring meditation involves monitoring meditation involves monitoring meditation involves dedicating a certain amount of time dedicating a certain amount of time dedicating a certain amount of time where you close your eyes and whatever where you close your eyes and whatever where you close your eyes and whatever thoughts arise, whatever emotions arise, thoughts arise, whatever emotions arise, thoughts arise, whatever emotions arise, whatever ideas arise, to watch those and whatever ideas arise, to watch those and whatever ideas arise, to watch those and take an inventory of them. To just take an inventory of them. To just take an inventory of them. To just merely watch them show up and pass or merely watch them show up and pass or merely watch them show up and pass or maybe you become fixated on them for maybe you become fixated on them for maybe you become fixated on them for some period of time or maybe even just some period of time or maybe even just some period of time or maybe even just one for a long period of time. All of one for a long period of time. All of one for a long period of time. All of that is fine. In other words, whatever that is fine. In other words, whatever that is fine. In other words, whatever surfaces surfaces. That's open surfaces surfaces. That's open surfaces surfaces. That's open monitoring meditation, and that we know monitoring meditation, and that we know monitoring meditation, and that we know from brain imaging studies, and we know from brain imaging studies, and we know from brain imaging studies, and we know from measurements of dopamine in from measurements of dopamine in from measurements of dopamine in particular brain circuits, and we know particular brain circuits, and we know particular brain circuits, and we know from people who train with open from people who train with open from people who train with open monitoring meditation monitoring meditation monitoring meditation on a regular basis improves divergent on a regular basis improves divergent on a regular basis improves divergent thinking capability. So, in terms of thinking capability. So, in terms of thinking capability. So, in terms of tools, practicing open monitoring tools, practicing open monitoring tools, practicing open monitoring meditation or what I would just call meditation or what I would just call meditation or what I would just call open monitoring thinking open monitoring thinking open monitoring thinking is going to be immensely useful. And is going to be immensely useful. And is going to be immensely useful. And this is actually an opportunity to queue this is actually an opportunity to queue this is actually an opportunity to queue up something that I mentioned in our up something that I mentioned in our up something that I mentioned in our episode on meditation, which goes deep episode on meditation, which goes deep episode on meditation, which goes deep into the different kinds of meditation into the different kinds of meditation into the different kinds of meditation involving focus inward and outward, etc. involving focus inward and outward, etc. involving focus inward and outward, etc. You're welcome to check out that You're welcome to check out that You're welcome to check out that episode. It's at hubermanlab.com. episode. It's at hubermanlab.com. episode. It's at hubermanlab.com. But, the point is that But, the point is that But, the point is that rather than think about the word rather than think about the word rather than think about the word meditation, which carries a bunch of meditation, which carries a bunch of meditation, which carries a bunch of ideas about what it is and what it isn't ideas about what it is and what it isn't ideas about what it is and what it isn't and how to do it, and how to do it, and how to do it, meditation is really just a perceptual meditation is really just a perceptual meditation is really just a perceptual exercise. For instance, you could do a exercise. For instance, you could do a exercise. For instance, you could do a meditation where you look at a single meditation where you look at a single meditation where you look at a single point on a wall for 5 minutes and point on a wall for 5 minutes and point on a wall for 5 minutes and redirect your focus to that single point redirect your focus to that single point redirect your focus to that single point on a wall over and over again every time on a wall over and over again every time on a wall over and over again every time your mind drifts as it no doubt would, your mind drifts as it no doubt would, your mind drifts as it no doubt would, or to a tone in the room. You could or to a tone in the room. You could or to a tone in the room. You could attend to that and redirect to that. attend to that and redirect to that. attend to that and redirect to that. Rather than think about it as a Rather than think about it as a Rather than think about it as a meditation, it's really just a meditation, it's really just a meditation, it's really just a perceptual exercise. That's all that perceptual exercise. That's all that perceptual exercise. That's all that meditation is. So, open monitoring meditation is. So, open monitoring meditation is. So, open monitoring meditation is really just a form of meditation is really just a form of meditation is really just a form of perception where you're paying perception where you're paying perception where you're paying attention, you're perceiving your attention, you're perceiving your attention, you're perceiving your thoughts without laying judgment to thoughts without laying judgment to thoughts without laying judgment to those thoughts or trying not to lay those thoughts or trying not to lay those thoughts or trying not to lay judgment to those thoughts. And what judgment to those thoughts. And what judgment to those thoughts. And what people find is that they very quickly, people find is that they very quickly, people find is that they very quickly, within a few days, get better at doing within a few days, get better at doing within a few days, get better at doing open monitoring meditation. And open monitoring meditation. And open monitoring meditation. And fortunately, within it just a few days, fortunately, within it just a few days, fortunately, within it just a few days, and certainly within about a week or and certainly within about a week or and certainly within about a week or more of practice, and it doesn't even more of practice, and it doesn't even more of practice, and it doesn't even have to be daily practice, so although have to be daily practice, so although have to be daily practice, so although of course daily practice will accelerate of course daily practice will accelerate of course daily practice will accelerate the process further, people become the process further, people become the process further, people become significantly better at divergent significantly better at divergent significantly better at divergent thinking. And that's because of the thinking. And that's because of the thinking. And that's because of the dopamine circuits and in particular dopamine circuits and in particular dopamine circuits and in particular along the nigrostriatal path pathway along the nigrostriatal path pathway along the nigrostriatal path pathway becoming more active. And the wonderful becoming more active. And the wonderful becoming more active. And the wonderful thing is that when you repeat a practice thing is that when you repeat a practice thing is that when you repeat a practice and a particular neural circuit is and a particular neural circuit is and a particular neural circuit is engaged over and over again engaged over and over again engaged over and over again deliberately, that neural circuit deliberately, that neural circuit deliberately, that neural circuit becomes easier to engage, so-called becomes easier to engage, so-called becomes easier to engage, so-called neuroplasticity. So, I would encourage any of you that So, I would encourage any of you that So, I would encourage any of you that want to explore the creative process for want to explore the creative process for want to explore the creative process for whatever reason, or get better at the whatever reason, or get better at the whatever reason, or get better at the creative process, dedicate some amount creative process, dedicate some amount creative process, dedicate some amount of time, maybe even just 5 minutes every of time, maybe even just 5 minutes every of time, maybe even just 5 minutes every other day to doing this open monitoring other day to doing this open monitoring other day to doing this open monitoring meditation. I've tried this meditation, meditation. I've tried this meditation, meditation. I've tried this meditation, it's actually it's actually it's actually quite fun to do, because at least to me quite fun to do, because at least to me quite fun to do, because at least to me it feels a lot easier than the it feels a lot easier than the it feels a lot easier than the meditation associated with convergent meditation associated with convergent meditation associated with convergent thinking. Now, the convergent thinking thinking. Now, the convergent thinking thinking. Now, the convergent thinking meditation is the so-called focus meditation is the so-called focus meditation is the so-called focus attention meditation, and that's also attention meditation, and that's also attention meditation, and that's also described in the same study, and other described in the same study, and other described in the same study, and other studies have explored which particular studies have explored which particular studies have explored which particular brain networks it involves, and I can brain networks it involves, and I can brain networks it involves, and I can just tell you that focused attention just tell you that focused attention just tell you that focused attention meditation, which you can think of, or meditation, which you can think of, or meditation, which you can think of, or I'd prefer that you think of just as a I'd prefer that you think of just as a I'd prefer that you think of just as a perceptual exercise, involves sitting or perceptual exercise, involves sitting or perceptual exercise, involves sitting or lying down, closing your eyes, focusing lying down, closing your eyes, focusing lying down, closing your eyes, focusing either on your breath or some element of either on your breath or some element of either on your breath or some element of your body, could be you know, the tops your body, could be you know, the tops your body, could be you know, the tops of your knees or the clasp of your of your knees or the clasp of your of your knees or the clasp of your hands, it could be hands, it could be hands, it could be focusing on an auditory tone, you could focusing on an auditory tone, you could focusing on an auditory tone, you could even do it eyes open and stare at a even do it eyes open and stare at a even do it eyes open and stare at a point on a wall or a flame of light, point on a wall or a flame of light, point on a wall or a flame of light, what whatever it happens to be that what whatever it happens to be that what whatever it happens to be that allows you to redirect your focus to a allows you to redirect your focus to a allows you to redirect your focus to a particular location or idea or sound, particular location or idea or sound, particular location or idea or sound, that is known to improve your ability that is known to improve your ability that is known to improve your ability to engage convergent thinking, to engage convergent thinking, to engage convergent thinking, to quickly parse through or quickly parse through or quickly parse through or analyze a bunch of different choices, analyze a bunch of different choices, analyze a bunch of different choices, and to persist in choice selection, and to persist in choice selection, and to persist in choice selection, and therefore more rapidly arrive at the therefore more rapidly arrive at the therefore more rapidly arrive at the correct answer. This is well correct answer. This is well correct answer. This is well established, and in fact in the episode established, and in fact in the episode established, and in fact in the episode that I did with a wonderful guest, Dr. that I did with a wonderful guest, Dr. that I did with a wonderful guest, Dr. Wendy Suzuki from New York University, Wendy Suzuki from New York University, Wendy Suzuki from New York University, she talked about how a daily meditation she talked about how a daily meditation she talked about how a daily meditation of about 10 to 13 minutes, performed for of about 10 to 13 minutes, performed for of about 10 to 13 minutes, performed for about 8 weeks, that's what they explored about 8 weeks, that's what they explored about 8 weeks, that's what they explored in that study, greatly increases in that study, greatly increases in that study, greatly increases people's ability to focus, and in fact people's ability to focus, and in fact people's ability to focus, and in fact their memory, and that's exactly the their memory, and that's exactly the their memory, and that's exactly the point, which is that convergent point, which is that convergent point, which is that convergent thinking, as I mentioned before, thinking, as I mentioned before, thinking, as I mentioned before, requires persistence, focus, and access requires persistence, focus, and access requires persistence, focus, and access to specific memories. So, if you are to specific memories. So, if you are to specific memories. So, if you are somebody who wants to get better at somebody who wants to get better at somebody who wants to get better at focusing, that is the meditation for focusing, that is the meditation for focusing, that is the meditation for you. However, because today we're you. However, because today we're you. However, because today we're talking about creativity, if you are talking about creativity, if you are talking about creativity, if you are somebody who wants to get better at somebody who wants to get better at somebody who wants to get better at divergent thinking and convergent divergent thinking and convergent divergent thinking and convergent thinking, the two elements of thinking, the two elements of thinking, the two elements of creativity, that is, creativity, that is, creativity, that is, I would encourage you to do a dual I would encourage you to do a dual I would encourage you to do a dual meditation. That is, a meditation that meditation. That is, a meditation that meditation. That is, a meditation that starts with open monitoring starts with open monitoring starts with open monitoring for maybe 5 to 10 minutes, and then for maybe 5 to 10 minutes, and then for maybe 5 to 10 minutes, and then transitions to focused attention transitions to focused attention transitions to focused attention for maybe 5 to 10 minutes. Because for maybe 5 to 10 minutes. Because for maybe 5 to 10 minutes. Because the positioning of divergent thinking the positioning of divergent thinking the positioning of divergent thinking and then convergent thinking close and then convergent thinking close and then convergent thinking close together more closely resembles what the creative more closely resembles what the creative more closely resembles what the creative process really is and what it typically process really is and what it typically process really is and what it typically involves. Most of us would love to have involves. Most of us would love to have involves. Most of us would love to have a situation where we can spend a morning a situation where we can spend a morning a situation where we can spend a morning or a day or a week brainstorming. Just or a day or a week brainstorming. Just or a day or a week brainstorming. Just kind of brainstorming. Whatever we think kind of brainstorming. Whatever we think kind of brainstorming. Whatever we think about is fine. That's divergent about is fine. That's divergent about is fine. That's divergent thinking. Whatever elements, just throw thinking. Whatever elements, just throw thinking. Whatever elements, just throw them up on the whiteboard. We sometimes them up on the whiteboard. We sometimes them up on the whiteboard. We sometimes see people in companies doing this at see people in companies doing this at see people in companies doing this at retreats. You you bring people into a retreats. You you bring people into a retreats. You you bring people into a novel environment. You say, "Let's just novel environment. You say, "Let's just novel environment. You say, "Let's just forget all the rules and let's just come forget all the rules and let's just come forget all the rules and let's just come up with new ideas about some up with new ideas about some up with new ideas about some thing, new uses of something, new thing, new uses of something, new thing, new uses of something, new strategies." And you and nothing is too strategies." And you and nothing is too strategies." And you and nothing is too crazy. Nothing's off limits. And sure, crazy. Nothing's off limits. And sure, crazy. Nothing's off limits. And sure, that's a useful exercise, so-called that's a useful exercise, so-called that's a useful exercise, so-called brainstorming. But at some point, brainstorming. But at some point, brainstorming. But at some point, there's the requirement to cross off there's the requirement to cross off there's the requirement to cross off things. And typically, that's done later things. And typically, that's done later things. And typically, that's done later in the retreat or later in the meeting in the retreat or later in the meeting in the retreat or later in the meeting or later in the weekend. or later in the weekend. or later in the weekend. And that's a wonderful way to approach And that's a wonderful way to approach And that's a wonderful way to approach creativity and to try and be creative. creativity and to try and be creative. creativity and to try and be creative. But not a lot of people train for that But not a lot of people train for that But not a lot of people train for that on a regular basis. So, what I just on a regular basis. So, what I just on a regular basis. So, what I just described to you are research-tested described to you are research-tested described to you are research-tested tools for training for divergent tools for training for divergent tools for training for divergent thinking and convergent thinking. And I thinking and convergent thinking. And I thinking and convergent thinking. And I would encourage people who are would encourage people who are would encourage people who are interested in being more creative to try interested in being more creative to try interested in being more creative to try and do these and do these and do these on a somewhat regular basis. If not on a somewhat regular basis. If not on a somewhat regular basis. If not every day, then certainly a few times a every day, then certainly a few times a every day, then certainly a few times a week or more. week or more. week or more. Certainly, the more you do it, the Certainly, the more you do it, the Certainly, the more you do it, the better you're going to get at it. That's better you're going to get at it. That's better you're going to get at it. That's well demonstrated in the literature. And well demonstrated in the literature. And well demonstrated in the literature. And if you're somebody who's very consistent if you're somebody who's very consistent if you're somebody who's very consistent doing maybe 5 minutes of open monitoring doing maybe 5 minutes of open monitoring doing maybe 5 minutes of open monitoring meditation and 5 minutes immediately meditation and 5 minutes immediately meditation and 5 minutes immediately after of focus attention meditation after of focus attention meditation after of focus attention meditation daily, you can expect that you will get daily, you can expect that you will get daily, you can expect that you will get very, very good at these processes very, very good at these processes very, very good at these processes uh very, very quickly. Now, I'm not uh very, very quickly. Now, I'm not uh very, very quickly. Now, I'm not going to go into a lengthy description going to go into a lengthy description going to go into a lengthy description of the different uh lines of evidence of the different uh lines of evidence of the different uh lines of evidence that the corresponding areas of the that the corresponding areas of the that the corresponding areas of the brain are active in each of these brain are active in each of these brain are active in each of these different kinds of meditation, but what different kinds of meditation, but what different kinds of meditation, but what I can tell you is that there've been I can tell you is that there've been I can tell you is that there've been some beautiful, what are called, loss of some beautiful, what are called, loss of some beautiful, what are called, loss of function studies, where particular brain function studies, where particular brain function studies, where particular brain areas are either depleted of dopamine or areas are either depleted of dopamine or areas are either depleted of dopamine or where dopamine in some cases, I guess where dopamine in some cases, I guess where dopamine in some cases, I guess what we would call gain of function what we would call gain of function what we would call gain of function studies, although not the kind of gain studies, although not the kind of gain studies, although not the kind of gain of function studies associated with of function studies associated with of function studies associated with virology, different gain of function virology, different gain of function virology, different gain of function studies, where you enhance the level of studies, where you enhance the level of studies, where you enhance the level of dopamine in the brain. What you find is dopamine in the brain. What you find is dopamine in the brain. What you find is that both divergent and convergent that both divergent and convergent that both divergent and convergent thinking are enhanced when levels of dopamine are enhanced when levels of dopamine are enhanced when levels of dopamine are elevated. Now, elevated. Now, elevated. Now, we're not necessarily talking about we're not necessarily talking about we're not necessarily talking about pharmacology here. It turns out that pharmacology here. It turns out that pharmacology here. It turns out that there are other ways to elevate dopamine there are other ways to elevate dopamine there are other ways to elevate dopamine that make us better at divergent and that make us better at divergent and that make us better at divergent and convergent thinking. In particular, convergent thinking. In particular, convergent thinking. In particular, by using mood. And now I'd like to talk by using mood. And now I'd like to talk by using mood. And now I'd like to talk about how what mood you are in when you about how what mood you are in when you about how what mood you are in when you happen to start a creative process or happen to start a creative process or happen to start a creative process or try and do a sort of training such as try and do a sort of training such as try and do a sort of training such as open monitoring meditation or focus open monitoring meditation or focus open monitoring meditation or focus meditation, how your mood relates to meditation, how your mood relates to meditation, how your mood relates to your level of dopamine at baseline, what your level of dopamine at baseline, what your level of dopamine at baseline, what we call your sort of tonic, as it's we call your sort of tonic, as it's we call your sort of tonic, as it's called, meaning consistent or ongoing called, meaning consistent or ongoing called, meaning consistent or ongoing level of dopamine, how that dictates level of dopamine, how that dictates level of dopamine, how that dictates whether or not you are going to be whether or not you are going to be whether or not you are going to be better at one particular aspect of the better at one particular aspect of the better at one particular aspect of the creative process or another and how you creative process or another and how you creative process or another and how you can enhance your creativity in the very can enhance your creativity in the very can enhance your creativity in the very short term, very quickly, using tools short term, very quickly, using tools short term, very quickly, using tools that are known to trigger additional that are known to trigger additional that are known to trigger additional release of dopamine, which in some cases release of dopamine, which in some cases release of dopamine, which in some cases is good and in some cases is bad, I is good and in some cases is bad, I is good and in some cases is bad, I should mention, and in other words, should mention, and in other words, should mention, and in other words, determine how you feel in one moment determine how you feel in one moment determine how you feel in one moment should dictate what sort of tool you should dictate what sort of tool you should dictate what sort of tool you should use in order to become more should use in order to become more should use in order to become more creative. The relationship between mood creative. The relationship between mood creative. The relationship between mood and creativity is a fascinating one that and creativity is a fascinating one that and creativity is a fascinating one that is bridged by one main feature, which is bridged by one main feature, which is bridged by one main feature, which is the amount of dopamine present in this the amount of dopamine present in this the amount of dopamine present in this nigrostriatal pathway. And there's a nigrostriatal pathway. And there's a nigrostriatal pathway. And there's a really wonderful correlate or measure of really wonderful correlate or measure of really wonderful correlate or measure of the amount of dopamine that's active in the amount of dopamine that's active in the amount of dopamine that's active in that pathway that can be addressed that pathway that can be addressed that pathway that can be addressed non-invasively in the laboratory. As I non-invasively in the laboratory. As I non-invasively in the laboratory. As I mentioned, the nigrostriatal pathway is mentioned, the nigrostriatal pathway is mentioned, the nigrostriatal pathway is involved in movement and in eye involved in movement and in eye involved in movement and in eye blinking, which of course is a movement. blinking, which of course is a movement. blinking, which of course is a movement. It's not a movement of the sort that we It's not a movement of the sort that we It's not a movement of the sort that we typically think of when we think of typically think of when we think of typically think of when we think of movements, but nonetheless it relies on movements, but nonetheless it relies on movements, but nonetheless it relies on dopamine levels in this pathway. And in dopamine levels in this pathway. And in dopamine levels in this pathway. And in fact, we can state fact, we can state fact, we can state very confidently that when dopamine very confidently that when dopamine very confidently that when dopamine levels are elevated, the blinking reflex levels are elevated, the blinking reflex levels are elevated, the blinking reflex is more active. People just blink more. is more active. People just blink more. is more active. People just blink more. When dopamine levels are lower or less When dopamine levels are lower or less When dopamine levels are lower or less active in this pathway, people tend to active in this pathway, people tend to active in this pathway, people tend to blink less. So, blink frequency is a blink less. So, blink frequency is a blink less. So, blink frequency is a common measure in studies of dopamine common measure in studies of dopamine common measure in studies of dopamine within this pathway within this pathway within this pathway that relate to creativity. The work that relate to creativity. The work that relate to creativity. The work that I'm about to describe is largely the I'm about to describe is largely the I'm about to describe is largely the work of two authors who have done work of two authors who have done work of two authors who have done wonderful work in across several papers. wonderful work in across several papers. wonderful work in across several papers. Unfortunately for me, their names are Unfortunately for me, their names are Unfortunately for me, their names are difficult to pronounce, so I apologize difficult to pronounce, so I apologize difficult to pronounce, so I apologize to them and their relatives for to them and their relatives for to them and their relatives for what is sure to be incorrect what is sure to be incorrect what is sure to be incorrect pronunciation, but the last names of pronunciation, but the last names of pronunciation, but the last names of these authors are Chermahini and Hommel. these authors are Chermahini and Hommel. these authors are Chermahini and Hommel. They're in the Netherlands. So, They're in the Netherlands. So, They're in the Netherlands. So, Chermahini and Hommel done a number of Chermahini and Hommel done a number of Chermahini and Hommel done a number of different papers different papers different papers or studies rather of the relationship or studies rather of the relationship or studies rather of the relationship between blinking, mood, and creativity, between blinking, mood, and creativity, between blinking, mood, and creativity, in particular divergent thinking. What in particular divergent thinking. What in particular divergent thinking. What they found is that if people are they found is that if people are they found is that if people are blinking fairly often and they measure blinking fairly often and they measure blinking fairly often and they measure their mood through subjective tests, and their mood through subjective tests, and their mood through subjective tests, and if they were to do brain imaging, which if they were to do brain imaging, which if they were to do brain imaging, which other studies have done, they find is other studies have done, they find is other studies have done, they find is that those people can engage in that those people can engage in that those people can engage in divergent thinking very easily. In other divergent thinking very easily. In other divergent thinking very easily. In other words, being in a good mood facilitates words, being in a good mood facilitates words, being in a good mood facilitates divergent thinking. divergent thinking. divergent thinking. Now, some of you might immediately say, Now, some of you might immediately say, Now, some of you might immediately say, "Well, duh. If you're in a good mood, "Well, duh. If you're in a good mood, "Well, duh. If you're in a good mood, you can kind of be more playful about you can kind of be more playful about you can kind of be more playful about the exploration about what could happen the exploration about what could happen the exploration about what could happen with these notes of music or these with these notes of music or these with these notes of music or these foods, et cetera." But it's not so foods, et cetera." But it's not so foods, et cetera." But it's not so obvious because it turns out that if obvious because it turns out that if obvious because it turns out that if your levels are very, very high your levels are very, very high your levels are very, very high and this can be measured non-invasively and this can be measured non-invasively and this can be measured non-invasively through the frequency of blinks or it through the frequency of blinks or it through the frequency of blinks or it can be measured more invasively through can be measured more invasively through can be measured more invasively through brain imaging, even through blood draws brain imaging, even through blood draws brain imaging, even through blood draws or other methods to measure dopamine. If or other methods to measure dopamine. If or other methods to measure dopamine. If dopamine levels are very, very high, dopamine levels are very, very high, dopamine levels are very, very high, what you observe is that divergent what you observe is that divergent what you observe is that divergent thinking is actually very, very poor. thinking is actually very, very poor. thinking is actually very, very poor. Now, a naturally-occurring, Now, a naturally-occurring, Now, a naturally-occurring, truly pathological example of this would truly pathological example of this would truly pathological example of this would be something like manic bipolar disorder be something like manic bipolar disorder be something like manic bipolar disorder where somebody is in the manic phase or where somebody is in the manic phase or where somebody is in the manic phase or somebody who has taken methamphetamine somebody who has taken methamphetamine somebody who has taken methamphetamine or cocaine, what tends to happen is that or cocaine, what tends to happen is that or cocaine, what tends to happen is that they have lots and lots of ideas, all of they have lots and lots of ideas, all of they have lots and lots of ideas, all of those ideas seem really exciting to those ideas seem really exciting to those ideas seem really exciting to them, but if you were to talk to them them, but if you were to talk to them them, but if you were to talk to them for any given moment, they would be very for any given moment, they would be very for any given moment, they would be very fixated on one particular tunnel of fixated on one particular tunnel of fixated on one particular tunnel of ideas. And by being fixated on one particular And by being fixated on one particular And by being fixated on one particular tunnel of ideas, like the idea that tunnel of ideas, like the idea that tunnel of ideas, like the idea that they're going to run for president they're going to run for president they're going to run for president tomorrow, this is unfortunately typical tomorrow, this is unfortunately typical tomorrow, this is unfortunately typical of people who have bipolar, which is not of people who have bipolar, which is not of people who have bipolar, which is not to say that everybody who runs for to say that everybody who runs for to say that everybody who runs for president is bipolar, rather, people who president is bipolar, rather, people who president is bipolar, rather, people who are bipolar often have these delusions are bipolar often have these delusions are bipolar often have these delusions of grandeur that they're somehow going of grandeur that they're somehow going of grandeur that they're somehow going to be presidents simply because they to be presidents simply because they to be presidents simply because they decided to and that they were selected decided to and that they were selected decided to and that they were selected to do this, etc., etc. to do this, etc., etc. to do this, etc., etc. Ideas about themselves and other people Ideas about themselves and other people Ideas about themselves and other people that are very constrained, in other that are very constrained, in other that are very constrained, in other words, not very divergent. So, divergent words, not very divergent. So, divergent words, not very divergent. So, divergent thinking is favored by having elevated thinking is favored by having elevated thinking is favored by having elevated levels of dopamine, levels of dopamine, levels of dopamine, but not too high. but not too high. but not too high. Well, that of course creates a Well, that of course creates a Well, that of course creates a conundrum. How do you know how much conundrum. How do you know how much conundrum. How do you know how much dopamine you need and how to achieve dopamine you need and how to achieve dopamine you need and how to achieve those elevated levels of dopamine? Well, those elevated levels of dopamine? Well, those elevated levels of dopamine? Well, leaving aside people who are suffering leaving aside people who are suffering leaving aside people who are suffering from a manic episode, from a manic episode, from a manic episode, what Chermahini and Hommel have discovered is Chermahini and Hommel have discovered is Chermahini and Hommel have discovered is that if people are in sort of a low that if people are in sort of a low that if people are in sort of a low mood, they're not feeling great, maybe they're not feeling great, maybe they're not feeling great, maybe they're depressed, but they're just not feeling depressed, but they're just not feeling depressed, but they're just not feeling that great. They feel, you know, on a that great. They feel, you know, on a that great. They feel, you know, on a scale of 1 to 10 around a two or a scale of 1 to 10 around a two or a scale of 1 to 10 around a two or a three, maybe a four. The probability three, maybe a four. The probability three, maybe a four. The probability that they will be able to engage that they will be able to engage that they will be able to engage effectively in divergent thinking is effectively in divergent thinking is effectively in divergent thinking is quite low. However, the good news is quite low. However, the good news is quite low. However, the good news is they are typically very susceptible they are typically very susceptible they are typically very susceptible to elevations in mood through observing to elevations in mood through observing to elevations in mood through observing or hearing positive stories, listening or hearing positive stories, listening or hearing positive stories, listening to music that they like, any kind of to music that they like, any kind of to music that they like, any kind of so-called inspirational stimuli. Now, so-called inspirational stimuli. Now, so-called inspirational stimuli. Now, this is good news. What this means is this is good news. What this means is this is good news. What this means is that if you're somebody who's not that if you're somebody who's not that if you're somebody who's not feeling very motivated feeling very motivated feeling very motivated to engage in divergent thinking, you're to engage in divergent thinking, you're to engage in divergent thinking, you're not feeling very creative, you're not feeling very creative, you're not feeling very creative, you're feeling a little low, feeling a little low, feeling a little low, the thing to do in that case is actually the thing to do in that case is actually the thing to do in that case is actually to take external stimuli, to take external stimuli, to take external stimuli, things that you know that you like, and things that you know that you like, and things that you know that you like, and start interacting with those stimuli to start interacting with those stimuli to start interacting with those stimuli to get your mood elevated, and then to get your mood elevated, and then to get your mood elevated, and then to engage in divergent thinking. engage in divergent thinking. engage in divergent thinking. However, what Chermahini However, what Chermahini However, what Chermahini and Hommel have also shown is that if and Hommel have also shown is that if and Hommel have also shown is that if people are already in a very people are already in a very people are already in a very good mood, good mood, good mood, elevating dopamine further is not elevating dopamine further is not elevating dopamine further is not conducive and in fact is detrimental to conducive and in fact is detrimental to conducive and in fact is detrimental to divergent thinking. And in that case, divergent thinking. And in that case, divergent thinking. And in that case, they would be better off, they would be better off, they would be better off, for example, not engaging in any for example, not engaging in any for example, not engaging in any activities or activities or activities or you know, taking anything in the way of you know, taking anything in the way of you know, taking anything in the way of pharmacology that would further increase pharmacology that would further increase pharmacology that would further increase their dopamine, their dopamine, their dopamine, and probably limiting the amount of and probably limiting the amount of and probably limiting the amount of external stimuli that are coming in external stimuli that are coming in external stimuli that are coming in through music and visual stimuli, and through music and visual stimuli, and through music and visual stimuli, and really focusing on divergent thinking in really focusing on divergent thinking in really focusing on divergent thinking in the creative process immediately. Now, the creative process immediately. Now, the creative process immediately. Now, this is important. In an earlier this is important. In an earlier this is important. In an earlier episode, both on bipolar and on other episode, both on bipolar and on other episode, both on bipolar and on other forms of depression, I talked about how forms of depression, I talked about how forms of depression, I talked about how rates of bipolar manic episodes rates of bipolar manic episodes rates of bipolar manic episodes and dopamine levels and creativity tend and dopamine levels and creativity tend and dopamine levels and creativity tend to be correlated. Now, unfortunately, to be correlated. Now, unfortunately, to be correlated. Now, unfortunately, rates of suicide are 20 to 30 times rates of suicide are 20 to 30 times rates of suicide are 20 to 30 times higher in people who have bipolar higher in people who have bipolar higher in people who have bipolar disorder as well, and so there's a whole disorder as well, and so there's a whole disorder as well, and so there's a whole dark side to the bipolar disorder that dark side to the bipolar disorder that dark side to the bipolar disorder that makes it a very, very dangerous and makes it a very, very dangerous and makes it a very, very dangerous and important disorder to treat. important disorder to treat. important disorder to treat. But, for sake of the discussion of for sake of the discussion of for sake of the discussion of creativity, what this means is that we creativity, what this means is that we creativity, what this means is that we all need to develop some sort of all need to develop some sort of all need to develop some sort of intuitive sense as to whether or not our intuitive sense as to whether or not our intuitive sense as to whether or not our mood is mood is mood is Suppose we could bin this into three Suppose we could bin this into three Suppose we could bin this into three categories. It's kind of um categories. It's kind of um categories. It's kind of um yes, you know, happy, excited, positive yes, you know, happy, excited, positive yes, you know, happy, excited, positive mood, and of course there are going to mood, and of course there are going to mood, and of course there are going to be levels to that. be levels to that. be levels to that. Low, kind of like mhm, or kind of meh, Low, kind of like mhm, or kind of meh, Low, kind of like mhm, or kind of meh, kind of in the middle. So, if you're in kind of in the middle. So, if you're in kind of in the middle. So, if you're in a low mood or kind of meh mood, by all a low mood or kind of meh mood, by all a low mood or kind of meh mood, by all means engage in something probably for means engage in something probably for means engage in something probably for about, you know, 5 to 30 minutes that about, you know, 5 to 30 minutes that about, you know, 5 to 30 minutes that elevates your mood before trying to elevates your mood before trying to elevates your mood before trying to engage in divergent thinking. However, engage in divergent thinking. However, engage in divergent thinking. However, if you happen to be in a pretty positive if you happen to be in a pretty positive if you happen to be in a pretty positive mood, even if you're not 10 out of 10 on mood, even if you're not 10 out of 10 on mood, even if you're not 10 out of 10 on mood, then bringing in additional mood, then bringing in additional mood, then bringing in additional stimuli to increase your levels of stimuli to increase your levels of stimuli to increase your levels of dopamine will not help you and in fact dopamine will not help you and in fact dopamine will not help you and in fact can hurt the divergent thinking process. can hurt the divergent thinking process. can hurt the divergent thinking process. So, in that case, I would also encourage So, in that case, I would also encourage So, in that case, I would also encourage you to think about something that was you to think about something that was you to think about something that was discussed on a previous episode, which discussed on a previous episode, which discussed on a previous episode, which is the particular effects of caffeine. is the particular effects of caffeine. is the particular effects of caffeine. I'll get into caffeine a little bit I'll get into caffeine a little bit I'll get into caffeine a little bit later, but just very briefly, later, but just very briefly, later, but just very briefly, caffeine increases levels of dopamine caffeine increases levels of dopamine caffeine increases levels of dopamine receptors. So, it's not that caffeine is receptors. So, it's not that caffeine is receptors. So, it's not that caffeine is bad. In fact, caffeine can be bad. In fact, caffeine can be bad. In fact, caffeine can be neuroprotective. It can enhance focus neuroprotective. It can enhance focus neuroprotective. It can enhance focus and so forth. and so forth. and so forth. But, divergent thinking is sort of But, divergent thinking is sort of But, divergent thinking is sort of anti-focus. It requires just enough anti-focus. It requires just enough anti-focus. It requires just enough focus to be able to come up with new focus to be able to come up with new focus to be able to come up with new ideas, but you actually don't want to be ideas, but you actually don't want to be ideas, but you actually don't want to be overly focused. Focus is more conducive overly focused. Focus is more conducive overly focused. Focus is more conducive to convergent thinking. In fact, that's to convergent thinking. In fact, that's to convergent thinking. In fact, that's exactly what the literature shows is exactly what the literature shows is exactly what the literature shows is that caffeine, because its effects on that caffeine, because its effects on that caffeine, because its effects on epinephrine and related systems in the epinephrine and related systems in the epinephrine and related systems in the brain like adenosine, brain like adenosine, brain like adenosine, but mainly because of its effects on but mainly because of its effects on but mainly because of its effects on persistence and focus is very conducive persistence and focus is very conducive persistence and focus is very conducive to convergent thinking. So, if you're to convergent thinking. So, if you're to convergent thinking. So, if you're somebody who wants to explore creativity somebody who wants to explore creativity somebody who wants to explore creativity and wants to get better at creativity, and wants to get better at creativity, and wants to get better at creativity, you now know that you need to engage in you now know that you need to engage in you now know that you need to engage in divergent thinking and then afterwards divergent thinking and then afterwards divergent thinking and then afterwards convergent thinking. convergent thinking. convergent thinking. I would recommend not using stimulants I would recommend not using stimulants I would recommend not using stimulants such as caffeine prior to divergent such as caffeine prior to divergent such as caffeine prior to divergent thinking, but rather use stimulants, if thinking, but rather use stimulants, if thinking, but rather use stimulants, if you do want to use stimulants such as you do want to use stimulants such as you do want to use stimulants such as caffeine, prior to convergent thinking. caffeine, prior to convergent thinking. caffeine, prior to convergent thinking. And in fact, in formulating the And in fact, in formulating the And in fact, in formulating the architecture of today's episode, which architecture of today's episode, which architecture of today's episode, which took me many hours across many different took me many hours across many different took me many hours across many different days, I confess, I actually decided to days, I confess, I actually decided to days, I confess, I actually decided to try this. In trying to imagine the try this. In trying to imagine the try this. In trying to imagine the different configurations and ways that different configurations and ways that different configurations and ways that this information can be organized, I this information can be organized, I this information can be organized, I deliberately abstained from caffeine deliberately abstained from caffeine deliberately abstained from caffeine during those bouts of work. And when during those bouts of work. And when during those bouts of work. And when structuring everything according to the structuring everything according to the structuring everything according to the decisions I had already made, I decisions I had already made, I decisions I had already made, I purposely ingested caffeine prior to purposely ingested caffeine prior to purposely ingested caffeine prior to that. Now, of course, constructing a that. Now, of course, constructing a that. Now, of course, constructing a podcast episode is not podcast episode is not podcast episode is not really the ultimate example of a really the ultimate example of a really the ultimate example of a creative act because of course it's creative act because of course it's creative act because of course it's taking existing information it's taking existing information it's taking existing information it's arranging it in novel ways, but it arranging it in novel ways, but it arranging it in novel ways, but it doesn't necessarily allow key concepts doesn't necessarily allow key concepts doesn't necessarily allow key concepts to pop out in the way that for instance to pop out in the way that for instance to pop out in the way that for instance Banksy or Rothko or an Escher would pop Banksy or Rothko or an Escher would pop Banksy or Rothko or an Escher would pop out, okay? I'm certainly not naive out, okay? I'm certainly not naive out, okay? I'm certainly not naive in thinking that it does, but the in thinking that it does, but the in thinking that it does, but the principle of is what's important here. principle of is what's important here. principle of is what's important here. You need divergent thinking, you need You need divergent thinking, you need You need divergent thinking, you need convergent thinking. You need some level convergent thinking. You need some level convergent thinking. You need some level of elevated dopamine in order to engage of elevated dopamine in order to engage of elevated dopamine in order to engage in divergent thinking. in divergent thinking. in divergent thinking. But not so high that it starts to But not so high that it starts to But not so high that it starts to inhibit that process. Now, if you were inhibit that process. Now, if you were inhibit that process. Now, if you were to come into the laboratory, this could to come into the laboratory, this could to come into the laboratory, this could be measured by your frequency of be measured by your frequency of be measured by your frequency of blinking. For better for worse, we can't actually For better for worse, we can't actually For better for worse, we can't actually count the number of times that we blink count the number of times that we blink count the number of times that we blink unless we're actively paying attention unless we're actively paying attention unless we're actively paying attention to it. So, I don't recommend that you to it. So, I don't recommend that you to it. So, I don't recommend that you pay attention to your blinking because pay attention to your blinking because pay attention to your blinking because that will take you off course from all that will take you off course from all that will take you off course from all the other important things of your life. the other important things of your life. the other important things of your life. Um and how many times you're blinking is Um and how many times you're blinking is Um and how many times you're blinking is rarely an important thing for you to pay rarely an important thing for you to pay rarely an important thing for you to pay attention to. attention to. attention to. You can, however, learn to calibrate You can, however, learn to calibrate You can, however, learn to calibrate your mood, that is to assess your mood, your mood, that is to assess your mood, your mood, that is to assess your mood, whether or not you're in low, medium, or whether or not you're in low, medium, or whether or not you're in low, medium, or high mood, no problem using those that high mood, no problem using those that high mood, no problem using those that broad binning, right? You could scale it broad binning, right? You could scale it broad binning, right? You could scale it on 1 to 10, and then decide whether or on 1 to 10, and then decide whether or on 1 to 10, and then decide whether or not you're going to use some not you're going to use some not you're going to use some dopamine-elevating stimulus from the dopamine-elevating stimulus from the dopamine-elevating stimulus from the outside. Again, could be music, could be outside. Again, could be music, could be outside. Again, could be music, could be exercise is an excellent way to elevate exercise is an excellent way to elevate exercise is an excellent way to elevate dopamine. I'll talk about another dopamine. I'll talk about another dopamine. I'll talk about another well-established one from the from the well-established one from the from the well-established one from the from the research literature that is known to research literature that is known to research literature that is known to elevate dopamine elevate dopamine elevate dopamine by 65% in the particular pathway that's by 65% in the particular pathway that's by 65% in the particular pathway that's relevant for divergent thinking, relevant for divergent thinking, relevant for divergent thinking, and to do that without any pharmacology. and to do that without any pharmacology. and to do that without any pharmacology. I'll share that with you in a moment. I'll share that with you in a moment. I'll share that with you in a moment. But you need to decide for you in a But you need to decide for you in a But you need to decide for you in a given moment or in a given work attempt given moment or in a given work attempt given moment or in a given work attempt at creativity what you need and apply at creativity what you need and apply at creativity what you need and apply accordingly because as Cheramini and accordingly because as Cheramini and accordingly because as Cheramini and Hommel have shown, Hommel have shown, Hommel have shown, whether or not you are in a low mood, whether or not you are in a low mood, whether or not you are in a low mood, medium mood, or high mood really can medium mood, or high mood really can medium mood, or high mood really can determine whether or not you'll be able determine whether or not you'll be able determine whether or not you'll be able to access to access to access divergent thinking or not. Now, if divergent thinking or not. Now, if divergent thinking or not. Now, if you're somebody who already has an idea you're somebody who already has an idea you're somebody who already has an idea in mind, you're very excited about a in mind, you're very excited about a in mind, you're very excited about a creative idea and you want to hone it. creative idea and you want to hone it. creative idea and you want to hone it. You want to shape it. You want to You want to shape it. You want to You want to shape it. You want to pressure test it. We'll talk a little pressure test it. We'll talk a little pressure test it. We'll talk a little bit more about what that means in a bit more about what that means in a bit more about what that means in a three-step process in just a little bit. three-step process in just a little bit. three-step process in just a little bit. I would strongly encourage you to look I would strongly encourage you to look I would strongly encourage you to look at that process as a very linear process at that process as a very linear process at that process as a very linear process in which there are right and wrong in which there are right and wrong in which there are right and wrong answers. And there the answers. And there the answers. And there the use of caffeine at appropriate dosages use of caffeine at appropriate dosages use of caffeine at appropriate dosages and dosages for caffeine that are safe and dosages for caffeine that are safe and dosages for caffeine that are safe and in fact performance-enhancing were and in fact performance-enhancing were and in fact performance-enhancing were covered in the episode on caffeine. covered in the episode on caffeine. covered in the episode on caffeine. Turns out it's 1 to 3 mg per kilogram of Turns out it's 1 to 3 mg per kilogram of Turns out it's 1 to 3 mg per kilogram of body weight, by the way. body weight, by the way. body weight, by the way. And if you want to leverage caffeine or if you want to leverage caffeine or if you want to leverage caffeine or maybe even other forms of healthy, legal maybe even other forms of healthy, legal maybe even other forms of healthy, legal stimulants, those are covered in the stimulants, those are covered in the stimulants, those are covered in the caffeine episode and I'll talk about a caffeine episode and I'll talk about a caffeine episode and I'll talk about a few more a little bit later. So, to few more a little bit later. So, to few more a little bit later. So, to summarize this segment and also just to summarize this segment and also just to summarize this segment and also just to make a more general point, I think it's make a more general point, I think it's make a more general point, I think it's very useful for people to start to pay very useful for people to start to pay very useful for people to start to pay attention to what their tonic level, attention to what their tonic level, attention to what their tonic level, that is their baseline level of dopamine that is their baseline level of dopamine that is their baseline level of dopamine ought to be ought to be ought to be in this nigrostriatal circuit and in this nigrostriatal circuit and in this nigrostriatal circuit and in other circuits. And to do that by other circuits. And to do that by other circuits. And to do that by learning to assess one's mood and pay learning to assess one's mood and pay learning to assess one's mood and pay attention to attention to attention to what kind of mood they happen to be in. what kind of mood they happen to be in. what kind of mood they happen to be in. And then to leverage tools, behavioral And then to leverage tools, behavioral And then to leverage tools, behavioral tools, maybe pharmacologic tools, maybe pharmacologic tools, maybe pharmacologic tools, provided they're safe and they're legal, provided they're safe and they're legal, provided they're safe and they're legal, in order to either increase dopamine or in order to either increase dopamine or in order to either increase dopamine or to elect not to increase dopamine in to elect not to increase dopamine in to elect not to increase dopamine in order to access the creative process. order to access the creative process. order to access the creative process. Now, I've mentioned pharmacology a few Now, I've mentioned pharmacology a few Now, I've mentioned pharmacology a few times and I'd like to talk about that times and I'd like to talk about that times and I'd like to talk about that just a little bit more in the context of just a little bit more in the context of just a little bit more in the context of dopamine. First of all, First of all, First of all, there is no supplement or drug that there is no supplement or drug that there is no supplement or drug that you or anyone else can take that will you or anyone else can take that will you or anyone else can take that will selectively elevate dopamine in only one selectively elevate dopamine in only one selectively elevate dopamine in only one of the four circuits that I described of the four circuits that I described of the four circuits that I described before. Okay, this is just a state of before. Okay, this is just a state of before. Okay, this is just a state of the technology nowadays. If you take a the technology nowadays. If you take a the technology nowadays. If you take a pill or even if you were to inject some pill or even if you were to inject some pill or even if you were to inject some substance, again, I would hope this substance, again, I would hope this substance, again, I would hope this would be legal um would be legal um would be legal um and safe, etc. Whatever mode of and safe, etc. Whatever mode of and safe, etc. Whatever mode of delivery, there is no technology that exists at there is no technology that exists at there is no technology that exists at this time that would allow you to this time that would allow you to this time that would allow you to selectively amplify dopamine, for selectively amplify dopamine, for selectively amplify dopamine, for instance, just in the nigrostriatal instance, just in the nigrostriatal instance, just in the nigrostriatal pathway or just in the mesocortical pathway or just in the mesocortical pathway or just in the mesocortical pathway. Again, the nigrostriatal pathway. Again, the nigrostriatal pathway. Again, the nigrostriatal pathway associated with divergent pathway associated with divergent pathway associated with divergent thinking, the mesocortical pathway associated with the mesocortical pathway associated with the mesocortical pathway associated with cognitive persistence and convergent cognitive persistence and convergent cognitive persistence and convergent thinking. If you were to amplify dopamine levels, If you were to amplify dopamine levels, If you were to amplify dopamine levels, for instance, by taking the amino acid for instance, by taking the amino acid for instance, by taking the amino acid precursor to dopamine L-tyrosine, precursor to dopamine L-tyrosine, precursor to dopamine L-tyrosine, something that I occasionally do to something that I occasionally do to something that I occasionally do to enhance dopamine levels for the sake of enhance dopamine levels for the sake of enhance dopamine levels for the sake of work or energy, 500 mg or 1,000 mg even work or energy, 500 mg or 1,000 mg even work or energy, 500 mg or 1,000 mg even of L-tyrosine, sometimes I'll combine of L-tyrosine, sometimes I'll combine of L-tyrosine, sometimes I'll combine that with other things like alpha-GPC, that with other things like alpha-GPC, that with other things like alpha-GPC, it's going to enhance dopamine it's going to enhance dopamine it's going to enhance dopamine transmission in the nigrostriatal transmission in the nigrostriatal transmission in the nigrostriatal pathway, the mesocortical pathway, but pathway, the mesocortical pathway, but pathway, the mesocortical pathway, but also in the mesolimbic pathway, and also in the mesolimbic pathway, and also in the mesolimbic pathway, and also for that matter in the for that matter in the for that matter in the tuberoinfundibular pathway associated tuberoinfundibular pathway associated tuberoinfundibular pathway associated with the pituitary. There is no way to with the pituitary. There is no way to with the pituitary. There is no way to direct dopamine activation to just one direct dopamine activation to just one direct dopamine activation to just one of those pathways. That's just a of those pathways. That's just a of those pathways. That's just a reflection of the existing technology. reflection of the existing technology. reflection of the existing technology. Now, this is also true if you rely on Now, this is also true if you rely on Now, this is also true if you rely on uh illicit drugs to increase dopamine. uh illicit drugs to increase dopamine. uh illicit drugs to increase dopamine. So, if it's cocaine or methamphetamine, So, if it's cocaine or methamphetamine, So, if it's cocaine or methamphetamine, those will greatly increase dopamine, those will greatly increase dopamine, those will greatly increase dopamine, but non-selectively across all those but non-selectively across all those but non-selectively across all those different pathways. different pathways. different pathways. And likewise with any drugs that inhibit And likewise with any drugs that inhibit And likewise with any drugs that inhibit or block or antagonize, as it's called, or block or antagonize, as it's called, or block or antagonize, as it's called, dopamine. This is why people who, for dopamine. This is why people who, for dopamine. This is why people who, for instance, have schizophrenia and take instance, have schizophrenia and take instance, have schizophrenia and take drugs to suppress auditory drugs to suppress auditory drugs to suppress auditory hallucinations, some of those drugs hallucinations, some of those drugs hallucinations, some of those drugs work because they block the so-called D2 work because they block the so-called D2 work because they block the so-called D2 receptor of the dopamine pathway. D2 receptor of the dopamine pathway. D2 receptor of the dopamine pathway. D2 receptors are present in all four of the receptors are present in all four of the receptors are present in all four of the dopaminergic pathways in the brain, and dopaminergic pathways in the brain, and dopaminergic pathways in the brain, and oftentimes those drugs will in fact oftentimes those drugs will in fact oftentimes those drugs will in fact suppress psychotic symptoms, auditory suppress psychotic symptoms, auditory suppress psychotic symptoms, auditory hallucinations, etc., because they hallucinations, etc., because they hallucinations, etc., because they reduce dopamine, but those people reduce dopamine, but those people reduce dopamine, but those people oftentimes will have problems with oftentimes will have problems with oftentimes will have problems with movement. They will express what's movement. They will express what's movement. They will express what's called in the clinical literature called in the clinical literature called in the clinical literature tardive dyskinesia, a kind of writhing tardive dyskinesia, a kind of writhing tardive dyskinesia, a kind of writhing of the face and the body from of the face and the body from of the face and the body from suppression of dopamine within the suppression of dopamine within the suppression of dopamine within the nigrostriatal pathway, which is nigrostriatal pathway, which is nigrostriatal pathway, which is associated with movement. They will associated with movement. They will associated with movement. They will sometimes have deficits in eye blinking. sometimes have deficits in eye blinking. sometimes have deficits in eye blinking. People with Parkinson's who actually People with Parkinson's who actually People with Parkinson's who actually have selective deficits of dopamine have selective deficits of dopamine have selective deficits of dopamine within the substantia within the substantia within the substantia nigrostriatal, remember substantia nigrostriatal, remember substantia nigrostriatal, remember substantia show deficits in what? In show deficits in what? In show deficits in what? In movement, in the smoothness of movement. movement, in the smoothness of movement. movement, in the smoothness of movement. Oftentimes they won't blink at all. Oftentimes they won't blink at all. Oftentimes they won't blink at all. They'll have kind of a blank stare, and They'll have kind of a blank stare, and They'll have kind of a blank stare, and they have other issues as well. So, if they have other issues as well. So, if they have other issues as well. So, if you're somebody who's interested in you're somebody who's interested in you're somebody who's interested in increasing dopamine through the use of increasing dopamine through the use of increasing dopamine through the use of legal safe pharmacology, as I would hope legal safe pharmacology, as I would hope legal safe pharmacology, as I would hope it would be the case, there are ways to it would be the case, there are ways to it would be the case, there are ways to do that reasonably safely for most do that reasonably safely for most do that reasonably safely for most people. Again, people with bipolar people. Again, people with bipolar people. Again, people with bipolar disorder issues with the dopaminergic disorder issues with the dopaminergic disorder issues with the dopaminergic pathway should not do this. I know pathway should not do this. I know pathway should not do this. I know nowadays there's a lot of use of drugs nowadays there's a lot of use of drugs nowadays there's a lot of use of drugs that increase dopamine such as that increase dopamine such as that increase dopamine such as Ritalin, Adderall, modafinil, Ritalin, Adderall, modafinil, Ritalin, Adderall, modafinil, armodafinil, often prescribed for things armodafinil, often prescribed for things armodafinil, often prescribed for things like attention deficit hyperactivity like attention deficit hyperactivity like attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. We did an entire episode on disorder. We did an entire episode on disorder. We did an entire episode on ADHD and pharmacologic prescription, ADHD and pharmacologic prescription, ADHD and pharmacologic prescription, supplement, and behavioral and supplement, and behavioral and supplement, and behavioral and nutritional tools for ADHD. You can find nutritional tools for ADHD. You can find nutritional tools for ADHD. You can find that episode at hubermanlab.com. that episode at hubermanlab.com. that episode at hubermanlab.com. I know a number of people take those I know a number of people take those I know a number of people take those compounds in order to increase dopamine compounds in order to increase dopamine compounds in order to increase dopamine and focus and focus and focus for sake of studying or other for sake of studying or other for sake of studying or other activities, staying up long hours, etc. activities, staying up long hours, etc. activities, staying up long hours, etc. And the fact that they increase focus, And the fact that they increase focus, And the fact that they increase focus, they are effective, although they do they are effective, although they do they are effective, although they do have their side effects, have their side effects, have their side effects, sometimes severe, sometimes severe, sometimes severe, sometimes habit-forming, sometimes even addicting habit-forming, sometimes even addicting habit-forming, sometimes even addicting as well. But the fact that they increase as well. But the fact that they increase as well. But the fact that they increase focus should automatically tell you focus should automatically tell you focus should automatically tell you something, that those drugs in something, that those drugs in something, that those drugs in particular increase dopamine particular increase dopamine particular increase dopamine in the so-called mesocortical in the so-called mesocortical in the so-called mesocortical and mesolimbic pathways. Why can I say and mesolimbic pathways. Why can I say and mesolimbic pathways. Why can I say that? How can I say that with any degree that? How can I say that with any degree that? How can I say that with any degree of confidence? Well, there are these of confidence? Well, there are these of confidence? Well, there are these four pathways. One's involved in four pathways. One's involved in four pathways. One's involved in movement, but these other ones are involved in but these other ones are involved in but these other ones are involved in motivation and desire and reward, and I motivation and desire and reward, and I motivation and desire and reward, and I told you that these things can be told you that these things can be told you that these things can be habit-forming and addicting in some habit-forming and addicting in some habit-forming and addicting in some cases, and they are can greatly increase cases, and they are can greatly increase cases, and they are can greatly increase focus, and focus is supported by focus, and focus is supported by focus, and focus is supported by enhanced levels of dopamine within this enhanced levels of dopamine within this enhanced levels of dopamine within this mesolimbic and mesocortical pathway. So, mesolimbic and mesocortical pathway. So, mesolimbic and mesocortical pathway. So, yes, those drugs increase dopamine yes, those drugs increase dopamine yes, those drugs increase dopamine across the board, but there does seem to across the board, but there does seem to across the board, but there does seem to be some weighting of dopamine toward the be some weighting of dopamine toward the be some weighting of dopamine toward the systems involved in motivation and systems involved in motivation and systems involved in motivation and reward, and sometimes even leading to reward, and sometimes even leading to reward, and sometimes even leading to habit formation and addiction. That's habit formation and addiction. That's habit formation and addiction. That's why those drugs should only be taken why those drugs should only be taken why those drugs should only be taken with the close supervision of a with the close supervision of a with the close supervision of a very skilled psychiatrist or somebody very skilled psychiatrist or somebody very skilled psychiatrist or somebody else who's board certified who can else who's board certified who can else who's board certified who can really govern that. really govern that. really govern that. There are, however, ways to increase There are, however, ways to increase There are, however, ways to increase dopamine more evenly across the board dopamine more evenly across the board dopamine more evenly across the board using non-prescription approaches. And using non-prescription approaches. And using non-prescription approaches. And one I already mentioned, which is one I already mentioned, which is one I already mentioned, which is L-tyrosine, taken typically in dosages of 500 to taken typically in dosages of 500 to taken typically in dosages of 500 to 1,000 mg. L-tyrosine is not as potent in 1,000 mg. L-tyrosine is not as potent in 1,000 mg. L-tyrosine is not as potent in increasing dopamine as increasing dopamine as increasing dopamine as are the prescription drugs that I are the prescription drugs that I are the prescription drugs that I referred to before. It tends to be referred to before. It tends to be referred to before. It tends to be milder. For some people, it can have a milder. For some people, it can have a milder. For some people, it can have a very amplified effect. They feel it very amplified effect. They feel it very amplified effect. They feel it right away. It's very intense in right away. It's very intense in right away. It's very intense in elevating focus and motivation elevating focus and motivation elevating focus and motivation and the desire to move. and the desire to move. and the desire to move. For other people, it's For other people, it's For other people, it's less potent. It really depends on a less potent. It really depends on a less potent. It really depends on a number of things. I should mention that number of things. I should mention that number of things. I should mention that regular consumption of caffeine of a 1 regular consumption of caffeine of a 1 regular consumption of caffeine of a 1 to 3 mg per kilogram body weight per day to 3 mg per kilogram body weight per day to 3 mg per kilogram body weight per day also will increase also will increase also will increase dopamine receptor efficacy and density, dopamine receptor efficacy and density, dopamine receptor efficacy and density, which will make any existing dopamine which will make any existing dopamine which will make any existing dopamine more effective whether or not that more effective whether or not that more effective whether or not that dopamine is triggered by things like dopamine is triggered by things like dopamine is triggered by things like L-tyrosine or if you're not taking L-tyrosine or if you're not taking L-tyrosine or if you're not taking anything to elevate dopamine, the anything to elevate dopamine, the anything to elevate dopamine, the dopamine that you do make will be more dopamine that you do make will be more dopamine that you do make will be more effective in elevating your mood, effective in elevating your mood, effective in elevating your mood, motivation, and desire to move, motivation, and desire to move, motivation, and desire to move, and by extension, divergent thinking, if and by extension, divergent thinking, if and by extension, divergent thinking, if you are consuming caffeine. But again, you are consuming caffeine. But again, you are consuming caffeine. But again, caffeine should be taken prior to caffeine should be taken prior to caffeine should be taken prior to convergent thinking type task probably convergent thinking type task probably convergent thinking type task probably more than it should be taken prior to more than it should be taken prior to more than it should be taken prior to divergent thinking task. And of course, divergent thinking task. And of course, divergent thinking task. And of course, there are other legal supplements that there are other legal supplements that there are other legal supplements that can elevate dopamine as well. In can elevate dopamine as well. In can elevate dopamine as well. In particular, phenylethylamine is very particular, phenylethylamine is very particular, phenylethylamine is very effective in doing that. 600 mg of that effective in doing that. 600 mg of that effective in doing that. 600 mg of that has a brief effect lasting only about 30 has a brief effect lasting only about 30 has a brief effect lasting only about 30 to 45 minutes, but it is one that many to 45 minutes, but it is one that many to 45 minutes, but it is one that many people find beneficial for sake of people find beneficial for sake of people find beneficial for sake of studying or for creative thinking and so studying or for creative thinking and so studying or for creative thinking and so on and so forth. Now, that's on and so forth. Now, that's on and so forth. Now, that's pharmacology. And in fact, there's an pharmacology. And in fact, there's an pharmacology. And in fact, there's an extensive landscape of prescription and extensive landscape of prescription and extensive landscape of prescription and supplement-based pharmacology and indeed supplement-based pharmacology and indeed supplement-based pharmacology and indeed nutrition. For instance, the consumption of foods For instance, the consumption of foods For instance, the consumption of foods that are high in L-tyrosine such as aged that are high in L-tyrosine such as aged that are high in L-tyrosine such as aged Parmesan cheese, for instance, of all Parmesan cheese, for instance, of all Parmesan cheese, for instance, of all things, very, very high in L-tyrosine, things, very, very high in L-tyrosine, things, very, very high in L-tyrosine, the precursor to dopamine. Certain the precursor to dopamine. Certain the precursor to dopamine. Certain foods, you can look up online which foods, you can look up online which foods, you can look up online which foods contain high levels of L-tyrosine foods contain high levels of L-tyrosine foods contain high levels of L-tyrosine and which ones are compatible with your and which ones are compatible with your and which ones are compatible with your nutrition. But, nutrition. But, nutrition. But, leaving pharmacology aside, there's a leaving pharmacology aside, there's a leaving pharmacology aside, there's a very exciting non-pharmacological very exciting non-pharmacological very exciting non-pharmacological tool, a purely behavioral tool, that the tool, a purely behavioral tool, that the tool, a purely behavioral tool, that the research literature has told us can research literature has told us can research literature has told us can selectively increase dopamine within the selectively increase dopamine within the selectively increase dopamine within the nigrostriatal pathway, the pathway nigrostriatal pathway, the pathway nigrostriatal pathway, the pathway that's involved in divergent thinking, that's involved in divergent thinking, that's involved in divergent thinking, and can do so very dramatically, as much and can do so very dramatically, as much and can do so very dramatically, as much as 65% above baseline. And so, this is a as 65% above baseline. And so, this is a as 65% above baseline. And so, this is a behavioral tool that is useful for a behavioral tool that is useful for a behavioral tool that is useful for a number of things, but that I find number of things, but that I find number of things, but that I find particularly interesting in leveraging particularly interesting in leveraging particularly interesting in leveraging towards the exploration and enhancement towards the exploration and enhancement towards the exploration and enhancement of creativity because, first of all, of creativity because, first of all, of creativity because, first of all, it's purely behavioral, so it's zero it's purely behavioral, so it's zero it's purely behavioral, so it's zero cost, and it involves no manipulation cost, and it involves no manipulation cost, and it involves no manipulation of brain neuromodulators or chemistry of brain neuromodulators or chemistry of brain neuromodulators or chemistry through pharmacology. So, it's something through pharmacology. So, it's something through pharmacology. So, it's something that you can explore very safely and that you can explore very safely and that you can explore very safely and certainly not having to purchase certainly not having to purchase certainly not having to purchase anything. And what's really remarkable anything. And what's really remarkable anything. And what's really remarkable is the selectivity, or I think it's fair is the selectivity, or I think it's fair is the selectivity, or I think it's fair to say the immense selectivity that this to say the immense selectivity that this to say the immense selectivity that this particular behavioral intervention seems particular behavioral intervention seems particular behavioral intervention seems to exert on dopamine within this pathway to exert on dopamine within this pathway to exert on dopamine within this pathway associated with divergent thinking. So, associated with divergent thinking. So, associated with divergent thinking. So, the study that I'm about to describe is the study that I'm about to describe is the study that I'm about to describe is a study that dates back 20 years. Now, a study that dates back 20 years. Now, a study that dates back 20 years. Now, that should not concern you. In fact, that should not concern you. In fact, that should not concern you. In fact, the early arrival of this study, or what the early arrival of this study, or what the early arrival of this study, or what now seems to be early arrival, I mean, now seems to be early arrival, I mean, now seems to be early arrival, I mean, it wasn't that long ago, it wasn't that long ago, it wasn't that long ago, is really exciting because the first is really exciting because the first is really exciting because the first line of this study really illustrates line of this study really illustrates line of this study really illustrates how important or how much of a landmark how important or how much of a landmark how important or how much of a landmark study this really is. And so, I'll just study this really is. And so, I'll just study this really is. And so, I'll just read you the first line of the study, read you the first line of the study, read you the first line of the study, then I'll tell you the title, then I'll then I'll tell you the title, then I'll then I'll tell you the title, then I'll tell you what they discovered tell you what they discovered tell you what they discovered in fairly top contour, and we will in fairly top contour, and we will in fairly top contour, and we will provide a link to the study if you want provide a link to the study if you want provide a link to the study if you want to peruse it in more detail. to peruse it in more detail. to peruse it in more detail. The first line of the study is, "This is The first line of the study is, "This is The first line of the study is, "This is the first in vivo", just meaning in the first in vivo", just meaning in the first in vivo", just meaning in the organism, in this case, this was a study organism, in this case, this was a study organism, in this case, this was a study on humans, on humans, on humans, "This is the first in vivo demonstration "This is the first in vivo demonstration "This is the first in vivo demonstration of an association between an endogenous of an association between an endogenous of an association between an endogenous neurotransmitter release", endogenous neurotransmitter release", endogenous neurotransmitter release", endogenous means within us, and conscious means within us, and conscious means within us, and conscious experience. So, what this sentence experience. So, what this sentence experience. So, what this sentence essentially says is this is the first essentially says is this is the first essentially says is this is the first study exploring how a chemical that's study exploring how a chemical that's study exploring how a chemical that's naturally released in our body relates naturally released in our body relates naturally released in our body relates to a particular to a particular to a particular quality of conscious experience. quality of conscious experience. quality of conscious experience. This study was performed in Scandinavia This study was performed in Scandinavia This study was performed in Scandinavia in one of the hospitals in Denmark. in one of the hospitals in Denmark. in one of the hospitals in Denmark. Again, we'll provide a link. The first Again, we'll provide a link. The first Again, we'll provide a link. The first author is Kjaer, I think I'm pronouncing author is Kjaer, I think I'm pronouncing author is Kjaer, I think I'm pronouncing it correctly, although probably not, k j it correctly, although probably not, k j it correctly, although probably not, k j a e r, a e r, a e r, et al. And the title of the study is et al. And the title of the study is et al. And the title of the study is increased dopamine tone during increased dopamine tone during increased dopamine tone during meditation induced change of meditation induced change of meditation induced change of consciousness. And I want to just consciousness. And I want to just consciousness. And I want to just highlight that the meditation used in highlight that the meditation used in highlight that the meditation used in this study isn't really a meditation at this study isn't really a meditation at this study isn't really a meditation at all. I don't know why they selected that all. I don't know why they selected that all. I don't know why they selected that for the title. for the title. for the title. The behavioral protocol used in this The behavioral protocol used in this The behavioral protocol used in this study was more akin to what is normally study was more akin to what is normally study was more akin to what is normally called yoga nidra or NSDR, non-sleep called yoga nidra or NSDR, non-sleep called yoga nidra or NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. Now, yoga nidra and NSDR have deep rest. Now, yoga nidra and NSDR have deep rest. Now, yoga nidra and NSDR have been discussed many times before on this been discussed many times before on this been discussed many times before on this podcast. Yoga nidra, for instance, is a podcast. Yoga nidra, for instance, is a podcast. Yoga nidra, for instance, is a practice that's been around for practice that's been around for practice that's been around for hundreds, if not thousands of years, in hundreds, if not thousands of years, in hundreds, if not thousands of years, in which people deliberately lie still. which people deliberately lie still. which people deliberately lie still. So, they're forcing themselves to be So, they're forcing themselves to be So, they're forcing themselves to be mostly motionless, small movements are mostly motionless, small movements are mostly motionless, small movements are fine, and they're directing their attention to and they're directing their attention to and they're directing their attention to the surface of their body, they're doing the surface of their body, they're doing the surface of their body, they're doing long exhale breathing, sometimes some long exhale breathing, sometimes some long exhale breathing, sometimes some intentions, sometimes some intentions, sometimes some intentions, sometimes some visualization, but it's really visualization, but it's really visualization, but it's really self-directed relaxation. And the key self-directed relaxation. And the key self-directed relaxation. And the key component is that people stay awake and component is that people stay awake and component is that people stay awake and engage in very little movement. And the engage in very little movement. And the engage in very little movement. And the key word there is movement. Now, key word there is movement. Now, key word there is movement. Now, non-sleep deep rest non-sleep deep rest non-sleep deep rest is a acronym, a term that I coined. It's is a acronym, a term that I coined. It's is a acronym, a term that I coined. It's not a term that I coined in order to try not a term that I coined in order to try not a term that I coined in order to try and wipe away or discard with yoga and wipe away or discard with yoga and wipe away or discard with yoga nidra. I'm a person who has great nidra. I'm a person who has great nidra. I'm a person who has great respect for yoga nidra and its respect for yoga nidra and its respect for yoga nidra and its traditions. It's a term that I coined in traditions. It's a term that I coined in traditions. It's a term that I coined in order to encompass a number of practices order to encompass a number of practices order to encompass a number of practices that don't include any mystical type that don't include any mystical type that don't include any mystical type language or scientific language, for language or scientific language, for language or scientific language, for that matter, and that doesn't involve that matter, and that doesn't involve that matter, and that doesn't involve intentions. It involves deep relaxation, intentions. It involves deep relaxation, intentions. It involves deep relaxation, yet remaining wide awake and conscious. yet remaining wide awake and conscious. yet remaining wide awake and conscious. Sometimes people fall asleep, and that's Sometimes people fall asleep, and that's Sometimes people fall asleep, and that's okay, but this is really an atypical okay, but this is really an atypical okay, but this is really an atypical brain state of being deeply relaxed, yet brain state of being deeply relaxed, yet brain state of being deeply relaxed, yet in general awake, and in general awake, and in general awake, and motionless. Again, motionless being the motionless. Again, motionless being the motionless. Again, motionless being the key. Very few brain states involve us key. Very few brain states involve us key. Very few brain states involve us being mostly, if not completely, being mostly, if not completely, being mostly, if not completely, motionless and yet awake. And it turns motionless and yet awake. And it turns motionless and yet awake. And it turns out that brain state, whether or not you out that brain state, whether or not you out that brain state, whether or not you call it yoga nidra, you call it NSDR, call it yoga nidra, you call it NSDR, call it yoga nidra, you call it NSDR, whether or not you call it whether or not you call it whether or not you call it meditation-induced shift in meditation-induced shift in meditation-induced shift in consciousness, as they did in this consciousness, as they did in this consciousness, as they did in this study, although they do refer to yoga nidra, although they do refer to yoga nidra, although they do refer to yoga nidra, all refer to the same thing, which is all refer to the same thing, which is all refer to the same thing, which is being motionless and yet aware. being motionless and yet aware. being motionless and yet aware. And relaxed, I should mention. So, in And relaxed, I should mention. So, in And relaxed, I should mention. So, in this study, what they did was they this study, what they did was they this study, what they did was they brought subjects into the laboratory. brought subjects into the laboratory. brought subjects into the laboratory. They had them either undergo this They had them either undergo this They had them either undergo this self-directed deep relaxation while they self-directed deep relaxation while they self-directed deep relaxation while they are motionless or mostly motionless, or are motionless or mostly motionless, or are motionless or mostly motionless, or they had them listen to an audio script they had them listen to an audio script they had them listen to an audio script while also just lying there with eyes while also just lying there with eyes while also just lying there with eyes closed. And then they used a number of closed. And then they used a number of closed. And then they used a number of chemical tricks, and I don't want to get chemical tricks, and I don't want to get chemical tricks, and I don't want to get too deep into those now cuz they can be too deep into those now cuz they can be too deep into those now cuz they can be a little bit distracting. For those of a little bit distracting. For those of a little bit distracting. For those of you that are interested, you can look at you that are interested, you can look at you that are interested, you can look at it in the study. This is a binding of a it in the study. This is a binding of a it in the study. This is a binding of a chemical in the brain that then they can chemical in the brain that then they can chemical in the brain that then they can image with brain imaging, which is what image with brain imaging, which is what image with brain imaging, which is what they did in the study, to evaluate how they did in the study, to evaluate how they did in the study, to evaluate how much dopamine changed in the brain and much dopamine changed in the brain and much dopamine changed in the brain and where specifically in the brain dopamine where specifically in the brain dopamine where specifically in the brain dopamine changed its levels changed its levels changed its levels before, during, and after this before, during, and after this before, during, and after this particular behavioral practice in one or particular behavioral practice in one or particular behavioral practice in one or the other group. And what they the other group. And what they the other group. And what they discovered is that discovered is that discovered is that people who did this deep relaxation, people who did this deep relaxation, people who did this deep relaxation, that is self-directed deep relaxation, that is self-directed deep relaxation, that is self-directed deep relaxation, lying there, eyes closed, relatively motionless, although small relatively motionless, although small relatively motionless, although small movements of the body or movements of movements of the body or movements of movements of the body or movements of the head are absolutely fine. What they the head are absolutely fine. What they the head are absolutely fine. What they observed was a 65% increase in dopamine observed was a 65% increase in dopamine observed was a 65% increase in dopamine release. Now, here it's key, dopamine release. Now, here it's key, dopamine release. Now, here it's key, dopamine release, and they observed an increase in and they observed an increase in and they observed an increase in so-called theta activity. Theta activity so-called theta activity. Theta activity so-called theta activity. Theta activity is a pattern of brainwave activity is a pattern of brainwave activity is a pattern of brainwave activity that's commonly associated with creative that's commonly associated with creative that's commonly associated with creative states and divergent thinking in states and divergent thinking in states and divergent thinking in particular, so that's important. particular, so that's important. particular, so that's important. And they observed that across subjects, And they observed that across subjects, And they observed that across subjects, specifically in the nigrostriatal specifically in the nigrostriatal specifically in the nigrostriatal pathway, this pathway associated with pathway, this pathway associated with pathway, this pathway associated with divergent thinking. So, this is very divergent thinking. So, this is very divergent thinking. So, this is very exciting. This is a study that really exciting. This is a study that really exciting. This is a study that really points to a behavioral tool that can be points to a behavioral tool that can be points to a behavioral tool that can be used to selectively elevate dopamine in used to selectively elevate dopamine in used to selectively elevate dopamine in the very pathway that one would want to the very pathway that one would want to the very pathway that one would want to if they wanted to engage divergent if they wanted to engage divergent if they wanted to engage divergent thinking for sake of creative thinking for sake of creative thinking for sake of creative exploration. There are also a number of exploration. There are also a number of exploration. There are also a number of key observations within this study. key observations within this study. key observations within this study. First of all, First of all, First of all, the reduction in bodily movement was the reduction in bodily movement was the reduction in bodily movement was essential. In fact, when people rated or when the In fact, when people rated or when the In fact, when people rated or when the amount of readiness for action in their amount of readiness for action in their amount of readiness for action in their system, their body, was evaluated, what system, their body, was evaluated, what system, their body, was evaluated, what people found was that immediately after people found was that immediately after people found was that immediately after this practice, they felt very still. In this practice, they felt very still. In this practice, they felt very still. In other words, they felt as if remaining other words, they felt as if remaining other words, they felt as if remaining still was natural. Now, it's not the still was natural. Now, it's not the still was natural. Now, it's not the case that they couldn't move. In fact, case that they couldn't move. In fact, case that they couldn't move. In fact, the elevation in dopamine that occurred the elevation in dopamine that occurred the elevation in dopamine that occurred during this practice, this Yoga during this practice, this Yoga during this practice, this Yoga Nidra-like non-sleep or NSDR-like Nidra-like non-sleep or NSDR-like Nidra-like non-sleep or NSDR-like practice, actually prepared them to be able to actually prepared them to be able to actually prepared them to be able to move in a much more dedicated and robust move in a much more dedicated and robust move in a much more dedicated and robust way afterwards, but during the practice, way afterwards, but during the practice, way afterwards, but during the practice, their readiness for action went way, way their readiness for action went way, way their readiness for action went way, way down. Not surprising, they were pretty down. Not surprising, they were pretty down. Not surprising, they were pretty much motionless. much motionless. much motionless. But interestingly, as the level of But interestingly, as the level of But interestingly, as the level of readiness for movement went down, readiness for movement went down, readiness for movement went down, their degree of visual down, their degree of visual down, their degree of visual imagery, that is, their internal imagery, that is, their internal imagery, that is, their internal landscape and their ability to imagine landscape and their ability to imagine landscape and their ability to imagine new things, new things, new things, increased. And in fact, areas of the increased. And in fact, areas of the increased. And in fact, areas of the brain that are associated with visual brain that are associated with visual brain that are associated with visual imagery, such as the visual or so-called imagery, such as the visual or so-called imagery, such as the visual or so-called occipital cortex and the parietal occipital cortex and the parietal occipital cortex and the parietal cortex, has been shown in other studies cortex, has been shown in other studies cortex, has been shown in other studies to ramp up when people are motionless. to ramp up when people are motionless. to ramp up when people are motionless. So, there seems to be this inverse So, there seems to be this inverse So, there seems to be this inverse relationship between movement and visual relationship between movement and visual relationship between movement and visual imagery, which makes sense. When we're imagery, which makes sense. When we're imagery, which makes sense. When we're moving, we can pay attention to things moving, we can pay attention to things moving, we can pay attention to things in the outside world, we tend to be in the outside world, we tend to be in the outside world, we tend to be aware of our sensory environment to aware of our sensory environment to aware of our sensory environment to varying degrees, varying degrees, varying degrees, but we don't tend to be very focused on but we don't tend to be very focused on but we don't tend to be very focused on visual imagery within our head. Whereas, visual imagery within our head. Whereas, visual imagery within our head. Whereas, when we lie down or sit down and close when we lie down or sit down and close when we lie down or sit down and close our eyes and we are motionless, the our eyes and we are motionless, the our eyes and we are motionless, the degree of visual imagery really degree of visual imagery really degree of visual imagery really increases. Hence, the increase in divergent Hence, the increase in divergent Hence, the increase in divergent thinking because what essentially is thinking because what essentially is thinking because what essentially is happening is the library of options, the happening is the library of options, the happening is the library of options, the library of possible interactions with library of possible interactions with library of possible interactions with whatever it is that you're thinking whatever it is that you're thinking whatever it is that you're thinking about. I give the example, which is a about. I give the example, which is a about. I give the example, which is a trivial one on purpose, of a pen, but trivial one on purpose, of a pen, but trivial one on purpose, of a pen, but the bank of options that becomes the bank of options that becomes the bank of options that becomes available when we are motionless and available when we are motionless and available when we are motionless and when we are limiting our when we are limiting our when we are limiting our visualization of the external world visualization of the external world visualization of the external world increases exponentially. So, this is increases exponentially. So, this is increases exponentially. So, this is important and what it points to is the important and what it points to is the important and what it points to is the fact that this very simple, completely fact that this very simple, completely fact that this very simple, completely non-pharmacologic behavioral practice of non-pharmacologic behavioral practice of non-pharmacologic behavioral practice of lying down motionless for some period of lying down motionless for some period of lying down motionless for some period of time. And I confess, the amount of time time. And I confess, the amount of time time. And I confess, the amount of time that they use in this study was quite that they use in this study was quite that they use in this study was quite long. It was longer than 60 minutes. long. It was longer than 60 minutes. long. It was longer than 60 minutes. But, all the data that I'm aware of in But, all the data that I'm aware of in But, all the data that I'm aware of in terms of NSDR and yoga nidra, and terms of NSDR and yoga nidra, and terms of NSDR and yoga nidra, and there's a growing body of literature on there's a growing body of literature on there's a growing body of literature on these practices, I should mention, these practices, I should mention, these practices, I should mention, show that even 10 minutes, or even show that even 10 minutes, or even show that even 10 minutes, or even better would be 20 or 30 minutes of better would be 20 or 30 minutes of better would be 20 or 30 minutes of lying motionless with eyes closed, lying motionless with eyes closed, lying motionless with eyes closed, and allowing the mind to drift wherever and allowing the mind to drift wherever and allowing the mind to drift wherever it happens to go, but it happens to go, but it happens to go, but focusing on relaxing by doing long focusing on relaxing by doing long focusing on relaxing by doing long exhale breathing, perhaps doing a body exhale breathing, perhaps doing a body exhale breathing, perhaps doing a body scan, or focusing your attention on scan, or focusing your attention on scan, or focusing your attention on particular body parts, but not keeping particular body parts, but not keeping particular body parts, but not keeping it focused on any one particular body it focused on any one particular body it focused on any one particular body part for that long, that general part for that long, that general part for that long, that general practice of deep relaxation while awake practice of deep relaxation while awake practice of deep relaxation while awake and being relatively motionless really and being relatively motionless really and being relatively motionless really favors the brain states associated with favors the brain states associated with favors the brain states associated with divergent thinking and actually divergent thinking and actually divergent thinking and actually represents an accessing of the various represents an accessing of the various represents an accessing of the various components that you would use during components that you would use during components that you would use during divergent thinking. And perhaps most divergent thinking. And perhaps most divergent thinking. And perhaps most excitingly, it's associated with this excitingly, it's associated with this excitingly, it's associated with this massive increase, 65% increase in massive increase, 65% increase in massive increase, 65% increase in dopamine release within the very pathway dopamine release within the very pathway dopamine release within the very pathway that underlies divergent thinking. So, that underlies divergent thinking. So, that underlies divergent thinking. So, my recommendation would be for those of my recommendation would be for those of my recommendation would be for those of you that are trying to enhance divergent you that are trying to enhance divergent you that are trying to enhance divergent thinking and creative ability, that you thinking and creative ability, that you thinking and creative ability, that you would do this practice at a minimum once would do this practice at a minimum once would do this practice at a minimum once per week. And I should say, if you were per week. And I should say, if you were per week. And I should say, if you were going to do it once per week, I'd going to do it once per week, I'd going to do it once per week, I'd recommend doing it for about 20 to 30 recommend doing it for about 20 to 30 recommend doing it for about 20 to 30 minutes. Some of you might be able to do minutes. Some of you might be able to do minutes. Some of you might be able to do it for as long as 60 minutes. I myself it for as long as 60 minutes. I myself it for as long as 60 minutes. I myself do such a practice on a daily basis do such a practice on a daily basis do such a practice on a daily basis anywhere from 10 minutes to 20 minutes, anywhere from 10 minutes to 20 minutes, anywhere from 10 minutes to 20 minutes, sometimes 30 minutes. There's an example sometimes 30 minutes. There's an example sometimes 30 minutes. There's an example of an NSDR script completely zero cost. of an NSDR script completely zero cost. of an NSDR script completely zero cost. I confess it does happen to be my voice. I confess it does happen to be my voice. I confess it does happen to be my voice. So forgive me in advance. There are So forgive me in advance. There are So forgive me in advance. There are other options of NSDR. You can go to other options of NSDR. You can go to other options of NSDR. You can go to YouTube, put NSDR and my name. Again, YouTube, put NSDR and my name. Again, YouTube, put NSDR and my name. Again, completely zero cost. You can get a completely zero cost. You can get a completely zero cost. You can get a sample of what a 10-minute NSDR script sample of what a 10-minute NSDR script sample of what a 10-minute NSDR script looks like. That's through Virtusan. Put looks like. That's through Virtusan. Put looks like. That's through Virtusan. Put that out there. So thank you Virtusan that out there. So thank you Virtusan that out there. So thank you Virtusan for putting that out there at zero cost. for putting that out there at zero cost. for putting that out there at zero cost. There are examples of 20 and 30-minute There are examples of 20 and 30-minute There are examples of 20 and 30-minute NSDR scripts and yoga nidra scripts. NSDR scripts and yoga nidra scripts. NSDR scripts and yoga nidra scripts. Some that I particularly like. We will Some that I particularly like. We will Some that I particularly like. We will also provide a link to some of those. also provide a link to some of those. also provide a link to some of those. Again, those are completely zero cost Again, those are completely zero cost Again, those are completely zero cost for you to explore. for you to explore. for you to explore. But more important than you follow any But more important than you follow any But more important than you follow any one particular yoga nidra NSDR script is one particular yoga nidra NSDR script is one particular yoga nidra NSDR script is that you learn to take your body and that you learn to take your body and that you learn to take your body and brain into these states of limited brain into these states of limited brain into these states of limited motion, elevated dopamine within this particular elevated dopamine within this particular elevated dopamine within this particular pathway, and fairly deep relaxation. pathway, and fairly deep relaxation. pathway, and fairly deep relaxation. Again, if you happen to fall asleep, Again, if you happen to fall asleep, Again, if you happen to fall asleep, that's you know, not necessarily a bad that's you know, not necessarily a bad that's you know, not necessarily a bad thing. Although the idea is that you thing. Although the idea is that you thing. Although the idea is that you stay in a shallow plane of consciousness stay in a shallow plane of consciousness stay in a shallow plane of consciousness or sleep, or sleep, or sleep, hence the term non-sleep deep rest. hence the term non-sleep deep rest. hence the term non-sleep deep rest. So, in any event, I think this is a very So, in any event, I think this is a very So, in any event, I think this is a very useful practice that many people could useful practice that many people could useful practice that many people could benefit from. And the fact that it's benefit from. And the fact that it's benefit from. And the fact that it's zero cost and purely behavioral, I think zero cost and purely behavioral, I think zero cost and purely behavioral, I think adds additional benefit because it's additional benefit because it's additional benefit because it's certainly one that people could explore certainly one that people could explore certainly one that people could explore depending on what amount of time you're depending on what amount of time you're depending on what amount of time you're willing to commit. And the research data willing to commit. And the research data willing to commit. And the research data on this on this on this now extend beyond this one individual now extend beyond this one individual now extend beyond this one individual paper, and I think it's really exciting paper, and I think it's really exciting paper, and I think it's really exciting because what it says is as the title and because what it says is as the title and because what it says is as the title and first line of the paper suggests is that first line of the paper suggests is that first line of the paper suggests is that we can increase dopamine using specific we can increase dopamine using specific we can increase dopamine using specific types of meditation-induced types of meditation-induced types of meditation-induced consciousness. And those increases in consciousness. And those increases in consciousness. And those increases in dopamine can be used to increase our dopamine can be used to increase our dopamine can be used to increase our ability to be more creative. Before ability to be more creative. Before ability to be more creative. Before moving forward, I want to make moving forward, I want to make moving forward, I want to make absolutely clear how it is that you absolutely clear how it is that you absolutely clear how it is that you would use NSDR aka yoga nidra or would use NSDR aka yoga nidra or would use NSDR aka yoga nidra or similar. The name doesn't really matter similar. The name doesn't really matter similar. The name doesn't really matter after all. The practice is what matters. after all. The practice is what matters. after all. The practice is what matters. In order to enhance dopamine In order to enhance dopamine In order to enhance dopamine in this nigrostriatal pathway and in this nigrostriatal pathway and in this nigrostriatal pathway and enhance divergent thinking. The key enhance divergent thinking. The key enhance divergent thinking. The key thing to understand here is that the thing to understand here is that the thing to understand here is that the period of motionlessness period of motionlessness period of motionlessness and deep relaxation while awake and deep relaxation while awake and deep relaxation while awake increases dopamine in the nigrostriatal increases dopamine in the nigrostriatal increases dopamine in the nigrostriatal pathway. It increases mental imagery. pathway. It increases mental imagery. pathway. It increases mental imagery. That is, it increases access to the bank That is, it increases access to the bank That is, it increases access to the bank or the library, if you will, of possible or the library, if you will, of possible or the library, if you will, of possible solutions or elements to engage in the solutions or elements to engage in the solutions or elements to engage in the divergent thinking process. divergent thinking process. divergent thinking process. But divergent thinking itself does not But divergent thinking itself does not But divergent thinking itself does not occur during NSDR, aka Yoga Nidra. occur during NSDR, aka Yoga Nidra. occur during NSDR, aka Yoga Nidra. The NSDR and Yoga Nidra deep relaxation The NSDR and Yoga Nidra deep relaxation The NSDR and Yoga Nidra deep relaxation meditation, whatever it is you want to meditation, whatever it is you want to meditation, whatever it is you want to call it, call it, call it, sets a dopaminergic tone, and that's sets a dopaminergic tone, and that's sets a dopaminergic tone, and that's actually the appropriate use of the word actually the appropriate use of the word actually the appropriate use of the word dopaminergic tone. It raises the dopaminergic tone. It raises the dopaminergic tone. It raises the baseline of dopamine transmission in baseline of dopamine transmission in baseline of dopamine transmission in that circuitry that then positions you that circuitry that then positions you that circuitry that then positions you to engage in divergent thinking more to engage in divergent thinking more to engage in divergent thinking more effectively. So, the idea would be to do effectively. So, the idea would be to do effectively. So, the idea would be to do anywhere from 10 to 20, maybe 30 anywhere from 10 to 20, maybe 30 anywhere from 10 to 20, maybe 30 minutes, maybe even as much as an hour, minutes, maybe even as much as an hour, minutes, maybe even as much as an hour, depending on how much time you had to depending on how much time you had to depending on how much time you had to dedicate, of such a meditation NSDR dedicate, of such a meditation NSDR dedicate, of such a meditation NSDR practice, and then not necessarily practice, and then not necessarily practice, and then not necessarily immediately, but within the 5 to 15 immediately, but within the 5 to 15 immediately, but within the 5 to 15 minutes following, minutes following, minutes following, then to go into a practice of divergent then to go into a practice of divergent then to go into a practice of divergent thinking and start doing creative thinking and start doing creative thinking and start doing creative exploration. That is, to start thinking exploration. That is, to start thinking exploration. That is, to start thinking about different ways to combine existing about different ways to combine existing about different ways to combine existing elements in whatever domain it is that elements in whatever domain it is that elements in whatever domain it is that you want to achieve creativity. So, the you want to achieve creativity. So, the you want to achieve creativity. So, the point is that the divergent thinking point is that the divergent thinking point is that the divergent thinking itself is not occurring during the NSDR itself is not occurring during the NSDR itself is not occurring during the NSDR or Yoga Nidra practice. The NSDR and or Yoga Nidra practice. The NSDR and or Yoga Nidra practice. The NSDR and Yoga Nidra practice prepares you for Yoga Nidra practice prepares you for Yoga Nidra practice prepares you for divergent thinking that you do in the divergent thinking that you do in the divergent thinking that you do in the hour or hours that follows. And just to hour or hours that follows. And just to hour or hours that follows. And just to contrast that with pharmacology, I am contrast that with pharmacology, I am contrast that with pharmacology, I am not aware of any specific not aware of any specific not aware of any specific dopamine-related pharmacology that would dopamine-related pharmacology that would dopamine-related pharmacology that would allow us to selectively increase allow us to selectively increase allow us to selectively increase dopamine in the very pathway associated dopamine in the very pathway associated dopamine in the very pathway associated with divergent thinking and creativity. with divergent thinking and creativity. with divergent thinking and creativity. Now, there are forms of pharmacology Now, there are forms of pharmacology Now, there are forms of pharmacology that can shift brain neurotransmitters that can shift brain neurotransmitters that can shift brain neurotransmitters and neuromodulators in ways that favor and neuromodulators in ways that favor and neuromodulators in ways that favor creativity. And this is certainly a creativity. And this is certainly a creativity. And this is certainly a topic that we will go into in more depth topic that we will go into in more depth topic that we will go into in more depth in a future episode, but there's an in a future episode, but there's an in a future episode, but there's an exciting study that was performed just exciting study that was performed just exciting study that was performed just this last year looking at the role of this last year looking at the role of this last year looking at the role of serotonin, another neuromodulator, in serotonin, another neuromodulator, in serotonin, another neuromodulator, in divergent and convergent thinking. And divergent and convergent thinking. And divergent and convergent thinking. And it turns out that serotonin underlies a it turns out that serotonin underlies a it turns out that serotonin underlies a lot of the brain activity that's lot of the brain activity that's lot of the brain activity that's responsible for both divergent and for responsible for both divergent and for responsible for both divergent and for convergent thinking. And there's one convergent thinking. And there's one convergent thinking. And there's one particular form of pharmacology particular form of pharmacology particular form of pharmacology which can enhance activation of the which can enhance activation of the which can enhance activation of the serotonergic pathways associated with serotonergic pathways associated with serotonergic pathways associated with the so-called 5-HT, the so-called 5-HT, the so-called 5-HT, that's serotonin, 5-HT, that's the that's serotonin, 5-HT, that's the that's serotonin, 5-HT, that's the abbreviation, 5-HT2A abbreviation, 5-HT2A abbreviation, 5-HT2A receptor. Serotonin 2A receptor in particular Serotonin 2A receptor in particular Serotonin 2A receptor in particular brain areas in ways that favor both brain areas in ways that favor both brain areas in ways that favor both divergent and convergent thinking. And divergent and convergent thinking. And divergent and convergent thinking. And the pharmacologic agent in that case the pharmacologic agent in that case the pharmacologic agent in that case turns out to be very low dose, or as turns out to be very low dose, or as turns out to be very low dose, or as some of you may have heard of it some of you may have heard of it some of you may have heard of it referred to as microdosing of referred to as microdosing of referred to as microdosing of psilocybin. Now, I do want to say psilocybin. Now, I do want to say psilocybin. Now, I do want to say because it would be entirely because it would be entirely because it would be entirely inappropriate for me to not say this inappropriate for me to not say this inappropriate for me to not say this that in most areas of the world, and in that in most areas of the world, and in that in most areas of the world, and in particular in the United States, particular in the United States, particular in the United States, psilocybin is still illegal. It is not psilocybin is still illegal. It is not psilocybin is still illegal. It is not legal. In some areas it has been legal. In some areas it has been legal. In some areas it has been decriminalized, and there are a number decriminalized, and there are a number decriminalized, and there are a number of different clinical trials occurring of different clinical trials occurring of different clinical trials occurring now at Johns Hopkins, at Stanford, at now at Johns Hopkins, at Stanford, at now at Johns Hopkins, at Stanford, at University of California, San Francisco, University of California, San Francisco, University of California, San Francisco, and elsewhere exploring psilocybin for and elsewhere exploring psilocybin for and elsewhere exploring psilocybin for the treatment of depression, for trauma, the treatment of depression, for trauma, the treatment of depression, for trauma, for eating disorders. for eating disorders. for eating disorders. Most of those studies focus on macro Most of those studies focus on macro Most of those studies focus on macro doses of psilocybin, not microdosing. doses of psilocybin, not microdosing. doses of psilocybin, not microdosing. There are far fewer studies of There are far fewer studies of There are far fewer studies of microdosing of psilocybin, and I do have microdosing of psilocybin, and I do have microdosing of psilocybin, and I do have to point out that psilocybin use to point out that psilocybin use to point out that psilocybin use um and possession and of course sale is um and possession and of course sale is um and possession and of course sale is still illegal. So, I would be remiss if still illegal. So, I would be remiss if still illegal. So, I would be remiss if I didn't state that. However, I will I didn't state that. However, I will I didn't state that. However, I will provide a link to the study that shows provide a link to the study that shows provide a link to the study that shows that microdosing of psilocybin for a that microdosing of psilocybin for a that microdosing of psilocybin for a series of weeks series of weeks series of weeks on a daily basis, so these are dosages on a daily basis, so these are dosages on a daily basis, so these are dosages of psilocybin that do not induce of psilocybin that do not induce of psilocybin that do not induce hallucination and do not massively shift hallucination and do not massively shift hallucination and do not massively shift mood or internal states in any way that mood or internal states in any way that mood or internal states in any way that has people feeling like they has people feeling like they has people feeling like they are acting or feeling that much are acting or feeling that much are acting or feeling that much different, although some people do different, although some people do different, although some people do report a subjective shift, does seem to report a subjective shift, does seem to report a subjective shift, does seem to increase divergent thinking ability. But, I do divergent thinking ability. But, I do divergent thinking ability. But, I do want to put a big asterisks, a want to put a big asterisks, a want to put a big asterisks, a highlight, and an underline pen highlight, and an underline pen highlight, and an underline pen beneath the statement I'm about to make, beneath the statement I'm about to make, beneath the statement I'm about to make, which is that pharmacology of the which is that pharmacology of the which is that pharmacology of the serotonin system, just as pharmacology serotonin system, just as pharmacology serotonin system, just as pharmacology of the dopamine system, is very of the dopamine system, is very of the dopamine system, is very broadband. It's a shotgun approach. broadband. It's a shotgun approach. broadband. It's a shotgun approach. You're going to hit all the circuits of You're going to hit all the circuits of You're going to hit all the circuits of the brain that involve serotonin with the brain that involve serotonin with the brain that involve serotonin with microdosing psilocybin. Although it has microdosing psilocybin. Although it has microdosing psilocybin. Although it has some selectivity for the 5-HT2A some selectivity for the 5-HT2A some selectivity for the 5-HT2A receptor, it can receptor, it can receptor, it can attach to other receptors as well and attach to other receptors as well and attach to other receptors as well and act there. This is the same reason why act there. This is the same reason why act there. This is the same reason why SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, can indeed shift mood and inhibitors, can indeed shift mood and inhibitors, can indeed shift mood and appetite, but can also shift libido and appetite, but can also shift libido and appetite, but can also shift libido and other things. It's because there are other things. It's because there are other things. It's because there are serotonin receptors everywhere, or I serotonin receptors everywhere, or I serotonin receptors everywhere, or I should say many places, not just in the should say many places, not just in the should say many places, not just in the areas of the brain that are associated areas of the brain that are associated areas of the brain that are associated with mood, for instance. with mood, for instance. with mood, for instance. And, as I mentioned before, And, as I mentioned before, And, as I mentioned before, agents, whether or not they are agents, whether or not they are agents, whether or not they are recreational or illicit drugs or recreational or illicit drugs or recreational or illicit drugs or prescription drugs or prescription drugs or prescription drugs or supplements that increase dopamine will supplements that increase dopamine will supplements that increase dopamine will also be broadband and hit a number of also be broadband and hit a number of also be broadband and hit a number of different circuits in parallel. So, this different circuits in parallel. So, this different circuits in parallel. So, this is why I always say is why I always say is why I always say behavioral tools really should come behavioral tools really should come behavioral tools really should come first. I don't say that because I first. I don't say that because I first. I don't say that because I dislike pharmacology. I say that because dislike pharmacology. I say that because dislike pharmacology. I say that because in many cases behavioral tools are not in many cases behavioral tools are not in many cases behavioral tools are not only safer and easier to titrate to only safer and easier to titrate to only safer and easier to titrate to adjust the duration, et cetera, adjust the duration, et cetera, adjust the duration, et cetera, than is pharmacology, but also because than is pharmacology, but also because than is pharmacology, but also because they can sometimes, as in the case of they can sometimes, as in the case of they can sometimes, as in the case of the study we just described, afford you the study we just described, afford you the study we just described, afford you more specificity, not less, than more specificity, not less, than more specificity, not less, than pharmacology. Pharmacology place, can be wonderful, Pharmacology place, can be wonderful, Pharmacology place, can be wonderful, provided safe and legal, et cetera, but provided safe and legal, et cetera, but provided safe and legal, et cetera, but it can cause a lot of so-called it can cause a lot of so-called it can cause a lot of so-called off-target effects. So, for those of you off-target effects. So, for those of you off-target effects. So, for those of you that are interested in increasing that are interested in increasing that are interested in increasing creativity through pharmacology, creativity through pharmacology, creativity through pharmacology, I would say stay tuned for the data on I would say stay tuned for the data on I would say stay tuned for the data on psilocybin and microdosing psilocybin. psilocybin and microdosing psilocybin. psilocybin and microdosing psilocybin. If you are absolutely obsessed with the you are absolutely obsessed with the you are absolutely obsessed with the idea of microdosing psilocybin for idea of microdosing psilocybin for idea of microdosing psilocybin for enhancing creativity and you'd like to enhancing creativity and you'd like to enhancing creativity and you'd like to go straight to the study, go straight to the study, go straight to the study, I will tell you what that study is and I will tell you what that study is and I will tell you what that study is and therefore you can access some of the therefore you can access some of the therefore you can access some of the specifics in terms of dosage and specifics in terms of dosage and specifics in terms of dosage and protocols, etc. So since I can't help protocols, etc. So since I can't help protocols, etc. So since I can't help myself, I'll just very briefly summarize myself, I'll just very briefly summarize myself, I'll just very briefly summarize that microdosing psychedelic study. The that microdosing psychedelic study. The that microdosing psychedelic study. The title of the study, title of the study, title of the study, which was published in 2018, is which was published in 2018, is which was published in 2018, is exploring the effect of microdosing exploring the effect of microdosing exploring the effect of microdosing psychedelics on creativity in an psychedelics on creativity in an psychedelics on creativity in an open-label natural setting. open-label natural setting. open-label natural setting. Uh interesting title. This was a Uh interesting title. This was a Uh interesting title. This was a microdosing event organized by the Dutch microdosing event organized by the Dutch microdosing event organized by the Dutch Psychedelic Society. They examined the Psychedelic Society. They examined the Psychedelic Society. They examined the effects of psychedelic truffles effects of psychedelic truffles effects of psychedelic truffles where they knew what sorts of where they knew what sorts of where they knew what sorts of psychedelic compounds were contained there on two compounds were contained there on two compounds were contained there on two creativity-related problem-solving tasks. The picture problem-solving tasks. The picture problem-solving tasks. The picture concept task, which I don't expect you concept task, which I don't expect you concept task, which I don't expect you to recognize or know, but it assesses to recognize or know, but it assesses to recognize or know, but it assesses convergent thinking, and the alternative convergent thinking, and the alternative convergent thinking, and the alternative uses task, uses task, uses task, which I also don't expect you to know, which I also don't expect you to know, which I also don't expect you to know, but is a standard task for assessing but is a standard task for assessing but is a standard task for assessing divergent thinking. divergent thinking. divergent thinking. They tested once before taking a They tested once before taking a They tested once before taking a microdose, and while the effects were microdose, and while the effects were microdose, and while the effects were expected to be manifested, they say. expected to be manifested, they say. expected to be manifested, they say. Interesting, they use the word Interesting, they use the word Interesting, they use the word manifested in a study of psychedelics. manifested in a study of psychedelics. manifested in a study of psychedelics. Science is changing. Indeed. In any Science is changing. Indeed. In any Science is changing. Indeed. In any case, what they found was an enhancement of what they found was an enhancement of what they found was an enhancement of creative, that is, creative, that is, creative, that is, divergent and convergent thinking, not divergent and convergent thinking, not divergent and convergent thinking, not surprising given the fact that the surprising given the fact that the surprising given the fact that the 5-HT2A receptor activity is increased activity is increased activity is increased by microdosing of psilocybin and 5-HT2A by microdosing of psilocybin and 5-HT2A by microdosing of psilocybin and 5-HT2A receptors are present both on the neural receptors are present both on the neural receptors are present both on the neural circuits that underlie divergent and circuits that underlie divergent and circuits that underlie divergent and convergent thinking. convergent thinking. convergent thinking. So again, this is not a plug for So again, this is not a plug for So again, this is not a plug for microdosing psilocybin. This is really microdosing psilocybin. This is really microdosing psilocybin. This is really in response to what I know will be a in response to what I know will be a in response to what I know will be a number of different questions about what number of different questions about what number of different questions about what sorts of pharmacologic agents can be sorts of pharmacologic agents can be sorts of pharmacologic agents can be used to increase creativity. So more on used to increase creativity. So more on used to increase creativity. So more on that later, and again, we'll provide a that later, and again, we'll provide a that later, and again, we'll provide a link if you want to read that study in link if you want to read that study in link if you want to read that study in more depth. more depth. more depth. I can imagine that a number of you are I can imagine that a number of you are I can imagine that a number of you are probably also wondering about the probably also wondering about the probably also wondering about the effects of alcohol and the effects of effects of alcohol and the effects of effects of alcohol and the effects of cannabis on creativity. We did a long cannabis on creativity. We did a long cannabis on creativity. We did a long in-depth episode all about alcohol and in-depth episode all about alcohol and in-depth episode all about alcohol and its effects on health. its effects on health. its effects on health. The bottom line on alcohol is that in The bottom line on alcohol is that in The bottom line on alcohol is that in excess of two drinks per week, you're excess of two drinks per week, you're excess of two drinks per week, you're starting to run into the starting to run into the starting to run into the cancer-promoting and toxic effects of cancer-promoting and toxic effects of cancer-promoting and toxic effects of alcohol. Didn't choose for the answer to be that, Didn't choose for the answer to be that, Didn't choose for the answer to be that, but that's what the data tell us. but that's what the data tell us. but that's what the data tell us. Not telling you can't drink more Not telling you can't drink more Not telling you can't drink more than two drinks per week. I'm just than two drinks per week. I'm just than two drinks per week. I'm just saying that if you're going to do that, saying that if you're going to do that, saying that if you're going to do that, you should really consider it offsetting you should really consider it offsetting you should really consider it offsetting that with some other behavioral that with some other behavioral that with some other behavioral measures, all discussed in the episode measures, all discussed in the episode measures, all discussed in the episode on alcohol. And on alcohol. And on alcohol. And despite what people think, there is despite what people think, there is despite what people think, there is absolutely zero, zero evidence that absolutely zero, zero evidence that absolutely zero, zero evidence that alcohol increases creativity. However, alcohol increases creativity. However, alcohol increases creativity. However, by way of reducing activation of the by way of reducing activation of the by way of reducing activation of the prefrontal cortex, there is some prefrontal cortex, there is some prefrontal cortex, there is some evidence that alcohol and other evidence that alcohol and other evidence that alcohol and other substances that reduce what is called substances that reduce what is called substances that reduce what is called autobiographical scripting, that is autobiographical scripting, that is autobiographical scripting, that is a narrative about ourselves, sort of a narrative about ourselves, sort of a narrative about ourselves, sort of self-awareness, that it can enhance self-awareness, that it can enhance self-awareness, that it can enhance divergent thinking at very low doses. divergent thinking at very low doses. divergent thinking at very low doses. Now, this makes sense. Divergent Now, this makes sense. Divergent Now, this makes sense. Divergent thinking involves remembering certain thinking involves remembering certain thinking involves remembering certain things that we can use as elements in things that we can use as elements in things that we can use as elements in the creative process, but suppressing the creative process, but suppressing the creative process, but suppressing narratives about what the use of those narratives about what the use of those narratives about what the use of those would mean. Will people like it? Will would mean. Will people like it? Will would mean. Will people like it? Will they not like it? Will it lead to the they not like it? Will it lead to the they not like it? Will it lead to the outcome we want? Will it won't? All of outcome we want? Will it won't? All of outcome we want? Will it won't? All of that autobiographical scripting involves that autobiographical scripting involves that autobiographical scripting involves the forebrain being very, very active the forebrain being very, very active the forebrain being very, very active and specific regions of the forebrain in and specific regions of the forebrain in and specific regions of the forebrain in particular, and that all needs to be particular, and that all needs to be particular, and that all needs to be suppressed, which alcohol in very low suppressed, which alcohol in very low suppressed, which alcohol in very low doses can accomplish. But again, that's doses can accomplish. But again, that's doses can accomplish. But again, that's not a plug for alcohol. I think not a plug for alcohol. I think not a plug for alcohol. I think behavioral tools would be a much better behavioral tools would be a much better behavioral tools would be a much better route. But it therefore shouldn't be route. But it therefore shouldn't be route. But it therefore shouldn't be surprising why some people have used surprising why some people have used surprising why some people have used low-dose alcohol in order to engage in low-dose alcohol in order to engage in low-dose alcohol in order to engage in the creative process because it involves the creative process because it involves the creative process because it involves less inhibition or sense of self that less inhibition or sense of self that less inhibition or sense of self that could be detrimental to the divergent could be detrimental to the divergent could be detrimental to the divergent thinking process. Now, with respect to thinking process. Now, with respect to thinking process. Now, with respect to cannabis, I went in depth into the biology and the I went in depth into the biology and the I went in depth into the biology and the various uses, misuses, dangers, and in various uses, misuses, dangers, and in various uses, misuses, dangers, and in some cases benefits of cannabis use in some cases benefits of cannabis use in some cases benefits of cannabis use in certain the keyword there is certain the keyword there is certain the keyword there is certain populations. And I also dove into whether or not cannabis I also dove into whether or not cannabis I also dove into whether or not cannabis can be used to increase divergent and can be used to increase divergent and can be used to increase divergent and convergent thinking. So, that's time convergent thinking. So, that's time convergent thinking. So, that's time stamped in that episode. I'll refer you stamped in that episode. I'll refer you stamped in that episode. I'll refer you to that episode, but the long and short to that episode, but the long and short to that episode, but the long and short of it is that many of the ideas that of it is that many of the ideas that of it is that many of the ideas that people come up with people come up with people come up with when under the influence of cannabis in when under the influence of cannabis in when under the influence of cannabis in particular high THC containing cannabis particular high THC containing cannabis particular high THC containing cannabis does lead to enhanced divergent does lead to enhanced divergent does lead to enhanced divergent thinking, but so enhanced, it turns out, thinking, but so enhanced, it turns out, thinking, but so enhanced, it turns out, that oftentimes those ideas can't be that oftentimes those ideas can't be that oftentimes those ideas can't be constrained by the convergent thinking constrained by the convergent thinking constrained by the convergent thinking process. In other words, they have lots process. In other words, they have lots process. In other words, they have lots of ideas that make sense while under the of ideas that make sense while under the of ideas that make sense while under the influence of cannabis, but that later influence of cannabis, but that later influence of cannabis, but that later cannot be implemented into a coherent cannot be implemented into a coherent cannot be implemented into a coherent framework that leads to any actual framework that leads to any actual framework that leads to any actual creative endeavor or creative product. creative endeavor or creative product. creative endeavor or creative product. Or, as is often the case with cannabis, Or, as is often the case with cannabis, Or, as is often the case with cannabis, they simply can't remember what they simply can't remember what they simply can't remember what they were thinking about. Anytime there's a were thinking about. Anytime there's a were thinking about. Anytime there's a discussion about dopamine, there seems discussion about dopamine, there seems discussion about dopamine, there seems to be a discussion about motivation, to be a discussion about motivation, to be a discussion about motivation, desire, and drive. And of course, that desire, and drive. And of course, that desire, and drive. And of course, that makes sense given the roles of dopamine. makes sense given the roles of dopamine. makes sense given the roles of dopamine. We did an entire episode on dopamine, We did an entire episode on dopamine, We did an entire episode on dopamine, motivation, and drive. It's one of our motivation, and drive. It's one of our motivation, and drive. It's one of our most popular episodes. Again, you can most popular episodes. Again, you can most popular episodes. Again, you can access that with timestamps in all access that with timestamps in all access that with timestamps in all formats at hubermanlab.com. formats at hubermanlab.com. formats at hubermanlab.com. And anytime there's a discussion about And anytime there's a discussion about And anytime there's a discussion about dopamine and motivation, dopamine and motivation, dopamine and motivation, we also seem to have a lot of questions we also seem to have a lot of questions we also seem to have a lot of questions about attention and focus and ADHD or about attention and focus and ADHD or about attention and focus and ADHD or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in particular. in particular. in particular. So, just as a brief mention, there is a So, just as a brief mention, there is a So, just as a brief mention, there is a literature, although not terribly literature, although not terribly literature, although not terribly extensive, a small but strong literature extensive, a small but strong literature extensive, a small but strong literature on the relationship between ADHD and on the relationship between ADHD and on the relationship between ADHD and creativity. And the long and short of creativity. And the long and short of creativity. And the long and short of that literature is that people who have that literature is that people who have that literature is that people who have ADHD, regardless of age, ADHD, regardless of age, ADHD, regardless of age, do seem to have an ability to focus. do seem to have an ability to focus. do seem to have an ability to focus. I've mentioned that in the episode on I've mentioned that in the episode on I've mentioned that in the episode on ADHD, provided that they are interested ADHD, provided that they are interested ADHD, provided that they are interested in the thing that they are focusing on. in the thing that they are focusing on. in the thing that they are focusing on. So, that runs counter to this idea that So, that runs counter to this idea that So, that runs counter to this idea that people with ADHD simply can't focus. people with ADHD simply can't focus. people with ADHD simply can't focus. They can, but it tends to be a focus They can, but it tends to be a focus They can, but it tends to be a focus that's selective for things that they that's selective for things that they that's selective for things that they are very excited about or interested in are very excited about or interested in are very excited about or interested in as opposed to a general ability to as opposed to a general ability to as opposed to a general ability to focus. What's also highly under-appreciated is What's also highly under-appreciated is What's also highly under-appreciated is that people who have ADHD often times that people who have ADHD often times that people who have ADHD often times are very effective at divergent are very effective at divergent are very effective at divergent thinking, but are less effective at thinking, but are less effective at thinking, but are less effective at convergent thinking. What this tells us convergent thinking. What this tells us convergent thinking. What this tells us is that people with ADHD can often have is that people with ADHD can often have is that people with ADHD can often have excellent novel and indeed creative excellent novel and indeed creative excellent novel and indeed creative ideas, but that the implementation of ideas, but that the implementation of ideas, but that the implementation of those creative ideas is sometimes those creative ideas is sometimes those creative ideas is sometimes challenged. And that's one reason to challenged. And that's one reason to challenged. And that's one reason to explore rational pharmacology, nutrition explore rational pharmacology, nutrition explore rational pharmacology, nutrition supplementation, etc. Those are all supplementation, etc. Those are all supplementation, etc. Those are all things to explore in concert with or I things to explore in concert with or I things to explore in concert with or I should say in working closely with a should say in working closely with a should say in working closely with a board-certified physician or ideally board-certified physician or ideally board-certified physician or ideally psychiatrist expert in ADHD. You can psychiatrist expert in ADHD. You can psychiatrist expert in ADHD. You can also check out the episode that we did also check out the episode that we did also check out the episode that we did on ADHD. There are a lot of tools there, on ADHD. There are a lot of tools there, on ADHD. There are a lot of tools there, a lot of science mentioned there to a lot of science mentioned there to a lot of science mentioned there to support those tools. Again, you can find support those tools. Again, you can find support those tools. Again, you can find that hubermanlab.com, but I did think it that hubermanlab.com, but I did think it that hubermanlab.com, but I did think it was important to point out even if was important to point out even if was important to point out even if briefly that having ADHD is not a briefly that having ADHD is not a briefly that having ADHD is not a barrier to creativity. In fact, may barrier to creativity. In fact, may barrier to creativity. In fact, may actually be an enhanced portal to actually be an enhanced portal to actually be an enhanced portal to creativity, but that it doesn't allow creativity, but that it doesn't allow creativity, but that it doesn't allow people to access the convergent thinking people to access the convergent thinking people to access the convergent thinking that allows creative ideas to be that allows creative ideas to be that allows creative ideas to be implemented into specific strategies, implemented into specific strategies, implemented into specific strategies, pressure-tested, and eventually pressure-tested, and eventually pressure-tested, and eventually delivered in the form of a final product delivered in the form of a final product delivered in the form of a final product of music, art, etc. That is not to say of music, art, etc. That is not to say of music, art, etc. That is not to say that people with ADHD cannot accomplish that people with ADHD cannot accomplish that people with ADHD cannot accomplish that, but that it is going to require that, but that it is going to require that, but that it is going to require some additional steps and protocols in some additional steps and protocols in some additional steps and protocols in order to enhance convergent thinking. order to enhance convergent thinking. order to enhance convergent thinking. And that episode and the episode that we And that episode and the episode that we And that episode and the episode that we did on focus and in particular tools to did on focus and in particular tools to did on focus and in particular tools to enhance focus is very much directed at enhance focus is very much directed at enhance focus is very much directed at ways to enhance convergent thinking. So, ways to enhance convergent thinking. So, ways to enhance convergent thinking. So, if you have ADHD or know somebody who if you have ADHD or know somebody who if you have ADHD or know somebody who does and you're interested in the does and you're interested in the does and you're interested in the creative process or focusing generally, creative process or focusing generally, creative process or focusing generally, please check out the episodes that I please check out the episodes that I please check out the episodes that I mentioned. Now, there's also a small, mentioned. Now, there's also a small, mentioned. Now, there's also a small, but nonetheless very exciting literature but nonetheless very exciting literature but nonetheless very exciting literature on the relationship between physical on the relationship between physical on the relationship between physical movement and divergent thinking. This movement and divergent thinking. This movement and divergent thinking. This should come as no surprise to us. As should come as no surprise to us. As should come as no surprise to us. As mentioned many times now in this mentioned many times now in this mentioned many times now in this episode, the nigrostriatal pathway episode, the nigrostriatal pathway episode, the nigrostriatal pathway involved in divergent thinking that involved in divergent thinking that involved in divergent thinking that involves dopamine is also responsible involves dopamine is also responsible involves dopamine is also responsible for eye blinks and for movements of the for eye blinks and for movements of the for eye blinks and for movements of the limbs of the body in very deliberate limbs of the body in very deliberate limbs of the body in very deliberate ways. This tells us that there's some direct This tells us that there's some direct This tells us that there's some direct or maybe indirect relationship between or maybe indirect relationship between or maybe indirect relationship between movement of the body and divergent movement of the body and divergent movement of the body and divergent thinking. And despite the fact that it's thinking. And despite the fact that it's thinking. And despite the fact that it's only a few studies, there have been some only a few studies, there have been some only a few studies, there have been some studies of whether or not people are studies of whether or not people are studies of whether or not people are able to engage in divergent thinking able to engage in divergent thinking able to engage in divergent thinking more effectively when they are doing more effectively when they are doing more effectively when they are doing things like pacing or walking. And this things like pacing or walking. And this things like pacing or walking. And this could be on a treadmill or back and could be on a treadmill or back and could be on a treadmill or back and forth across the room. And in fact, that forth across the room. And in fact, that forth across the room. And in fact, that is absolutely the case. If you're is absolutely the case. If you're is absolutely the case. If you're somebody like myself who tends to have somebody like myself who tends to have somebody like myself who tends to have their best ideas, not saying that my ideas are best ideas, not saying that my ideas are best ideas, not saying that my ideas are always terrific, but the among the ideas always terrific, but the among the ideas always terrific, but the among the ideas I have, some of the better ones arrive I have, some of the better ones arrive I have, some of the better ones arrive to me while on my long Sunday run. I to me while on my long Sunday run. I to me while on my long Sunday run. I tend to do a long run or hike on tend to do a long run or hike on tend to do a long run or hike on Sundays, sometimes with a light weight Sundays, sometimes with a light weight Sundays, sometimes with a light weight vest or something of that sort. But when vest or something of that sort. But when vest or something of that sort. But when I'm in a state of essentially not I'm in a state of essentially not I'm in a state of essentially not directing my attention to any one thing directing my attention to any one thing directing my attention to any one thing in my external environment, this is in my external environment, this is in my external environment, this is extremely key for reasons that now extremely key for reasons that now extremely key for reasons that now should be obvious. Anytime we are should be obvious. Anytime we are should be obvious. Anytime we are directing our attention to a visual directing our attention to a visual directing our attention to a visual target or an auditory target, we are not target or an auditory target, we are not target or an auditory target, we are not as able to engage in divergent thinking. as able to engage in divergent thinking. as able to engage in divergent thinking. This is why I will sometimes listen to This is why I will sometimes listen to This is why I will sometimes listen to podcasts or to audiobooks while I go on podcasts or to audiobooks while I go on podcasts or to audiobooks while I go on these runs, but for portions of these runs, but for portions of these runs, but for portions of these runs or hikes, I tend to turn those off runs or hikes, I tend to turn those off runs or hikes, I tend to turn those off and just focus on the movement and focus and just focus on the movement and focus and just focus on the movement and focus on not focusing on anything in on not focusing on anything in on not focusing on anything in particular. And often times I will stop particular. And often times I will stop particular. And often times I will stop and write down ideas that suddenly or and write down ideas that suddenly or and write down ideas that suddenly or seemingly suddenly um appear to me or seemingly suddenly um appear to me or seemingly suddenly um appear to me or geyser to the surface. I'll have an geyser to the surface. I'll have an geyser to the surface. I'll have an idea. Sometimes those are good ideas, idea. Sometimes those are good ideas, idea. Sometimes those are good ideas, sometimes less good ideas. The fact that sometimes less good ideas. The fact that sometimes less good ideas. The fact that happens for me and that fact that happens for me and that fact that happens for me and that fact that many people are pacers or runners or many people are pacers or runners or many people are pacers or runners or come up with their best ideas while in come up with their best ideas while in come up with their best ideas while in the shower or while engaging in the shower or while engaging in the shower or while engaging in activities that don't require a lot of activities that don't require a lot of activities that don't require a lot of sensory attention to one specific sensory attention to one specific sensory attention to one specific location, either visual or auditory, location, either visual or auditory, location, either visual or auditory, etc. That is because it engages these That is because it engages these That is because it engages these nigrostriatal pathways through movement, nigrostriatal pathways through movement, nigrostriatal pathways through movement, which then opens up this library of which then opens up this library of which then opens up this library of ideas and allows the intersection of ideas and allows the intersection of ideas and allows the intersection of different ideas that normally would be different ideas that normally would be different ideas that normally would be constrained to separate categories. One constrained to separate categories. One constrained to separate categories. One way to think about this by analogy would way to think about this by analogy would way to think about this by analogy would be you know, when I was a kid you'd go to you know, when I was a kid you'd go to you know, when I was a kid you'd go to the library and nowadays you just go the library and nowadays you just go the library and nowadays you just go online, but the different pages of online, but the different pages of online, but the different pages of different books on different topics are different books on different topics are different books on different topics are kept distinct from one another. That is kept distinct from one another. That is kept distinct from one another. That is bound by different book covers and book bound by different book covers and book bound by different book covers and book ends, different shelves in the library. It's different shelves in the library. It's different shelves in the library. It's as if different pages and elements from as if different pages and elements from as if different pages and elements from those books are now being combined in a those books are now being combined in a those books are now being combined in a pseudo random, not random, but in a pseudo random, not random, but in a pseudo random, not random, but in a pseudo random way. And in that pseudo random way. And in that pseudo random way. And in that combination, new possibilities about combination, new possibilities about combination, new possibilities about ways that information could be combined ways that information could be combined ways that information could be combined and implemented start to arise. So, the and implemented start to arise. So, the and implemented start to arise. So, the tool that emerges from this is very tool that emerges from this is very tool that emerges from this is very simple and it won't necessarily apply to simple and it won't necessarily apply to simple and it won't necessarily apply to everybody, but if you are somebody who everybody, but if you are somebody who everybody, but if you are somebody who finds that just sitting in a chair and finds that just sitting in a chair and finds that just sitting in a chair and trying to be creative is very trying to be creative is very trying to be creative is very challenging, some of you might benefit from, for some of you might benefit from, for some of you might benefit from, for instance, if you are engaging in writing instance, if you are engaging in writing instance, if you are engaging in writing or you want to write, to talk into or you want to write, to talk into or you want to write, to talk into the voice recorder of your phone while the voice recorder of your phone while the voice recorder of your phone while walking or simply walking and not walking or simply walking and not walking or simply walking and not attending to any one specific thing attending to any one specific thing attending to any one specific thing visually or through headphones, and then visually or through headphones, and then visually or through headphones, and then as ideas surface, as ideas surface, as ideas surface, seemingly out of nowhere, which is how seemingly out of nowhere, which is how seemingly out of nowhere, which is how it happens, that you could either put it happens, that you could either put it happens, that you could either put them into your phone by voice dictation them into your phone by voice dictation them into your phone by voice dictation or you could type them out if you like. or you could type them out if you like. or you could type them out if you like. The key thing is to not be distracted by The key thing is to not be distracted by The key thing is to not be distracted by other things in your phone, not to start other things in your phone, not to start other things in your phone, not to start going on to social media or doing phone going on to social media or doing phone going on to social media or doing phone calls or looking at text messages, calls or looking at text messages, calls or looking at text messages, because that by definition is going to because that by definition is going to because that by definition is going to take you out of this take you out of this take you out of this what the biologists call a pseudo random what the biologists call a pseudo random what the biologists call a pseudo random walk. And this pseudo random element is walk. And this pseudo random element is walk. And this pseudo random element is extremely important. We know, for extremely important. We know, for extremely important. We know, for instance, that many circuits within the instance, that many circuits within the instance, that many circuits within the brain have what's called dedicated brain have what's called dedicated brain have what's called dedicated point-to-point wiring. So, for instance, point-to-point wiring. So, for instance, point-to-point wiring. So, for instance, the brain circuits that govern your the brain circuits that govern your the brain circuits that govern your breathing, the brain circuits that breathing, the brain circuits that breathing, the brain circuits that govern your heartbeat, the brain govern your heartbeat, the brain govern your heartbeat, the brain circuits that govern your specific circuits that govern your specific circuits that govern your specific movements once you are an adult and movements once you are an adult and movements once you are an adult and allow for smooth directed movement are allow for smooth directed movement are allow for smooth directed movement are very precise, very little slop, if any, very precise, very little slop, if any, very precise, very little slop, if any, in the wiring. However, there are in the wiring. However, there are in the wiring. However, there are aspects of your brain circuitry, yours aspects of your brain circuitry, yours aspects of your brain circuitry, yours and everybody else's, and everybody else's, and everybody else's, I should say, I should say, I should say, that are maintained into adulthood that are maintained into adulthood that are maintained into adulthood that include a lot of extra wiring. And this include a lot of extra wiring. And this include a lot of extra wiring. And this is these are fine wires, they're not the is these are fine wires, they're not the is these are fine wires, they're not the major highways between different areas, major highways between different areas, major highways between different areas, if you will. So, it's sort of like if you will. So, it's sort of like if you will. So, it's sort of like Google Maps has highways and streets and Google Maps has highways and streets and Google Maps has highways and streets and little passages and alleys, but little passages and alleys, but little passages and alleys, but it's as if there's a little web of it's as if there's a little web of it's as if there's a little web of additional possible pathways cast over additional possible pathways cast over additional possible pathways cast over that entire thing. The human brain that entire thing. The human brain that entire thing. The human brain maintains such webs of possible passage, maintains such webs of possible passage, maintains such webs of possible passage, and it's only during activities such as and it's only during activities such as and it's only during activities such as walking, running, cycling, swimming, walking, running, cycling, swimming, walking, running, cycling, swimming, hiking, pacing, hiking, pacing, hiking, pacing, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, that the activation of those that the activation of those that the activation of those pseudo-random pathways starts to ramp pseudo-random pathways starts to ramp pseudo-random pathways starts to ramp up. So, this is a purely behavioral up. So, this is a purely behavioral up. So, this is a purely behavioral approach to engaging different elements approach to engaging different elements approach to engaging different elements within neural networks that normally within neural networks that normally within neural networks that normally would not communicate with one another would not communicate with one another would not communicate with one another when we are completely still. So, again, when we are completely still. So, again, when we are completely still. So, again, the practices I talked about earlier of the practices I talked about earlier of the practices I talked about earlier of being completely still to raise dopamine being completely still to raise dopamine being completely still to raise dopamine and enhance divergent thinking, those I and enhance divergent thinking, those I and enhance divergent thinking, those I just want to re-emphasize are designed just want to re-emphasize are designed just want to re-emphasize are designed to position you to ready you to engage to position you to ready you to engage to position you to ready you to engage in the kinds of activities like walking in the kinds of activities like walking in the kinds of activities like walking and pacing, et cetera, that best and pacing, et cetera, that best and pacing, et cetera, that best facilitate divergent thinking. So, if facilitate divergent thinking. So, if facilitate divergent thinking. So, if you are somebody who wants to enhance you are somebody who wants to enhance you are somebody who wants to enhance divergent thinking, I would encourage divergent thinking, I would encourage divergent thinking, I would encourage you to explore how different patterns of you to explore how different patterns of you to explore how different patterns of movement, in particular patterns of movement, in particular patterns of movement, in particular patterns of movement that don't require any movement that don't require any movement that don't require any conscious attention to any one specific conscious attention to any one specific conscious attention to any one specific thing, allow you to access new ideas and new allow you to access new ideas and new allow you to access new ideas and new ways of combining existing elements in ways of combining existing elements in ways of combining existing elements in whatever domain it is you want to be whatever domain it is you want to be whatever domain it is you want to be creative. Now, this is also an creative. Now, this is also an creative. Now, this is also an opportunity to underscore something I opportunity to underscore something I opportunity to underscore something I said back at the beginning, which is you said back at the beginning, which is you said back at the beginning, which is you are not going to come up with great are not going to come up with great are not going to come up with great works of music if you don't understand works of music if you don't understand works of music if you don't understand chords and melodies and notes and music. chords and melodies and notes and music. chords and melodies and notes and music. Those basic elements have to be built up Those basic elements have to be built up Those basic elements have to be built up through some sort of formal or at least through some sort of formal or at least through some sort of formal or at least rigorous or regular training. In the rigorous or regular training. In the rigorous or regular training. In the same way that you're not going to take a same way that you're not going to take a same way that you're not going to take a walk and then suddenly be able to paint walk and then suddenly be able to paint walk and then suddenly be able to paint an incredible picture if you have no an incredible picture if you have no an incredible picture if you have no painting ability. That is not going to painting ability. That is not going to painting ability. That is not going to happen. What I'm talking about here are happen. What I'm talking about here are happen. What I'm talking about here are ways to enhance your capacity for ways to enhance your capacity for ways to enhance your capacity for divergent thinking, such as NSDR, and divergent thinking, such as NSDR, and divergent thinking, such as NSDR, and ways to engage in divergent thinking, ways to engage in divergent thinking, ways to engage in divergent thinking, such as through certain forms of such as through certain forms of such as through certain forms of movement that don't require a lot of movement that don't require a lot of movement that don't require a lot of conscious attention to your surroundings conscious attention to your surroundings conscious attention to your surroundings or any one specific sensory target. or any one specific sensory target. or any one specific sensory target. And in doing so, enhancing your ability And in doing so, enhancing your ability And in doing so, enhancing your ability to be more creative in a domain for to be more creative in a domain for to be more creative in a domain for which you already have some degree of which you already have some degree of which you already have some degree of skill or even mastery. Now, in keeping skill or even mastery. Now, in keeping skill or even mastery. Now, in keeping with the theme of how to enhance our with the theme of how to enhance our with the theme of how to enhance our creativity, there's a very exciting and yet parallel there's a very exciting and yet parallel there's a very exciting and yet parallel literature to the literature that I've literature to the literature that I've literature to the literature that I've been describing thus far. Now, I promise been describing thus far. Now, I promise been describing thus far. Now, I promise you that I'm not going to open up an you that I'm not going to open up an you that I'm not going to open up an entire library of new information entire library of new information entire library of new information related to neural circuits and so forth, related to neural circuits and so forth, related to neural circuits and so forth, but I would be remiss if I didn't but I would be remiss if I didn't but I would be remiss if I didn't mention this parallel literature, mention this parallel literature, mention this parallel literature, because it speaks very specifically to because it speaks very specifically to because it speaks very specifically to some important practices that we can all some important practices that we can all some important practices that we can all use in order to enhance creativity and use in order to enhance creativity and use in order to enhance creativity and to do so the first time and every time. to do so the first time and every time. to do so the first time and every time. And this is really because certain And this is really because certain And this is really because certain scientists out there have really gone scientists out there have really gone scientists out there have really gone through the trouble, I should even say through the trouble, I should even say through the trouble, I should even say the painstaking trouble, of really the painstaking trouble, of really the painstaking trouble, of really trying to dissect what the creative trying to dissect what the creative trying to dissect what the creative process is, both for individuals and in process is, both for individuals and in process is, both for individuals and in groups or even in pairs. And so, what groups or even in pairs. And so, what groups or even in pairs. And so, what I'm about to tell you is beautifully I'm about to tell you is beautifully I'm about to tell you is beautifully encapsulated in an article encapsulated in an article encapsulated in an article entitled A New Method for Training entitled A New Method for Training entitled A New Method for Training Creativity: Narrative as an Alternative Creativity: Narrative as an Alternative Creativity: Narrative as an Alternative to Divergent Thinking. to Divergent Thinking. to Divergent Thinking. So, again, we've been talking about So, again, we've been talking about So, again, we've been talking about divergent thinking, that's one pathway divergent thinking, that's one pathway divergent thinking, that's one pathway into the creative process, but there are into the creative process, but there are into the creative process, but there are others as well. And as it turns out, others as well. And as it turns out, others as well. And as it turns out, they're not so distinct in terms of the they're not so distinct in terms of the they're not so distinct in terms of the underlying brain mechanisms. underlying brain mechanisms. underlying brain mechanisms. Nonetheless, let me describe briefly how Nonetheless, let me describe briefly how Nonetheless, let me describe briefly how narrative can be used to train narrative can be used to train narrative can be used to train creativity and to become more creative. creativity and to become more creative. creativity and to become more creative. And in order to do that, I'd like to And in order to do that, I'd like to And in order to do that, I'd like to just briefly paraphrase or read from the just briefly paraphrase or read from the just briefly paraphrase or read from the first paragraph of this paper. So, what first paragraph of this paper. So, what first paragraph of this paper. So, what I'm about to read are the authors' I'm about to read are the authors' I'm about to read are the authors' words, not mine. Quote, words, not mine. Quote, words, not mine. Quote, "Here's a paradox. According to current "Here's a paradox. According to current "Here's a paradox. According to current research, young children are more research, young children are more research, young children are more imaginatively creative than adults." And imaginatively creative than adults." And imaginatively creative than adults." And indeed, that is true, by the way. indeed, that is true, by the way. indeed, that is true, by the way. "Yet also according to current research, "Yet also according to current research, "Yet also according to current research, creativity's main neural engine is creativity's main neural engine is creativity's main neural engine is divergent thinking, which relies on divergent thinking, which relies on divergent thinking, which relies on memory and logical association, two memory and logical association, two memory and logical association, two tasks at which young children tasks at which young children tasks at which young children underperform adults. That is children underperform adults. That is children underperform adults. That is children are not as good at divergent thinking as are not as good at divergent thinking as are not as good at divergent thinking as adults are. So how could it be, the adults are. So how could it be, the adults are. So how could it be, the authors are asking, that children are authors are asking, that children are authors are asking, that children are more imaginative and thus more creative more imaginative and thus more creative more imaginative and thus more creative than adults. This can only mean that than adults. This can only mean that than adults. This can only mean that there are alternate pathways to there are alternate pathways to there are alternate pathways to creativity. And indeed that is the case. And indeed that is the case. And indeed that is the case. And so what this paper really explores And so what this paper really explores And so what this paper really explores is other ways to access creativity. And is other ways to access creativity. And is other ways to access creativity. And what they describe is what's called what they describe is what's called what they describe is what's called narrative theory. And there's a number narrative theory. And there's a number narrative theory. And there's a number of different aspects to this narrative of different aspects to this narrative of different aspects to this narrative theory. But they agree that the standard But they agree that the standard But they agree that the standard definition of creativity is the same one definition of creativity is the same one definition of creativity is the same one that we were talking about before. So that we were talking about before. So that we were talking about before. So we're not talking about a different form we're not talking about a different form we're not talking about a different form of creativity here. We're talking about of creativity here. We're talking about of creativity here. We're talking about a different way to access creativity. a different way to access creativity. a different way to access creativity. They describe the standard definition of They describe the standard definition of They describe the standard definition of creativity as quote the ability to creativity as quote the ability to creativity as quote the ability to generate novel ideas that are useful. So generate novel ideas that are useful. So generate novel ideas that are useful. So the commonly accepted one. the commonly accepted one. the commonly accepted one. And what they cite as the basis for what they cite as the basis for what they cite as the basis for narrative theory is this breakthrough narrative theory is this breakthrough narrative theory is this breakthrough finding in the 1950s. This is the work finding in the 1950s. This is the work finding in the 1950s. This is the work of Guilford. Some people out there might of Guilford. Some people out there might of Guilford. Some people out there might be familiar with it. I was not at the be familiar with it. I was not at the be familiar with it. I was not at the outset of researching this episode. What outset of researching this episode. What outset of researching this episode. What this theory from Guilford essentially this theory from Guilford essentially this theory from Guilford essentially states is that there are different states is that there are different states is that there are different intellectual capacities that are not intellectual capacities that are not intellectual capacities that are not captured by standard IQ test. I think captured by standard IQ test. I think captured by standard IQ test. I think that's generally accepted nowadays. We that's generally accepted nowadays. We that's generally accepted nowadays. We know there's emotional intelligence. We know there's emotional intelligence. We know there's emotional intelligence. We know there's standard IQ, etc. know there's standard IQ, etc. know there's standard IQ, etc. But the important element to understand But the important element to understand But the important element to understand is that these authors is that these authors is that these authors were able to trace back the idea of were able to trace back the idea of were able to trace back the idea of narrative training as a way to enhance narrative training as a way to enhance narrative training as a way to enhance creativity long before Guilford in the 1950s, all long before Guilford in the 1950s, all long before Guilford in the 1950s, all the way back to Aristotle. And so this the way back to Aristotle. And so this the way back to Aristotle. And so this is incredible. Narrative theory was is incredible. Narrative theory was is incredible. Narrative theory was actually birthed in 335 BCE in his actually birthed in 335 BCE in his actually birthed in 335 BCE in his writing called Poetics, which writing called Poetics, which writing called Poetics, which I think is incredible, at least to me, I think is incredible, at least to me, I think is incredible, at least to me, that people long before us were thinking that people long before us were thinking that people long before us were thinking about creativity and what goes into about creativity and what goes into about creativity and what goes into creativity. And what Aristotle said, creativity. And what Aristotle said, creativity. And what Aristotle said, what Guilford then elaborated on, and what Guilford then elaborated on, and what Guilford then elaborated on, and what the authors of this paper further what the authors of this paper further what the authors of this paper further elaborate on, and actually have elaborate on, and actually have elaborate on, and actually have developed training protocols for, is the developed training protocols for, is the developed training protocols for, is the idea that there are three elements that idea that there are three elements that idea that there are three elements that we can use in order to enhance we can use in order to enhance we can use in order to enhance creativity. And those three elements are creativity. And those three elements are creativity. And those three elements are what's called world building. I'll what's called world building. I'll what's called world building. I'll explain what these are in a moment. explain what these are in a moment. explain what these are in a moment. Perspective shifting and action Perspective shifting and action Perspective shifting and action generating. And right off the bat, the generating. And right off the bat, the generating. And right off the bat, the word action should raise a flag for you. word action should raise a flag for you. word action should raise a flag for you. And by that I mean a positive flag And by that I mean a positive flag And by that I mean a positive flag because once again we are back into the because once again we are back into the because once again we are back into the world and therefore the neural circuits world and therefore the neural circuits world and therefore the neural circuits of movement and motion. Okay, so three of movement and motion. Okay, so three of movement and motion. Okay, so three elements of world building, perspective elements of world building, perspective elements of world building, perspective shifting, and active generating are what shifting, and active generating are what shifting, and active generating are what make up this narrative approach to make up this narrative approach to make up this narrative approach to creativity. And I should mention that creativity. And I should mention that creativity. And I should mention that these authors and others are using such these authors and others are using such these authors and others are using such approach with companies, with groups, approach with companies, with groups, approach with companies, with groups, with individuals. So this is used in a with individuals. So this is used in a with individuals. So this is used in a bunch of different contexts to approach bunch of different contexts to approach bunch of different contexts to approach and enhance different forms of and enhance different forms of and enhance different forms of creativity. So let's talk first about world building So let's talk first about world building So let's talk first about world building techniques. This is going to be immediately This is going to be immediately This is going to be immediately familiar to you when you hear it. But familiar to you when you hear it. But familiar to you when you hear it. But one of the key elements of creativity is one of the key elements of creativity is one of the key elements of creativity is to at the outset come up with some idea to at the outset come up with some idea to at the outset come up with some idea that makes sense or is attractive to you that makes sense or is attractive to you that makes sense or is attractive to you about how the world is different inside about how the world is different inside about how the world is different inside of your creative endeavor. So for those of your creative endeavor. So for those of your creative endeavor. So for those that write science fiction or think that write science fiction or think that write science fiction or think about science fiction, there's some about science fiction, there's some about science fiction, there's some obvious aspects to this. But for those obvious aspects to this. But for those obvious aspects to this. But for those of you that don't, maybe you come up of you that don't, maybe you come up of you that don't, maybe you come up with a narrative for instance in the with a narrative for instance in the with a narrative for instance in the context of storytelling that in your context of storytelling that in your context of storytelling that in your world we are the house cats world we are the house cats world we are the house cats and the cats are actually the ones that and the cats are actually the ones that and the cats are actually the ones that are the curators of the earth. Okay, so are the curators of the earth. Okay, so are the curators of the earth. Okay, so right there there's a conceptual shift right there there's a conceptual shift right there there's a conceptual shift that the world in which whatever that the world in which whatever that the world in which whatever creative idea is going to emerge is creative idea is going to emerge is creative idea is going to emerge is entirely different than the one that we entirely different than the one that we entirely different than the one that we actually live in. So that sets a certain actually live in. So that sets a certain actually live in. So that sets a certain number of important constraints. It number of important constraints. It number of important constraints. It means certain things are now possible, means certain things are now possible, means certain things are now possible, other things are not possible that are other things are not possible that are other things are not possible that are very different from the world that we very different from the world that we very different from the world that we live in. live in. live in. You can see the parallels here to kind You can see the parallels here to kind You can see the parallels here to kind of childhood imagination where of childhood imagination where of childhood imagination where essentially anything can happen in the essentially anything can happen in the essentially anything can happen in the child's mind because they are child's mind because they are child's mind because they are unconstrained. The second element is unconstrained. The second element is unconstrained. The second element is this perspective shifting techniques. this perspective shifting techniques. this perspective shifting techniques. And the idea here is that And the idea here is that And the idea here is that not only are we supposed to have the not only are we supposed to have the not only are we supposed to have the reader or the listener or the observer reader or the listener or the observer reader or the listener or the observer or us explore for creativity and develop or us explore for creativity and develop or us explore for creativity and develop a creative idea by thinking differently, a creative idea by thinking differently, a creative idea by thinking differently, right? Which is kind of a generic term. right? Which is kind of a generic term. right? Which is kind of a generic term. How do we actually think differently? How do we actually think differently? How do we actually think differently? But rather than just say take the rather than just say take the rather than just say take the perspective of somebody else in terms of perspective of somebody else in terms of perspective of somebody else in terms of what they would see or do or say or what they would see or do or say or what they would see or do or say or think, rather we are supposed to think think, rather we are supposed to think think, rather we are supposed to think about their underlying motivation. So, about their underlying motivation. So, about their underlying motivation. So, we could do the world shift, that is the we could do the world shift, that is the we could do the world shift, that is the world structure shift from step one. And world structure shift from step one. And world structure shift from step one. And then in step two, you would ask then in step two, you would ask then in step two, you would ask yourself, "Okay, rather than yourself, "Okay, rather than yourself, "Okay, rather than write about or think about or move from write about or think about or move from write about or think about or move from the perspective of myself." Let's say the perspective of myself." Let's say the perspective of myself." Let's say you're feeling particularly happy that you're feeling particularly happy that you're feeling particularly happy that day. You'd say, "You know, I'm actually day. You'd say, "You know, I'm actually day. You'd say, "You know, I'm actually going to take the perspective of going to take the perspective of going to take the perspective of somebody who's angry." But rather than somebody who's angry." But rather than somebody who's angry." But rather than just act angry, I'm going to think about just act angry, I'm going to think about just act angry, I'm going to think about what their motivation for being angry what their motivation for being angry what their motivation for being angry is. Maybe they had a breakup. Maybe they is. Maybe they had a breakup. Maybe they is. Maybe they had a breakup. Maybe they were jealous. Maybe somebody had wronged were jealous. Maybe somebody had wronged were jealous. Maybe somebody had wronged them in some way. Maybe they're just them in some way. Maybe they're just them in some way. Maybe they're just generally angry at the world for generally angry at the world for generally angry at the world for whatever reason. And then operate from whatever reason. And then operate from whatever reason. And then operate from that motivational stance. And this is a that motivational stance. And this is a that motivational stance. And this is a very interesting and powerful step very interesting and powerful step very interesting and powerful step because what it really captures, at because what it really captures, at because what it really captures, at least as viewed by me, the least as viewed by me, the least as viewed by me, the neuroscientist, is it captures a whole neuroscientist, is it captures a whole neuroscientist, is it captures a whole set of neural circuits about what that set of neural circuits about what that set of neural circuits about what that motivational state means. Because motivational state means. Because motivational state means. Because motivational states dictate a huge motivational states dictate a huge motivational states dictate a huge number of possible different outcomes, number of possible different outcomes, number of possible different outcomes, but they really constrain the number of but they really constrain the number of but they really constrain the number of different actions and outcomes that any different actions and outcomes that any different actions and outcomes that any of us would engage in. Rather than of us would engage in. Rather than of us would engage in. Rather than saying I'm going to view the world the saying I'm going to view the world the saying I'm going to view the world the way that someone else would view the way that someone else would view the way that someone else would view the world, by stating that we are going to world, by stating that we are going to world, by stating that we are going to be motivated by their set of motivations be motivated by their set of motivations be motivated by their set of motivations and not our own, it includes a lot more and not our own, it includes a lot more and not our own, it includes a lot more possibilities and yet not an infinite possibilities and yet not an infinite possibilities and yet not an infinite number of possibilities. They are number of possibilities. They are number of possibilities. They are constrained in a logical way, which is constrained in a logical way, which is constrained in a logical way, which is one of the key elements of creativity. one of the key elements of creativity. one of the key elements of creativity. And then this third element, which is And then this third element, which is And then this third element, which is action generating techniques, action generating techniques, action generating techniques, is a really cool one that you will is a really cool one that you will is a really cool one that you will immediately notice implications for the immediately notice implications for the immediately notice implications for the workplace, which is forced workplace, which is forced workplace, which is forced collaboration. So, inside of this thing collaboration. So, inside of this thing collaboration. So, inside of this thing that we're building here, this kind of that we're building here, this kind of that we're building here, this kind of story, you create a novel rule for the story, you create a novel rule for the story, you create a novel rule for the world that your story is going to exist world that your story is going to exist world that your story is going to exist in or your music is going to exist in or in or your music is going to exist in or in or your music is going to exist in or your sport will exist in, your sport will exist in, your sport will exist in, then you create this perspective shift then you create this perspective shift then you create this perspective shift where you take on the motivation of where you take on the motivation of where you take on the motivation of someone else different than you, and someone else different than you, and someone else different than you, and then you force collaboration between then you force collaboration between then you force collaboration between that person who has this alt- alternate that person who has this alt- alternate that person who has this alt- alternate motivation different from you, and motivation different from you, and motivation different from you, and someone else who has an entirely someone else who has an entirely someone else who has an entirely different motivation. And in doing so, different motivation. And in doing so, different motivation. And in doing so, you create these kind of what are called you create these kind of what are called you create these kind of what are called creative collisions. Now, they're creative collisions. Now, they're creative collisions. Now, they're collisions because they're crossing one collisions because they're crossing one collisions because they're crossing one another and something new has to emerge another and something new has to emerge another and something new has to emerge from them. They could be antagonistic, from them. They could be antagonistic, from them. They could be antagonistic, like the arguments, fighting, physical like the arguments, fighting, physical like the arguments, fighting, physical or verbal or otherwise. They could be or verbal or otherwise. They could be or verbal or otherwise. They could be synergistic. They could take on any synergistic. They could take on any synergistic. They could take on any number of different forms depending on number of different forms depending on number of different forms depending on the motivations and the individuals that the motivations and the individuals that the motivations and the individuals that are involved. But, even though I just are involved. But, even though I just are involved. But, even though I just described this in fairly top contour, described this in fairly top contour, described this in fairly top contour, what I just described is actually the what I just described is actually the what I just described is actually the core elements of any story or any core elements of any story or any core elements of any story or any creative endeavor. It's just that many creative endeavor. It's just that many creative endeavor. It's just that many stories are from the perspective of what stories are from the perspective of what stories are from the perspective of what we already know and believe and think we already know and believe and think we already know and believe and think the world to be, the world to be, the world to be, and our own perspective, and the actions and our own perspective, and the actions and our own perspective, and the actions that we would take given that world and that we would take given that world and that we would take given that world and that perspective. Whereas, that perspective. Whereas, that perspective. Whereas, if we want to be creative, we want to if we want to be creative, we want to if we want to be creative, we want to think outside of our usual framework, think outside of our usual framework, think outside of our usual framework, and yet using elements that exist within and yet using elements that exist within and yet using elements that exist within us, right? No one has to tell us the us, right? No one has to tell us the us, right? No one has to tell us the creative narrative. We're trying to come creative narrative. We're trying to come creative narrative. We're trying to come up with it on our own. We want to up with it on our own. We want to up with it on our own. We want to essentially think in a childlike way. essentially think in a childlike way. essentially think in a childlike way. How do children think? Well, they have How do children think? Well, they have How do children think? Well, they have new, different, or entirely novel new, different, or entirely novel new, different, or entirely novel concepts about how the world works, but concepts about how the world works, but concepts about how the world works, but those are bounded, and this is a key those are bounded, and this is a key those are bounded, and this is a key word, those are bounded. They're not word, those are bounded. They're not word, those are bounded. They're not infinite. It's not that anything can infinite. It's not that anything can infinite. It's not that anything can happen, right? Some kids will say you happen, right? Some kids will say you happen, right? Some kids will say you can fly and you can shoot lasers out of can fly and you can shoot lasers out of can fly and you can shoot lasers out of your eyes, you can do all sorts of your eyes, you can do all sorts of your eyes, you can do all sorts of things, there's unicorns and candy things, there's unicorns and candy things, there's unicorns and candy falling from the sky. At some point, if falling from the sky. At some point, if falling from the sky. At some point, if you don't bound the change in the world, you don't bound the change in the world, you don't bound the change in the world, it just becomes pure chaos, and even it just becomes pure chaos, and even it just becomes pure chaos, and even children don't do that. So, we need to children don't do that. So, we need to children don't do that. So, we need to bound the change and yet create some bound the change and yet create some bound the change and yet create some alternate universe, if you will, in alternate universe, if you will, in alternate universe, if you will, in which the story takes place, which the story takes place, which the story takes place, where the creation of any kind doesn't where the creation of any kind doesn't where the creation of any kind doesn't have to be a story takes place. Then have to be a story takes place. Then have to be a story takes place. Then there has to be a perspective shift and there has to be a perspective shift and there has to be a perspective shift and this is very useful. This is a actually this is very useful. This is a actually this is very useful. This is a actually a tool that we can all use of trying to a tool that we can all use of trying to a tool that we can all use of trying to take the perspective of others, but not take the perspective of others, but not take the perspective of others, but not just asking what they would feel or just asking what they would feel or just asking what they would feel or think or do, but ask what is their think or do, but ask what is their think or do, but ask what is their motivation in life generally or what motivation in life generally or what motivation in life generally or what kind of mood stance or goal stance are kind of mood stance or goal stance are kind of mood stance or goal stance are they taking? Are they trying to extract they taking? Are they trying to extract they taking? Are they trying to extract from others? Are they trying to give to from others? Are they trying to give to from others? Are they trying to give to others? Are they very altruistic, etc., others? Are they very altruistic, etc., others? Are they very altruistic, etc., etc. And then you take that individual etc. And then you take that individual etc. And then you take that individual and you do that also for another and you do that also for another and you do that also for another individual or group of individuals and individual or group of individuals and individual or group of individuals and you start thinking about how those you start thinking about how those you start thinking about how those different individuals because of their different individuals because of their different individuals because of their different motivational states would different motivational states would different motivational states would engage at the level of action, what they engage at the level of action, what they engage at the level of action, what they would do, what they would say, would do, what they would say, would do, what they would say, would they mate, would they fight, would they mate, would they fight, would they mate, would they fight, would they etc., etc. You think of any story, the etc., etc. You think of any story, the etc., etc. You think of any story, the story of Star Wars, uh the Greek story of Star Wars, uh the Greek story of Star Wars, uh the Greek myths, you think of any story myths, you think of any story myths, you think of any story that has been created which we consider that has been created which we consider that has been created which we consider great and novel works great and novel works great and novel works and you start to find these three and you start to find these three and you start to find these three elements: world building, perspective elements: world building, perspective elements: world building, perspective shifting, and action generating shifting, and action generating shifting, and action generating techniques. And so, while this is again techniques. And so, while this is again techniques. And so, while this is again just a broad contour of what this just a broad contour of what this just a broad contour of what this narrative approach involves, I think narrative approach involves, I think narrative approach involves, I think it's a very important and very exciting it's a very important and very exciting it's a very important and very exciting one because it gives us a formula, one because it gives us a formula, one because it gives us a formula, right? We already know that divergent right? We already know that divergent right? We already know that divergent thinking and convergent thinking are thinking and convergent thinking are thinking and convergent thinking are both elements to the creative process. both elements to the creative process. both elements to the creative process. This is suggesting that whether or not This is suggesting that whether or not This is suggesting that whether or not it involves divergent thinking or not, it involves divergent thinking or not, it involves divergent thinking or not, these authors seem to think this is these authors seem to think this is these authors seem to think this is distinct from divergent thinking, that distinct from divergent thinking, that distinct from divergent thinking, that capturing some of the elements of capturing some of the elements of capturing some of the elements of creativity that are present in childhood creativity that are present in childhood creativity that are present in childhood that then tend to disappear as we start that then tend to disappear as we start that then tend to disappear as we start to assume identity, build identity, and to assume identity, build identity, and to assume identity, build identity, and understand rules about the actual world understand rules about the actual world understand rules about the actual world we live in. All of those basic elements we live in. All of those basic elements we live in. All of those basic elements of early childhood creativity can be of early childhood creativity can be of early childhood creativity can be reawakened and in fact they have data to reawakened and in fact they have data to reawakened and in fact they have data to support the fact that they can be support the fact that they can be support the fact that they can be reawakened in adults in meaningful ways reawakened in adults in meaningful ways reawakened in adults in meaningful ways that can lead to new product design, new that can lead to new product design, new that can lead to new product design, new workplace interactions, and on and on. workplace interactions, and on and on. workplace interactions, and on and on. That I find very exciting. And That I find very exciting. And That I find very exciting. And as a consequence, I intend to do an as a consequence, I intend to do an as a consequence, I intend to do an entire episode at some point on entire episode at some point on entire episode at some point on narrative and storytelling and the role narrative and storytelling and the role narrative and storytelling and the role of narrative and storytelling not just of narrative and storytelling not just of narrative and storytelling not just for sake of creativity, but also for sake of creativity, but also for sake of creativity, but also for accessing neural plasticity and for accessing neural plasticity and for accessing neural plasticity and for enhancing memory and so on. There's an enhancing memory and so on. There's an enhancing memory and so on. There's an entire landscape of literature and entire landscape of literature and entire landscape of literature and exciting tools and things to understand exciting tools and things to understand exciting tools and things to understand there. But in the meantime, we will there. But in the meantime, we will there. But in the meantime, we will provide a link to this paper and for provide a link to this paper and for provide a link to this paper and for those of you that choose not to access those of you that choose not to access those of you that choose not to access the paper, simply understanding these the paper, simply understanding these the paper, simply understanding these three aspects of narrative as an three aspects of narrative as an three aspects of narrative as an alternative to accessing creativity. alternative to accessing creativity. alternative to accessing creativity. That is That is That is a dedicated and well-understood or a dedicated and well-understood or a dedicated and well-understood or established world shift that you choose, established world shift that you choose, established world shift that you choose, perspective shifting and taking on the perspective shifting and taking on the perspective shifting and taking on the motivation of others, and creating some motivation of others, and creating some motivation of others, and creating some sort of landscape of exploration for sort of landscape of exploration for sort of landscape of exploration for what sorts of interactions would occur what sorts of interactions would occur what sorts of interactions would occur between that individual or groups of between that individual or groups of between that individual or groups of individuals and other individuals that individuals and other individuals that individuals and other individuals that have other motivations and yet are still have other motivations and yet are still have other motivations and yet are still living in this alternate world. Those living in this alternate world. Those living in this alternate world. Those three elements we now know can be three elements we now know can be three elements we now know can be combined into what you or I or anyone combined into what you or I or anyone combined into what you or I or anyone would consider important creative works. would consider important creative works. would consider important creative works. So, today we discussed creativity. This So, today we discussed creativity. This So, today we discussed creativity. This absolutely fascinating aspect to human absolutely fascinating aspect to human absolutely fascinating aspect to human brain function that has allowed us as a brain function that has allowed us as a brain function that has allowed us as a species to develop everything from great species to develop everything from great species to develop everything from great works of art and music to technological works of art and music to technological works of art and music to technological innovations that allow us to fly and innovations that allow us to fly and innovations that allow us to fly and allow us to access people all over the allow us to access people all over the allow us to access people all over the world through little screen devices that world through little screen devices that world through little screen devices that we carry around in our pockets we carry around in our pockets we carry around in our pockets and on and on. and on and on. and on and on. As I mentioned at the beginning of As I mentioned at the beginning of As I mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, I find creativity to be today's episode, I find creativity to be today's episode, I find creativity to be one of the most fascinating aspects of one of the most fascinating aspects of one of the most fascinating aspects of brain function and in particular because brain function and in particular because brain function and in particular because we don't actually know what the upper we don't actually know what the upper we don't actually know what the upper limits of creativity are and yet we limits of creativity are and yet we limits of creativity are and yet we understand that there are certain understand that there are certain understand that there are certain bounds. There are certain requirements. bounds. There are certain requirements. bounds. There are certain requirements. And the key requirement for creativity And the key requirement for creativity And the key requirement for creativity is this aspect of utility. Now, that is this aspect of utility. Now, that is this aspect of utility. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean that for doesn't necessarily mean that for doesn't necessarily mean that for something to be considered creative, it something to be considered creative, it something to be considered creative, it has to be useful in the practical sense, has to be useful in the practical sense, has to be useful in the practical sense, but it does seem that for something to but it does seem that for something to but it does seem that for something to be considered truly creative be considered truly creative be considered truly creative or especially creative in some cases, or especially creative in some cases, or especially creative in some cases, that it reveal to us something that it reveal to us something that it reveal to us something fundamental about the way that we or the fundamental about the way that we or the fundamental about the way that we or the world works. world works. world works. We discussed some of the neural circuits We discussed some of the neural circuits We discussed some of the neural circuits that underlie the different aspects of that underlie the different aspects of that underlie the different aspects of creativity, in particular divergent and creativity, in particular divergent and creativity, in particular divergent and convergent thinking, as well as convergent thinking, as well as convergent thinking, as well as narrative building, and some of the narrative building, and some of the narrative building, and some of the tools and steps that can allow us to tools and steps that can allow us to tools and steps that can allow us to better access divergent thinking and better access divergent thinking and better access divergent thinking and convergent thinking. And those tools convergent thinking. And those tools convergent thinking. And those tools include behavioral tools as well as include behavioral tools as well as include behavioral tools as well as pharmacology. And we talked about narrative building And we talked about narrative building And we talked about narrative building as a way to reawaken, or I should say as a way to reawaken, or I should say as a way to reawaken, or I should say reaccess, the childhood creativity that did indeed the childhood creativity that did indeed the childhood creativity that did indeed exist in all of us at some point in exist in all of us at some point in exist in all of us at some point in time. If you're learning from and/or time. If you're learning from and/or time. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In terrific zero-cost way to support us. In terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the addition, please subscribe to the addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. If you have up to a five-star review. If you have up to a five-star review. If you have questions for us or comments about the questions for us or comments about the questions for us or comments about the podcast, or suggestions about guests podcast, or suggestions about guests podcast, or suggestions about guests that you'd like us to interview on the that you'd like us to interview on the that you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do in the comment section on YouTube. We do in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check read all the comments. Please also check read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the out the sponsors mentioned at the out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and at various times during beginning and at various times during beginning and at various times during today's episode. That's the best way to today's episode. That's the best way to today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. As mentioned at support this podcast. As mentioned at support this podcast. As mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, we've the beginning of today's podcast, we've the beginning of today's podcast, we've partnered with Momentous Supplements, partnered with Momentous Supplements, partnered with Momentous Supplements, because Momentous Supplements are the because Momentous Supplements are the because Momentous Supplements are the very highest quality. They have very highest quality. They have very highest quality. They have single-ingredient formulations, which single-ingredient formulations, which single-ingredient formulations, which turns out to be most effective in turns out to be most effective in turns out to be most effective in building a supplement protocol. And when building a supplement protocol. And when building a supplement protocol. And when I say most effective, I mean most I say most effective, I mean most I say most effective, I mean most biologically effective and most biologically effective and most biologically effective and most cost-effective. And cost-effective. And cost-effective. And we're fortunate that they ship we're fortunate that they ship we're fortunate that they ship internationally, because we know that internationally, because we know that internationally, because we know that many of you reside outside of the United many of you reside outside of the United many of you reside outside of the United States. If you want to check out the States. If you want to check out the States. If you want to check out the supplements mentioned in today's and in supplements mentioned in today's and in supplements mentioned in today's and in other episodes of the Huberman Lab other episodes of the Huberman Lab other episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, supplements that are aimed at Podcast, supplements that are aimed at Podcast, supplements that are aimed at enhancing sleep, enhancing focus, enhancing sleep, enhancing focus, enhancing sleep, enhancing focus, hormone support, et cetera, you can go hormone support, et cetera, you can go hormone support, et cetera, you can go to Live Momentous, spelled OUS, so it's to Live Momentous, spelled OUS, so it's to Live Momentous, spelled OUS, so it's livemomentous.com/huberman. If you haven't already subscribed to the If you haven't already subscribed to the If you haven't already subscribed to the Huberman Lab Podcast and Neural Network Huberman Lab Podcast and Neural Network Huberman Lab Podcast and Neural Network Newsletter, this is a monthly newsletter Newsletter, this is a monthly newsletter Newsletter, this is a monthly newsletter that is completely zero-cost that has that is completely zero-cost that has that is completely zero-cost that has summaries of particular podcast summaries of particular podcast summaries of particular podcast episodes, as well as toolkits for things episodes, as well as toolkits for things episodes, as well as toolkits for things like enhancing sleep, enhancing focus, like enhancing sleep, enhancing focus, like enhancing sleep, enhancing focus, dopamine, deliberate cold exposure, and dopamine, deliberate cold exposure, and dopamine, deliberate cold exposure, and many other topics important to the many other topics important to the many other topics important to the listeners of the Huberman Lab podcast. listeners of the Huberman Lab podcast. listeners of the Huberman Lab podcast. If you'd like to join the newsletter, If you'd like to join the newsletter, If you'd like to join the newsletter, please go to hubermanlab.com, click on please go to hubermanlab.com, click on please go to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, and go to newsletter. You the menu, and go to newsletter. You the menu, and go to newsletter. You provide your email to us. We do not provide your email to us. We do not provide your email to us. We do not share your email with anybody else, and share your email with anybody else, and share your email with anybody else, and as I already mentioned, it is completely as I already mentioned, it is completely as I already mentioned, it is completely zero cost. If you're not already zero cost. If you're not already zero cost. If you're not already following us on Instagram, Twitter, following us on Instagram, Twitter, following us on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and or LinkedIn, please do so. Facebook, and or LinkedIn, please do so. Facebook, and or LinkedIn, please do so. It is Huberman Lab on all platforms. On It is Huberman Lab on all platforms. On It is Huberman Lab on all platforms. On all those social media platforms, I all those social media platforms, I all those social media platforms, I describe science and science-related describe science and science-related describe science and science-related tools, some of which overlap the content tools, some of which overlap the content tools, some of which overlap the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but often of the Huberman Lab podcast, but often of the Huberman Lab podcast, but often which does not overlap with the content which does not overlap with the content which does not overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's of the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's of the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all platforms. So, thank Huberman Lab on all platforms. So, thank Huberman Lab on all platforms. So, thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about the science today's discussion all about the science today's discussion all about the science and tools for creativity. And last, but and tools for creativity. And last, but and tools for creativity. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.