Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and information about science and information about science and science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. reach your health goals. reach your health goals. I've been getting my blood work done for I've been getting my blood work done for I've been getting my blood work done for many years now, and that's for the many years now, and that's for the many years now, and that's for the simple reason that only through quality simple reason that only through quality simple reason that only through quality blood work, and now through the advent blood work, and now through the advent blood work, and now through the advent of DNA tests, can one really get a clear of DNA tests, can one really get a clear of DNA tests, can one really get a clear picture of what's going on with their picture of what's going on with their picture of what's going on with their health. Things like metabolic factors health. Things like metabolic factors health. Things like metabolic factors and hormones, all the various and hormones, all the various and hormones, all the various triglycerides, these are things that can triglycerides, these are things that can triglycerides, these are things that can only be measured from a quality blood only be measured from a quality blood only be measured from a quality blood test. And now with DNA tests, you can test. And now with DNA tests, you can test. And now with DNA tests, you can get an additional window into your get an additional window into your get an additional window into your current health status and the trajectory current health status and the trajectory current health status and the trajectory of your health. What's really wonderful of your health. What's really wonderful of your health. What's really wonderful about InsideTracker is that you don't about InsideTracker is that you don't about InsideTracker is that you don't just get numbers back about the specific just get numbers back about the specific just get numbers back about the specific levels of various hormones and metabolic levels of various hormones and metabolic levels of various hormones and metabolic factors. You also get a lot of factors. You also get a lot of factors. You also get a lot of information about what you could or information about what you could or information about what you could or should do in order to adjust those should do in order to adjust those should do in order to adjust those numbers to put you on the course to numbers to put you on the course to numbers to put you on the course to better health. better health. better health. So, for instance, it will give So, for instance, it will give So, for instance, it will give recommendations about particular foods recommendations about particular foods recommendations about particular foods to eat or avoid, particular exercise to eat or avoid, particular exercise to eat or avoid, particular exercise regimens that you might want to adopt, regimens that you might want to adopt, regimens that you might want to adopt, and the frequency of those regimens in and the frequency of those regimens in and the frequency of those regimens in order to move those markers in the order to move those markers in the order to move those markers in the correct direction. correct direction. correct direction. InsideTracker has also added a new InsideTracker has also added a new InsideTracker has also added a new feature that makes tracking your feature that makes tracking your feature that makes tracking your progress and analyzing your data even progress and analyzing your data even progress and analyzing your data even easier. For those of you that use a easier. For those of you that use a easier. For those of you that use a Garmin fitness tracker, such as the Garmin fitness tracker, such as the Garmin fitness tracker, such as the Garmin watch, that's now compatible with Garmin watch, that's now compatible with Garmin watch, that's now compatible with their platform. So, you can couple your their platform. So, you can couple your their platform. So, you can couple your data from your Garmin with your blood data from your Garmin with your blood data from your Garmin with your blood and DNA for even more personalization and DNA for even more personalization and DNA for even more personalization and insights on your health. However, if and insights on your health. However, if and insights on your health. However, if you don't have a Garmin device, there's you don't have a Garmin device, there's you don't have a Garmin device, there's still a lot that you can get from Inside still a lot that you can get from Inside still a lot that you can get from Inside Tracker and their tests. If you'd like Tracker and their tests. If you'd like Tracker and their tests. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can visit to try Inside Tracker, you can visit to try Inside Tracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman, and if you do that, you'll get 25% off and if you do that, you'll get 25% off and if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Use the any of Inside Tracker's plans. Use the any of Inside Tracker's plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout. That's code Huberman at checkout. That's code Huberman at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans, and use the code Huberman at plans, and use the code Huberman at plans, and use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also checkout. Today's podcast is also checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by ExpressVPN. brought to us by ExpressVPN. brought to us by ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is a virtual private network ExpressVPN is a virtual private network ExpressVPN is a virtual private network that keeps your data secure and private. that keeps your data secure and private. that keeps your data secure and private. It does that by routing your internet It does that by routing your internet It does that by routing your internet activity through their servers and activity through their servers and activity through their servers and encrypting it so that no one can see or encrypting it so that no one can see or encrypting it so that no one can see or sell your data. sell your data. sell your data. I'm familiar with the effects of not I'm familiar with the effects of not I'm familiar with the effects of not securing my data well enough. A few securing my data well enough. A few securing my data well enough. A few years back, I had my bank accounts years back, I had my bank accounts years back, I had my bank accounts hacked. I don't know exactly how it hacked. I don't know exactly how it hacked. I don't know exactly how it happened, but it happened, and it was a happened, but it happened, and it was a happened, but it happened, and it was a terrible amount of work to have that terrible amount of work to have that terrible amount of work to have that reversed and secured. The great thing reversed and secured. The great thing reversed and secured. The great thing about ExpressVPN is I don't even notice about ExpressVPN is I don't even notice about ExpressVPN is I don't even notice that it's running. I have it on my that it's running. I have it on my that it's running. I have it on my computer. I turn it on anytime I work at computer. I turn it on anytime I work at computer. I turn it on anytime I work at home or when traveling, or in a cafe, home or when traveling, or in a cafe, home or when traveling, or in a cafe, airport, anywhere, and it runs in the airport, anywhere, and it runs in the airport, anywhere, and it runs in the background. It doesn't change anything background. It doesn't change anything background. It doesn't change anything about the interface with my computer or about the interface with my computer or about the interface with my computer or the Wi-Fi. It just secures my data, and the Wi-Fi. It just secures my data, and the Wi-Fi. It just secures my data, and it secures any information about what I it secures any information about what I it secures any information about what I happen to be searching for, etc. I don't happen to be searching for, etc. I don't happen to be searching for, etc. I don't feel like I have anything particular to feel like I have anything particular to feel like I have anything particular to hide except my bank account passwords hide except my bank account passwords hide except my bank account passwords and things of that sort, but with and things of that sort, but with and things of that sort, but with ExpressVPN, it basically makes ExpressVPN, it basically makes ExpressVPN, it basically makes everything secure. You can't be tracked, everything secure. You can't be tracked, everything secure. You can't be tracked, and no one can access or steal your and no one can access or steal your and no one can access or steal your data, which is terrific. So, again, I data, which is terrific. So, again, I data, which is terrific. So, again, I use it when I'm traveling and when I'm use it when I'm traveling and when I'm use it when I'm traveling and when I'm at home. at home. at home. If you want to start protecting your If you want to start protecting your If you want to start protecting your internet activity using ExpressVPN, you internet activity using ExpressVPN, you internet activity using ExpressVPN, you can go to expressvpn.com/huberman, can go to expressvpn.com/huberman, can go to expressvpn.com/huberman, and you'll get an extra 3 months free on and you'll get an extra 3 months free on and you'll get an extra 3 months free on a 1-year package. That's a 1-year package. That's a 1-year package. That's expressvpn.com/huberman to get 3 months free on any of their to get 3 months free on any of their to get 3 months free on any of their 1-year packages. 1-year packages. 1-year packages. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by Today's podcast is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that gives you a total foundation drink that gives you a total foundation drink that gives you a total foundation of vitamins, minerals, and probiotics to of vitamins, minerals, and probiotics to of vitamins, minerals, and probiotics to support your health and well-being. support your health and well-being. support your health and well-being. I've been using Athletic Greens since I've been using Athletic Greens since I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're and so I'm delighted that they're and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. I started using sponsoring the podcast. I started using sponsoring the podcast. I started using Athletic Greens, and I still use Athletic Greens, and I still use Athletic Greens, and I still use Athletic Greens once or twice a day Athletic Greens once or twice a day Athletic Greens once or twice a day because it's the simplest and most because it's the simplest and most because it's the simplest and most straightforward way to get my basis of straightforward way to get my basis of straightforward way to get my basis of important vitamins, minerals, and important vitamins, minerals, and important vitamins, minerals, and probiotics taken care of. probiotics taken care of. probiotics taken care of. All of those things combine to support All of those things combine to support All of those things combine to support various aspects of my health, various aspects of my health, various aspects of my health, such as brain health, such as gut such as brain health, such as gut such as brain health, such as gut health. For instance, there's a health. For instance, there's a health. For instance, there's a tremendous amount of evidence now tremendous amount of evidence now tremendous amount of evidence now showing that probiotics support gut showing that probiotics support gut showing that probiotics support gut health, and that the gut-brain axis is health, and that the gut-brain axis is health, and that the gut-brain axis is important for things like focus and important for things like focus and important for things like focus and cognition, as well as for immune cognition, as well as for immune cognition, as well as for immune function, and various aspects of function, and various aspects of function, and various aspects of physical health like metabolism. The physical health like metabolism. The physical health like metabolism. The list sort of goes on and on. list sort of goes on and on. list sort of goes on and on. With Athletic Greens, it has all these With Athletic Greens, it has all these With Athletic Greens, it has all these vitamins and minerals and various other vitamins and minerals and various other vitamins and minerals and various other things that are good for me, and I things that are good for me, and I things that are good for me, and I actually really like the way it tastes. actually really like the way it tastes. actually really like the way it tastes. So, the way I use it is So, the way I use it is So, the way I use it is once a day, sometimes twice a day, I'll once a day, sometimes twice a day, I'll once a day, sometimes twice a day, I'll mix it up with water. I add a little bit mix it up with water. I add a little bit mix it up with water. I add a little bit of lemon or lime juice. I think it of lemon or lime juice. I think it of lemon or lime juice. I think it tastes great without the lemon or lime tastes great without the lemon or lime tastes great without the lemon or lime juice, but when I add that, it's truly juice, but when I add that, it's truly juice, but when I add that, it's truly delicious to me. And I'll drink that delicious to me. And I'll drink that delicious to me. And I'll drink that first thing in the day, mid-morning first thing in the day, mid-morning first thing in the day, mid-morning sometimes instead, and sometimes again sometimes instead, and sometimes again sometimes instead, and sometimes again in the later afternoon. I'm able to in the later afternoon. I'm able to in the later afternoon. I'm able to drink Athletic Greens late in the day drink Athletic Greens late in the day drink Athletic Greens late in the day and not have it keep me awake. and not have it keep me awake. and not have it keep me awake. If you want to try Athletic Greens, you If you want to try Athletic Greens, you If you want to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and if you do that, you can claim a and if you do that, you can claim a and if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five special offer. They'll give you five special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make mixing up free travel packs, which make mixing up free travel packs, which make mixing up Athletic Greens while you're on the road Athletic Greens while you're on the road Athletic Greens while you're on the road really simple and easy, and they'll give really simple and easy, and they'll give really simple and easy, and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Vitamin D3, as many of you know, you can Vitamin D3, as many of you know, you can Vitamin D3, as many of you know, you can get from the sun, but many people, even get from the sun, but many people, even get from the sun, but many people, even if they're already getting a lot of if they're already getting a lot of if they're already getting a lot of sun exposure, still have sun exposure, still have sun exposure, still have vitamin D3 levels that are too low. And vitamin D3 levels that are too low. And vitamin D3 levels that are too low. And vitamin D3 is very important for a huge vitamin D3 is very important for a huge vitamin D3 is very important for a huge number of cardiovascular, immune, number of cardiovascular, immune, number of cardiovascular, immune, metabolic, and other aspects of health. metabolic, and other aspects of health. metabolic, and other aspects of health. So, once again, if you go to So, once again, if you go to So, once again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get the five free travel packs you'll get the five free travel packs you'll get the five free travel packs and a year's supply of vitamin D3 and a year's supply of vitamin D3 and a year's supply of vitamin D3 and K2. Today is the third episode in our series Today is the third episode in our series Today is the third episode in our series of episodes about physical and athletic of episodes about physical and athletic of episodes about physical and athletic skill performance and skill learning in skill performance and skill learning in skill performance and skill learning in general. And today we're going to talk general. And today we're going to talk general. And today we're going to talk about the science of tools for fat loss. about the science of tools for fat loss. about the science of tools for fat loss. And fat loss is something that interests And fat loss is something that interests And fat loss is something that interests a large number of people. a large number of people. a large number of people. Many people want to lose fat. Many people want to lose fat. Many people want to lose fat. Many people are athletes who need to lose people are athletes who need to lose people are athletes who need to lose fat. And in general, we know that having fat. And in general, we know that having fat. And in general, we know that having body fat percentages that are too high body fat percentages that are too high body fat percentages that are too high is unhealthy for us. And most people is unhealthy for us. And most people is unhealthy for us. And most people struggle to lose fat. Most people struggle to lose fat. Most people struggle to lose fat. Most people struggle to lose weight generally, but struggle to lose weight generally, but struggle to lose weight generally, but most people especially struggle to lose most people especially struggle to lose most people especially struggle to lose body fat or what we call adipose tissue. body fat or what we call adipose tissue. body fat or what we call adipose tissue. Now, this is a huge topic on the Now, this is a huge topic on the Now, this is a huge topic on the internet. There's a lot of controversy. internet. There's a lot of controversy. internet. There's a lot of controversy. Today we're going to talk about some Today we're going to talk about some Today we're going to talk about some things related to fat loss and that are things related to fat loss and that are things related to fat loss and that are powerful for fat loss that I'm guessing powerful for fat loss that I'm guessing powerful for fat loss that I'm guessing most of you have never heard about most of you have never heard about most of you have never heard about before. You may have heard about a few of them, You may have heard about a few of them, You may have heard about a few of them, but I'm guessing you haven't heard about but I'm guessing you haven't heard about but I'm guessing you haven't heard about all of them. This episode is going to be all of them. This episode is going to be all of them. This episode is going to be rich with science-based tools rich with science-based tools rich with science-based tools that are gleaned from a variety of that are gleaned from a variety of that are gleaned from a variety of aspects of the literature including the aspects of the literature including the aspects of the literature including the use of cold, including brown fat, use of cold, including brown fat, use of cold, including brown fat, including something called beige fat. including something called beige fat. including something called beige fat. We're going to talk about something We're going to talk about something We're going to talk about something called neat. We're going to talk about called neat. We're going to talk about called neat. We're going to talk about all sorts of aspects of fat loss that all sorts of aspects of fat loss that all sorts of aspects of fat loss that are governed by your nervous system. And are governed by your nervous system. And are governed by your nervous system. And this is I think an important gap that's this is I think an important gap that's this is I think an important gap that's missing in the discussion about fat missing in the discussion about fat missing in the discussion about fat loss. You can hear a lot of information out You can hear a lot of information out You can hear a lot of information out there about the role of things like there about the role of things like there about the role of things like insulin and various diets like ketogenic insulin and various diets like ketogenic insulin and various diets like ketogenic diets or vegan diets or Mediterranean diets or vegan diets or Mediterranean diets or vegan diets or Mediterranean diets. And there's some great stuff out there And there's some great stuff out there And there's some great stuff out there and there's some really terrible and there's some really terrible and there's some really terrible information out there and there's a lot information out there and there's a lot information out there and there's a lot of controversy. of controversy. of controversy. We did a number of episodes talking We did a number of episodes talking We did a number of episodes talking about the role of hormones on metabolism about the role of hormones on metabolism about the role of hormones on metabolism and the role of food on mood and the role of food on mood and the role of food on mood and well-being. So, if you're interested in well-being. So, if you're interested in well-being. So, if you're interested in those topics, please check them out. I those topics, please check them out. I those topics, please check them out. I will touch a little bit on hormones will touch a little bit on hormones will touch a little bit on hormones today, things like insulin today, things like insulin today, things like insulin and leptin just a little bit. But, and leptin just a little bit. But, and leptin just a little bit. But, today's episode is mainly going to be today's episode is mainly going to be today's episode is mainly going to be focused on how the nervous system, focused on how the nervous system, focused on how the nervous system, neurons, and some of the cells they neurons, and some of the cells they neurons, and some of the cells they collaborate with, like glia and collaborate with, like glia and collaborate with, like glia and macrophages, how those encourage or can macrophages, how those encourage or can macrophages, how those encourage or can encourage accelerated fat loss, because encourage accelerated fat loss, because encourage accelerated fat loss, because it turns out they can. Remember, your it turns out they can. Remember, your it turns out they can. Remember, your nervous system, which includes your nervous system, which includes your nervous system, which includes your brain and your spinal cord, and all the brain and your spinal cord, and all the brain and your spinal cord, and all the connections that they make with the connections that they make with the connections that they make with the organs of the body, organs of the body, organs of the body, governs everything. It's the on switch governs everything. It's the on switch governs everything. It's the on switch and the off switch for your immune and the off switch for your immune and the off switch for your immune system. It's the on switch and the off switch, It's the on switch and the off switch, It's the on switch and the off switch, it turns out, also for fat burning. And it turns out, also for fat burning. And it turns out, also for fat burning. And so, the nervous system and the role of so, the nervous system and the role of so, the nervous system and the role of the brain and other neurons has been the brain and other neurons has been the brain and other neurons has been vastly overlooked in the discussion vastly overlooked in the discussion vastly overlooked in the discussion about losing fat. about losing fat. about losing fat. Now, I would be remiss and I'd probably Now, I would be remiss and I'd probably Now, I would be remiss and I'd probably come under pretty considerable attack if come under pretty considerable attack if come under pretty considerable attack if I didn't just acknowledge up front a I didn't just acknowledge up front a I didn't just acknowledge up front a core truth of core truth of core truth of metabolic science and also of metabolic science and also of metabolic science and also of neuroscience, frankly, which is that neuroscience, frankly, which is that neuroscience, frankly, which is that calories in versus calories out, meaning calories in versus calories out, meaning calories in versus calories out, meaning how many calories you ingest versus how many calories you ingest versus how many calories you ingest versus how many calories you burn, is the many calories you burn, is the many calories you burn, is the fundamental and most important formula fundamental and most important formula fundamental and most important formula in this business of fat loss and weight in this business of fat loss and weight in this business of fat loss and weight management in general. management in general. management in general. There's simply no way around the fact There's simply no way around the fact There's simply no way around the fact that if you ingest far more calories that if you ingest far more calories that if you ingest far more calories than you burn, you're likely to gain than you burn, you're likely to gain than you burn, you're likely to gain weight. And a good portion of that weight is And a good portion of that weight is And a good portion of that weight is likely to be adipose tissue, fat. likely to be adipose tissue, fat. likely to be adipose tissue, fat. It's also true that if you ingest fewer It's also true that if you ingest fewer It's also true that if you ingest fewer calories than you burn, that you will calories than you burn, that you will calories than you burn, that you will lose weight, and that a significant lose weight, and that a significant lose weight, and that a significant portion of that will come from body fat. portion of that will come from body fat. portion of that will come from body fat. What portion depends on a number of What portion depends on a number of What portion depends on a number of factors, but that simple formula is factors, but that simple formula is factors, but that simple formula is important. On a previous episode, I important. On a previous episode, I important. On a previous episode, I mentioned the complications with the mentioned the complications with the mentioned the complications with the statements of a calorie is a calorie. statements of a calorie is a calorie. statements of a calorie is a calorie. And indeed, there is evidence from, for And indeed, there is evidence from, for And indeed, there is evidence from, for instance, Robert Lustig, who's a instance, Robert Lustig, who's a instance, Robert Lustig, who's a pediatric endocrinologist at UC San pediatric endocrinologist at UC San pediatric endocrinologist at UC San Francisco, has talked about how highly Francisco, has talked about how highly Francisco, has talked about how highly processed foods change the way that we processed foods change the way that we processed foods change the way that we utilize food and can lead to higher utilize food and can lead to higher utilize food and can lead to higher incidences of obesity and other incidences of obesity and other incidences of obesity and other metabolic syndromes that go against the metabolic syndromes that go against the metabolic syndromes that go against the idea that a calorie is a calorie and idea that a calorie is a calorie and idea that a calorie is a calorie and that's it. So, a calorie is a calorie as that's it. So, a calorie is a calorie as that's it. So, a calorie is a calorie as a unit of energy, and we need to accept a unit of energy, and we need to accept a unit of energy, and we need to accept and acknowledge this calories in and acknowledge this calories in and acknowledge this calories in meaning calories ingested versus meaning calories ingested versus meaning calories ingested versus calories burned formula, but the calories burned formula, but the calories burned formula, but the calories burned portion is strongly calories burned portion is strongly calories burned portion is strongly influenced by a number of things that influenced by a number of things that influenced by a number of things that you can control you can control you can control that can greatly accelerate or increase that can greatly accelerate or increase that can greatly accelerate or increase the amount of adipose tissue or the amount of adipose tissue or the amount of adipose tissue or the proportion of adipose tissue that you proportion of adipose tissue that you proportion of adipose tissue that you burn in response to exercise and food. burn in response to exercise and food. burn in response to exercise and food. So, your hormones are important. So, your hormones are important. So, your hormones are important. Your thermogenic milieu, meaning how Your thermogenic milieu, meaning how Your thermogenic milieu, meaning how warm or how cold your body is, how cold warm or how cold your body is, how cold warm or how cold your body is, how cold you make it, how warm you make it, but you make it, how warm you make it, but you make it, how warm you make it, but also your level of metabolism, your also your level of metabolism, your also your level of metabolism, your levels of thyroid hormone, and something levels of thyroid hormone, and something levels of thyroid hormone, and something that's hardly ever discussed, but is well hardly ever discussed, but is well hardly ever discussed, but is well supported by the scientific literature, supported by the scientific literature, supported by the scientific literature, how much innervation, meaning how much how much innervation, meaning how much how much innervation, meaning how much connectivity there is between your connectivity there is between your connectivity there is between your nervous system and fat. Today, we're nervous system and fat. Today, we're nervous system and fat. Today, we're going to talk about the fact that going to talk about the fact that going to talk about the fact that your body fat of various kinds, and your body fat of various kinds, and your body fat of various kinds, and there are several kinds of body fat, there are several kinds of body fat, there are several kinds of body fat, are actually innervated by neurons. are actually innervated by neurons. are actually innervated by neurons. Neurons connect to your body fat and can Neurons connect to your body fat and can Neurons connect to your body fat and can change the probability that body change the probability that body change the probability that body fat will be burned or not. So, your fat will be burned or not. So, your fat will be burned or not. So, your nervous system is the master controller nervous system is the master controller nervous system is the master controller of this process, of this process, of this process, and it plays a strong role in the and it plays a strong role in the and it plays a strong role in the calories out, the calories burned calories out, the calories burned calories out, the calories burned component. So, component. So, component. So, as usual, we're going to discuss a as usual, we're going to discuss a as usual, we're going to discuss a little bit of science. I promise I won't little bit of science. I promise I won't little bit of science. I promise I won't go too deep into lipolysis and all sorts go too deep into lipolysis and all sorts go too deep into lipolysis and all sorts of things related to fat oxidation. of things related to fat oxidation. of things related to fat oxidation. We're going to break down that process We're going to break down that process We're going to break down that process into two important steps. into two important steps. into two important steps. And if you can understand those two And if you can understand those two And if you can understand those two important steps, then the rest of the important steps, then the rest of the important steps, then the rest of the tools will be very straightforward to tools will be very straightforward to tools will be very straightforward to understand and manage. And I do believe understand and manage. And I do believe understand and manage. And I do believe that today you will walk away with many that today you will walk away with many that today you will walk away with many new tools that you could incorporate new tools that you could incorporate new tools that you could incorporate into any kind of fat loss regimen that into any kind of fat loss regimen that into any kind of fat loss regimen that will greatly accelerate that process will greatly accelerate that process will greatly accelerate that process because it's grounded in quality because it's grounded in quality because it's grounded in quality peer-reviewed science. peer-reviewed science. peer-reviewed science. Throughout the episode, I'm going to Throughout the episode, I'm going to Throughout the episode, I'm going to talk about some behavioral tools. talk about some behavioral tools. talk about some behavioral tools. In fact, I'll mostly talk about In fact, I'll mostly talk about In fact, I'll mostly talk about behavioral tools. I will also talk about behavioral tools. I will also talk about behavioral tools. I will also talk about compounds, supplements. Many of you are compounds, supplements. Many of you are compounds, supplements. Many of you are into supplements, some of you aren't, into supplements, some of you aren't, into supplements, some of you aren't, and that's fine. For those of you that and that's fine. For those of you that and that's fine. For those of you that are into supplements, an important issue are into supplements, an important issue are into supplements, an important issue in a discussion about supplements for in a discussion about supplements for in a discussion about supplements for fat loss or otherwise is going to be the fat loss or otherwise is going to be the fat loss or otherwise is going to be the quality of those supplements and the quality of those supplements and the quality of those supplements and the accuracy about what's in those accuracy about what's in those accuracy about what's in those supplement bottles and tablets, etc. supplement bottles and tablets, etc. supplement bottles and tablets, etc. I usually mention this at the end of the I usually mention this at the end of the I usually mention this at the end of the podcast, but this podcast, we've podcast, but this podcast, we've podcast, but this podcast, we've partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e, partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e, partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e, because Thorne, we believe, has the because Thorne, we believe, has the because Thorne, we believe, has the highest levels of stringency in terms of highest levels of stringency in terms of highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the compounds in their the quality of the compounds in their the quality of the compounds in their supplements and the amounts of those supplements and the amounts of those supplements and the amounts of those compounds. If you want to see the compounds. If you want to see the compounds. If you want to see the supplements I take, you can go to supplements I take, you can go to supplements I take, you can go to thorne.com/theletteru/huberman. You can see the supplements that I take. You can see the supplements that I take. You can see the supplements that I take. That will also allow you to get 20% off That will also allow you to get 20% off That will also allow you to get 20% off any of those supplements or 20% off any of those supplements or 20% off any of those supplements or 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne of the other supplements that Thorne of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Thorne has partnered with the Mayo Thorne has partnered with the Mayo Thorne has partnered with the Mayo Clinic and all the major sports teams, Clinic and all the major sports teams, Clinic and all the major sports teams, so there's a very strong basis for their so there's a very strong basis for their so there's a very strong basis for their stringency. Again, you don't need to use Again, you don't need to use Again, you don't need to use supplements. I'm certainly not supplements. I'm certainly not supplements. I'm certainly not encouraging anyone to use supplements if encouraging anyone to use supplements if encouraging anyone to use supplements if that's not your thing. But if you're that's not your thing. But if you're that's not your thing. But if you're going to use supplements, make sure that going to use supplements, make sure that going to use supplements, make sure that your supplement source is one of very your supplement source is one of very your supplement source is one of very high quality. high quality. high quality. With that said, I to get started and With that said, I to get started and With that said, I to get started and talk about the various tools for fat talk about the various tools for fat talk about the various tools for fat loss and how neuroscience, neurons loss and how neuroscience, neurons loss and how neuroscience, neurons control fat loss. control fat loss. control fat loss. Before I do that, I want to set the Before I do that, I want to set the Before I do that, I want to set the context correctly context correctly context correctly and extract some of the key takeaways and extract some of the key takeaways and extract some of the key takeaways from previous episodes because if your from previous episodes because if your from previous episodes because if your foundation of health and your foundation of health and your foundation of health and your foundation of hormones and your foundation of hormones and your foundation of hormones and your foundation of metabolism isn't right, it's going to be metabolism isn't right, it's going to be metabolism isn't right, it's going to be very hard to get the most out of any very hard to get the most out of any very hard to get the most out of any kind of exercise or fat loss protocol. kind of exercise or fat loss protocol. kind of exercise or fat loss protocol. In previous episodes, I talked all about In previous episodes, I talked all about In previous episodes, I talked all about the science and the details going into the science and the details going into the science and the details going into particular protocols. We don't have time particular protocols. We don't have time particular protocols. We don't have time to do that now to do that now to do that now and I want to get to the new material. and I want to get to the new material. and I want to get to the new material. However, there are a couple bins, a However, there are a couple bins, a However, there are a couple bins, a couple items that you should make sure couple items that you should make sure couple items that you should make sure you're getting correctly. And if you're getting correctly. And if you're getting correctly. And if you're not perfect about these, don't worry not perfect about these, don't worry not perfect about these, don't worry about it. Most people are not perfect about it. Most people are not perfect about it. Most people are not perfect about them. I'm certainly not perfect about them. I'm certainly not perfect about them. I'm certainly not perfect about them, but we should all be about them, but we should all be about them, but we should all be striving to get quality and sufficient striving to get quality and sufficient striving to get quality and sufficient sleep. I did four full episodes on sleep sleep. I did four full episodes on sleep sleep. I did four full episodes on sleep and how to get better at sleeping and how to get better at sleeping and how to get better at sleeping through things like light exposure, through things like light exposure, through things like light exposure, temperature, timing your sleep correctly for your timing your sleep correctly for your timing your sleep correctly for your so-called chronotype, if you're a night so-called chronotype, if you're a night so-called chronotype, if you're a night owl or a morning person. That's the owl or a morning person. That's the owl or a morning person. That's the first four or I think five episodes of first four or I think five episodes of first four or I think five episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Get your sleep the Huberman Lab Podcast. Get your sleep the Huberman Lab Podcast. Get your sleep right. Get your light exposure right. Get your light exposure right. Get your light exposure right. Avoid bright light in your eyes at times Avoid bright light in your eyes at times Avoid bright light in your eyes at times you want to be asleep and get bright you want to be asleep and get bright you want to be asleep and get bright light in your eyes at times you want to light in your eyes at times you want to light in your eyes at times you want to be awake. So, get your sleep right. The be awake. So, get your sleep right. The be awake. So, get your sleep right. The other thing is essential fatty acids. I other thing is essential fatty acids. I other thing is essential fatty acids. I talked about this in the food and mood talked about this in the food and mood talked about this in the food and mood episode, but I also talked about it episode, but I also talked about it episode, but I also talked about it during the hormones episodes. during the hormones episodes. during the hormones episodes. We need fatty acids. They are vital to We need fatty acids. They are vital to We need fatty acids. They are vital to so many aspects of our health. You don't so many aspects of our health. You don't so many aspects of our health. You don't have to get them from supplements. You have to get them from supplements. You have to get them from supplements. You can if you want to, but you need to get can if you want to, but you need to get can if you want to, but you need to get them from your food. They are essential. them from your food. They are essential. them from your food. They are essential. There's a reason there's an E in the There's a reason there's an E in the There's a reason there's an E in the essential part there. essential part there. essential part there. Of the fatty acids, there are multiple Of the fatty acids, there are multiple Of the fatty acids, there are multiple kinds, but for the antidepressant kinds, but for the antidepressant kinds, but for the antidepressant effects or the levels of fatty acids effects or the levels of fatty acids effects or the levels of fatty acids that will promote good mood and also that will promote good mood and also that will promote good mood and also healthy metabolism and will start to healthy metabolism and will start to healthy metabolism and will start to shift the needle in the right direction shift the needle in the right direction shift the needle in the right direction on blood-borne cardiovascular factors. on blood-borne cardiovascular factors. on blood-borne cardiovascular factors. The key thing is to get the levels of The key thing is to get the levels of The key thing is to get the levels of EPA that you ingest EPA that you ingest EPA that you ingest above 1,000 mg per day. So, that doesn't above 1,000 mg per day. So, that doesn't above 1,000 mg per day. So, that doesn't mean just taking 1,000 mg or more of, mean just taking 1,000 mg or more of, mean just taking 1,000 mg or more of, say, fish oil or krill oil or whatever say, fish oil or krill oil or whatever say, fish oil or krill oil or whatever your preferred source is. It means your preferred source is. It means your preferred source is. It means getting above 1,000 mg of EPA, which may getting above 1,000 mg of EPA, which may getting above 1,000 mg of EPA, which may require that you ingest more essential require that you ingest more essential require that you ingest more essential fatty acids than just 1,000 mg per day. fatty acids than just 1,000 mg per day. fatty acids than just 1,000 mg per day. That, of course, can be done through That, of course, can be done through That, of course, can be done through food sources, food sources, food sources, things like fatty fish, or if you're not things like fatty fish, or if you're not things like fatty fish, or if you're not if you're not into eating fish, you if you're not into eating fish, you if you're not into eating fish, you quality meats that are grass-raised can quality meats that are grass-raised can quality meats that are grass-raised can do that. There other sources of do that. There other sources of do that. There other sources of essential fatty acids, of course, also essential fatty acids, of course, also essential fatty acids, of course, also from plant sources. So, look those up from plant sources. So, look those up from plant sources. So, look those up online. It's really easy to find, but online. It's really easy to find, but online. It's really easy to find, but the research in the literature shows the research in the literature shows the research in the literature shows that you want to get above 1,000 mg of that you want to get above 1,000 mg of that you want to get above 1,000 mg of EPA per day, EPA per day, EPA per day, because that's when you can best support because that's when you can best support because that's when you can best support your metabolism and position yourself your metabolism and position yourself your metabolism and position yourself for good fat loss. for good fat loss. for good fat loss. As well, for people who have cravings As well, for people who have cravings As well, for people who have cravings issues, they crave sweets all the issues, they crave sweets all the issues, they crave sweets all the time. I talked about this in the time. I talked about this in the time. I talked about this in the gut-brain episode and hormones and food, gut-brain episode and hormones and food, gut-brain episode and hormones and food, that you have neurons in your gut that you have neurons in your gut that you have neurons in your gut that are craving, they're seeking essential are craving, they're seeking essential are craving, they're seeking essential fatty acids, and they're craving and fatty acids, and they're craving and fatty acids, and they're craving and seeking amino acids from your food. Now, seeking amino acids from your food. Now, seeking amino acids from your food. Now, these are not supplements that they these are not supplements that they these are not supplements that they crave, per se. They're craving those crave, per se. They're craving those crave, per se. They're craving those things because that's what your body things because that's what your body things because that's what your body needs and your brain needs. But, those needs and your brain needs. But, those needs and your brain needs. But, those same neurons will respond to sugars, and same neurons will respond to sugars, and same neurons will respond to sugars, and so many people who are craving sugar can so many people who are craving sugar can so many people who are craving sugar can satisfy that sugar craving by giving the satisfy that sugar craving by giving the satisfy that sugar craving by giving the neurons, so to speak, what they actually neurons, so to speak, what they actually neurons, so to speak, what they actually want, which are amino acids and want, which are amino acids and want, which are amino acids and essential fatty acids. That includes essential fatty acids. That includes essential fatty acids. That includes EPA, but also things like glutamine, an EPA, but also things like glutamine, an EPA, but also things like glutamine, an amino acid that can really reduce sugar amino acid that can really reduce sugar amino acid that can really reduce sugar cravings. If you take a teaspoon of cravings. If you take a teaspoon of cravings. If you take a teaspoon of that, or even a tablespoon of that, a that, or even a tablespoon of that, a that, or even a tablespoon of that, a few times a day. You have to ease into few times a day. You have to ease into few times a day. You have to ease into that a little bit because some people that a little bit because some people that a little bit because some people can get a little bit of GI distress from can get a little bit of GI distress from can get a little bit of GI distress from too much glutamine, but too much glutamine, but too much glutamine, but glutamine has also been shown to improve glutamine has also been shown to improve glutamine has also been shown to improve symptoms of leaky gut. It's a powerful symptoms of leaky gut. It's a powerful symptoms of leaky gut. It's a powerful amino acid and yes, you can also get it amino acid and yes, you can also get it amino acid and yes, you can also get it from food. Things like cottage cheese from food. Things like cottage cheese from food. Things like cottage cheese are high in glutamine, etc. And then are high in glutamine, etc. And then are high in glutamine, etc. And then finally, you can't really position finally, you can't really position finally, you can't really position yourself to have a strong metabolism if yourself to have a strong metabolism if yourself to have a strong metabolism if your iodine levels aren't correct and your iodine levels aren't correct and your iodine levels aren't correct and your thyroid levels aren't correct. You your thyroid levels aren't correct. You your thyroid levels aren't correct. You can overdo iodine, so you don't want to can overdo iodine, so you don't want to can overdo iodine, so you don't want to do that. A lot of table salt has iodine do that. A lot of table salt has iodine do that. A lot of table salt has iodine added to it, but some people need to add added to it, but some people need to add added to it, but some people need to add iodine they by ingesting things like iodine they by ingesting things like iodine they by ingesting things like kelp, etc. But one of the best ways to kelp, etc. But one of the best ways to kelp, etc. But one of the best ways to support the thyroid system and support the thyroid system and support the thyroid system and metabolism in general is to make sure metabolism in general is to make sure metabolism in general is to make sure you're getting enough selenium, you're getting enough selenium, you're getting enough selenium, sometimes called selenium, sometimes called selenium, sometimes called selenium, each day. Simple way to do that is to each day. Simple way to do that is to each day. Simple way to do that is to ingest the highest concentration of ingest the highest concentration of ingest the highest concentration of selenium food that I'm aware of, which selenium food that I'm aware of, which selenium food that I'm aware of, which is Brazil nuts. One or two or three of is Brazil nuts. One or two or three of is Brazil nuts. One or two or three of those per day, you'll have more than those per day, you'll have more than those per day, you'll have more than enough selenium uh to meet the thyroid enough selenium uh to meet the thyroid enough selenium uh to meet the thyroid needs. You don't want your selenium to needs. You don't want your selenium to needs. You don't want your selenium to be too high. You don't want a diet too be too high. You don't want a diet too be too high. You don't want a diet too high in anything. So again, sleep, high in anything. So again, sleep, high in anything. So again, sleep, sufficient EPAs, glutamine, if you have sufficient EPAs, glutamine, if you have sufficient EPAs, glutamine, if you have issues with leaky gut or sugar cravings issues with leaky gut or sugar cravings issues with leaky gut or sugar cravings can really help. Get your gut microbiome can really help. Get your gut microbiome can really help. Get your gut microbiome right. I may have uh missed saying that, right. I may have uh missed saying that, right. I may have uh missed saying that, but get your gut microbiome right. That but get your gut microbiome right. That but get your gut microbiome right. That does not necessarily mean you need to does not necessarily mean you need to does not necessarily mean you need to ingest probiotics. You can if you want ingest probiotics. You can if you want ingest probiotics. You can if you want to, but you can also just simply ingest to, but you can also just simply ingest to, but you can also just simply ingest a serving or two of fermented foods per a serving or two of fermented foods per a serving or two of fermented foods per day. That can greatly assist. So things day. That can greatly assist. So things day. That can greatly assist. So things like sauerkraut, kimchi, every culture like sauerkraut, kimchi, every culture like sauerkraut, kimchi, every culture has a different um source or sources of has a different um source or sources of has a different um source or sources of fermented foods. Those can really help fermented foods. Those can really help fermented foods. Those can really help the gut microbiome, and then make the gut microbiome, and then make the gut microbiome, and then make sure that your thyroid hormone is sure that your thyroid hormone is sure that your thyroid hormone is supported through the ingestion of supported through the ingestion of supported through the ingestion of sufficient iodine, not too much, and sufficient iodine, not too much, and sufficient iodine, not too much, and sufficient selenium, not too much. Okay? sufficient selenium, not too much. Okay? sufficient selenium, not too much. Okay? Sleep, EPA, glutamine, fermented foods, Sleep, EPA, glutamine, fermented foods, Sleep, EPA, glutamine, fermented foods, iodine, selenium. That sets the basis iodine, selenium. That sets the basis iodine, selenium. That sets the basis for how things like exercise, cold, and for how things like exercise, cold, and for how things like exercise, cold, and some of the compounds and other things some of the compounds and other things some of the compounds and other things that we're going to talk about today that we're going to talk about today that we're going to talk about today that are I'm guessing truly going to be that are I'm guessing truly going to be that are I'm guessing truly going to be truly new to many of you that can really truly new to many of you that can really truly new to many of you that can really increase the burn increase the burn increase the burn factor in the equation of calories in factor in the equation of calories in factor in the equation of calories in versus calories burned. Okay? So, on the versus calories burned. Okay? So, on the versus calories burned. Okay? So, on the one hand, we have this reality of one hand, we have this reality of one hand, we have this reality of calories in versus calories burned. calories in versus calories burned. calories in versus calories burned. However, I would also be remiss if I However, I would also be remiss if I However, I would also be remiss if I didn't mention an incredible study that didn't mention an incredible study that didn't mention an incredible study that was done by my colleague Alia Crum at was done by my colleague Alia Crum at was done by my colleague Alia Crum at Stanford. She's a faculty member, a Stanford. She's a faculty member, a Stanford. She's a faculty member, a professor in the psychology department, professor in the psychology department, professor in the psychology department, looking at how belief affects, just looking at how belief affects, just looking at how belief affects, just thinking, can impact the effects of thinking, can impact the effects of thinking, can impact the effects of things like exercise on weight loss. things like exercise on weight loss. things like exercise on weight loss. These are just incredible results. What These are just incredible results. What These are just incredible results. What they did was they took subjects who were they did was they took subjects who were they did was they took subjects who were hotel service people that would clean hotel service people that would clean hotel service people that would clean the hotels and come in and change the hotels and come in and change the hotels and come in and change the linens and so forth, the linens and so forth, the linens and so forth, divide them into two groups. divide them into two groups. divide them into two groups. One group they were told One group they were told One group they were told moving around and doing your duties for moving around and doing your duties for moving around and doing your duties for your job uh meet the standards for US your job uh meet the standards for US your job uh meet the standards for US guidelines for activity and movement, guidelines for activity and movement, guidelines for activity and movement, etc. And a basic lecture about how etc. And a basic lecture about how etc. And a basic lecture about how movement is good for you, etc. But movement is good for you, etc. But movement is good for you, etc. But mostly just that their daily activities mostly just that their daily activities mostly just that their daily activities met the standards for the US. met the standards for the US. met the standards for the US. The other group, however, was given a The other group, however, was given a The other group, however, was given a bunch of information about how movement bunch of information about how movement bunch of information about how movement and their daily routine was very good and their daily routine was very good and their daily routine was very good for cardiovascular health, it could be for cardiovascular health, it could be for cardiovascular health, it could be good for weight loss, etc. good for weight loss, etc. good for weight loss, etc. And then they tracked these subjects And then they tracked these subjects And then they tracked these subjects over a period of many weeks. over a period of many weeks. over a period of many weeks. The take-home message from the study was The take-home message from the study was The take-home message from the study was that simply being told that simply being told that simply being told that movement is good for you, can lead that movement is good for you, can lead that movement is good for you, can lead to weight loss, etc. led to weight loss, etc. led to weight loss, etc. led to significantly more body fat loss, significantly more body fat loss, significantly more body fat loss, waist-to-hip ratio changes in the waist-to-hip ratio changes in the waist-to-hip ratio changes in the direction that most people would want, direction that most people would want, direction that most people would want, essentially a slimming down, if you essentially a slimming down, if you essentially a slimming down, if you will, and all sorts of other positive effects and all sorts of other positive effects and all sorts of other positive effects on things like cardiovascular health on things like cardiovascular health on things like cardiovascular health simply by the knowledge that movement simply by the knowledge that movement simply by the knowledge that movement and exercise can help various health and exercise can help various health and exercise can help various health markers. So, this is remarkable and it markers. So, this is remarkable and it markers. So, this is remarkable and it speaks to the power of the nervous speaks to the power of the nervous speaks to the power of the nervous system and the power of belief in system and the power of belief in system and the power of belief in governing aspects of our body and our governing aspects of our body and our governing aspects of our body and our physiology that one would otherwise physiology that one would otherwise physiology that one would otherwise think were outside our conscious think were outside our conscious think were outside our conscious control. Now, of course, Now, of course, Now, of course, any of you that think scientifically, any of you that think scientifically, any of you that think scientifically, which I imagine if you watch this which I imagine if you watch this which I imagine if you watch this podcast or listen to this podcast, is podcast or listen to this podcast, is podcast or listen to this podcast, is all of you by now, all of you by now, all of you by now, probably thinking, well, maybe they just probably thinking, well, maybe they just probably thinking, well, maybe they just moved around more or maybe you know, moved around more or maybe you know, moved around more or maybe you know, they stood up and sat down more. Maybe stood up and sat down more. Maybe stood up and sat down more. Maybe they did something else that was they did something else that was they did something else that was different. And indeed, there's a strong different. And indeed, there's a strong different. And indeed, there's a strong possibility that they did things possibility that they did things possibility that they did things differently than the other group. But, differently than the other group. But, differently than the other group. But, the mere knowledge that the mere knowledge that the mere knowledge that exercise is good for you, that movement exercise is good for you, that movement exercise is good for you, that movement is good for you, shifted their behavior is good for you, shifted their behavior is good for you, shifted their behavior and their physiology in the direction of and their physiology in the direction of and their physiology in the direction of enhanced weight loss, fat loss, etc. So, enhanced weight loss, fat loss, etc. So, enhanced weight loss, fat loss, etc. So, how we think about a given set of how we think about a given set of how we think about a given set of activities affects how we perform those activities affects how we perform those activities affects how we perform those activities and how we think and how we think and how we think and about and perform those activities has a about and perform those activities has a about and perform those activities has a real effect on our physiology. So, real effect on our physiology. So, real effect on our physiology. So, somewhere between the hard and fast rule somewhere between the hard and fast rule somewhere between the hard and fast rule that governs fat loss and weight loss, that governs fat loss and weight loss, that governs fat loss and weight loss, which is which is which is if you ingest more calories than you if you ingest more calories than you if you ingest more calories than you burn, you'll either maintain or gain burn, you'll either maintain or gain burn, you'll either maintain or gain weight, typically you'll gain weight, typically you'll gain weight, typically you'll gain weight, although not always. although not always. although not always. If you If you If you ingest about as many calories as you ingest about as many calories as you ingest about as many calories as you burn, you'll maintain weight, burn, you'll maintain weight, burn, you'll maintain weight, typically. And if you ingest fewer calories than And if you ingest fewer calories than And if you ingest fewer calories than you burn, typically you'll lose weight. you burn, typically you'll lose weight. you burn, typically you'll lose weight. That's the kind of rule of fat loss. And That's the kind of rule of fat loss. And That's the kind of rule of fat loss. And yet, we also have these belief effects, yet, we also have these belief effects, yet, we also have these belief effects, which show, and this has been replicated which show, and this has been replicated which show, and this has been replicated again and again, that how we think about again and again, that how we think about again and again, that how we think about a process, whether or not we think it's a process, whether or not we think it's a process, whether or not we think it's beneficial, can change our physiology in beneficial, can change our physiology in beneficial, can change our physiology in ways that can be beneficial to us. ways that can be beneficial to us. ways that can be beneficial to us. Somewhere in between those two extremes Somewhere in between those two extremes Somewhere in between those two extremes of hardcore metabolic science and belief hardcore metabolic science and belief hardcore metabolic science and belief effects, well, I a bunch of effects, well, I a bunch of effects, well, I a bunch of protocols that are grounded in quality protocols that are grounded in quality protocols that are grounded in quality peer-reviewed science and in physiology peer-reviewed science and in physiology peer-reviewed science and in physiology that you can leverage to increase the that you can leverage to increase the that you can leverage to increase the rates of fat loss. And so that's what rates of fat loss. And so that's what rates of fat loss. And so that's what we're going to talk about today. we're going to talk about today. we're going to talk about today. I love this topic and it's not that I'm I love this topic and it's not that I'm I love this topic and it's not that I'm so obsessed with fat loss, so obsessed with fat loss, so obsessed with fat loss, but rather but rather but rather the first project I ever worked on in the first project I ever worked on in the first project I ever worked on in science was thermogenesis and fat loss. science was thermogenesis and fat loss. science was thermogenesis and fat loss. I joined a laboratory as an I joined a laboratory as an I joined a laboratory as an undergraduate and the guy I worked for and the guy I worked for and the guy I worked for loved to explore new compounds and how loved to explore new compounds and how loved to explore new compounds and how they impacted thermogenesis. they impacted thermogenesis. they impacted thermogenesis. And so we looked at how things like And so we looked at how things like And so we looked at how things like MDMA, ecstasy, MDMA, ecstasy, MDMA, ecstasy, uh how antipsychotics, antidepressants, uh how antipsychotics, antidepressants, uh how antipsychotics, antidepressants, uh various weight loss drugs that were uh various weight loss drugs that were uh various weight loss drugs that were on the market, how those impacted body on the market, how those impacted body on the market, how those impacted body temperature and fat loss and metabolism. temperature and fat loss and metabolism. temperature and fat loss and metabolism. And we just had so much fun doing it. So And we just had so much fun doing it. So And we just had so much fun doing it. So if you detect a smile on my face, that's if you detect a smile on my face, that's if you detect a smile on my face, that's uh that's what that's about. And I also uh that's what that's about. And I also uh that's what that's about. And I also learned a lot and I also came to really learned a lot and I also came to really learned a lot and I also came to really appreciate that this tissue of our appreciate that this tissue of our appreciate that this tissue of our bodies, adipose tissue and fat, we think of as adipose tissue and fat, we think of as adipose tissue and fat, we think of as just this unfortunate thing that's like just this unfortunate thing that's like just this unfortunate thing that's like we're told it's a we're told it's a we're told it's a core energy source if we ever entered a core energy source if we ever entered a core energy source if we ever entered a famine and that's all true etc. We come famine and that's all true etc. We come famine and that's all true etc. We come to realize that these cells in our body, to realize that these cells in our body, to realize that these cells in our body, they are there as fuel they are there as fuel they are there as fuel for the furnace of our body, which is for the furnace of our body, which is for the furnace of our body, which is our metabolism. our metabolism. our metabolism. And there's a third player and that's And there's a third player and that's And there's a third player and that's where it really gets interesting that where it really gets interesting that where it really gets interesting that the nervous system, neurons, has the nervous system, neurons, has the nervous system, neurons, has the opportunity to turn up the intensity of opportunity to turn up the intensity of opportunity to turn up the intensity of that furnace. that furnace. that furnace. It has the opportunity to increase the It has the opportunity to increase the It has the opportunity to increase the amount of heat that we produce and amount of heat that we produce and amount of heat that we produce and therefore the amount of energy that we therefore the amount of energy that we therefore the amount of energy that we burn. And I was also really intrigued by burn. And I was also really intrigued by burn. And I was also really intrigued by something, which is that something, which is that something, which is that growing up, I think we all know people growing up, I think we all know people growing up, I think we all know people who can eat a ton and never seem to gain any can eat a ton and never seem to gain any can eat a ton and never seem to gain any body fat. Or people who seem to eat very body fat. Or people who seem to eat very body fat. Or people who seem to eat very little and seem to gain body fat very little and seem to gain body fat very little and seem to gain body fat very easily. And I was always intrigued by easily. And I was always intrigued by easily. And I was always intrigued by that and it turns out there are a number that and it turns out there are a number that and it turns out there are a number of different factors that relate to of different factors that relate to of different factors that relate to that. But the nervous system is the one that. But the nervous system is the one that. But the nervous system is the one that we can really control, both through that we can really control, both through that we can really control, both through behaviors and what we eat, but also in behaviors and what we eat, but also in behaviors and what we eat, but also in terms of this thing that we call terms of this thing that we call terms of this thing that we call thermogenesis. There is one particular story I want to There is one particular story I want to There is one particular story I want to relate to you that does not suggest any relate to you that does not suggest any relate to you that does not suggest any protocol. In fact, I'm going to protocol. In fact, I'm going to protocol. In fact, I'm going to discourage you from following this discourage you from following this discourage you from following this protocol. Please do not try the compound that I'm Please do not try the compound that I'm Please do not try the compound that I'm about to describe. about to describe. about to describe. One of the favorite things that we like One of the favorite things that we like One of the favorite things that we like to do in that lab was to find rare to do in that lab was to find rare to do in that lab was to find rare compounds and test them. And compounds and test them. And compounds and test them. And at the time I was reading about at the time I was reading about at the time I was reading about thermogenesis and I learned about a thermogenesis and I learned about a thermogenesis and I learned about a compound that was actually discovered in compound that was actually discovered in compound that was actually discovered in the armory factories of World War II. the armory factories of World War II. the armory factories of World War II. And it was discovered because And it was discovered because And it was discovered because women in particular who were working in women in particular who were working in women in particular who were working in these factories these factories these factories would take a brush and dip it in a would take a brush and dip it in a would take a brush and dip it in a compound uh or a paint rather, and they compound uh or a paint rather, and they compound uh or a paint rather, and they would then paint the numbers with a would then paint the numbers with a would then paint the numbers with a stencil onto things like bombs and stencil onto things like bombs and stencil onto things like bombs and uh ammunition of various kinds. uh ammunition of various kinds. uh ammunition of various kinds. And they were losing weight like crazy. It they were losing weight like crazy. It they were losing weight like crazy. It turns out that occasionally they'd lick turns out that occasionally they'd lick turns out that occasionally they'd lick the brush and then they would go back the brush and then they would go back the brush and then they would go back just to get a sharper point on the just to get a sharper point on the just to get a sharper point on the brush and then they would uh paint onto brush and then they would uh paint onto brush and then they would uh paint onto these uh various, you know, bullets and these uh various, you know, bullets and these uh various, you know, bullets and uh and missiles and so forth, bombs and uh and missiles and so forth, bombs and uh and missiles and so forth, bombs and so forth. And they started shedding all so forth. And they started shedding all so forth. And they started shedding all their body fat. And many of them lose their body fat. And many of them lose their body fat. And many of them lose excuse me, lost a lot of weight, a excuse me, lost a lot of weight, a excuse me, lost a lot of weight, a significant portion of their weight significant portion of their weight significant portion of their weight without changing anything else that they without changing anything else that they without changing anything else that they were doing, what they were eating, et were doing, what they were eating, et were doing, what they were eating, et cetera. Turned out that compound is cetera. Turned out that compound is cetera. Turned out that compound is something called dinitrophenol, DNP. something called dinitrophenol, DNP. something called dinitrophenol, DNP. And over the years dinitrophenol, DNP, And over the years dinitrophenol, DNP, And over the years dinitrophenol, DNP, has gained popularity in some niche has gained popularity in some niche has gained popularity in some niche cultures, mainly bodybuilders, athletes, cultures, mainly bodybuilders, athletes, cultures, mainly bodybuilders, athletes, even in the kind of modeling industry. even in the kind of modeling industry. even in the kind of modeling industry. It is a absolutely terrible compound for It is a absolutely terrible compound for It is a absolutely terrible compound for anyone to use because it's highly fatal anyone to use because it's highly fatal anyone to use because it's highly fatal if your body temperature goes too high. if your body temperature goes too high. if your body temperature goes too high. Hyperthermia will kill you. And indeed, Hyperthermia will kill you. And indeed, Hyperthermia will kill you. And indeed, many people have died using many people have died using many people have died using dinitrophenol as a weight loss drug dinitrophenol as a weight loss drug dinitrophenol as a weight loss drug or attempting to use it as weight or attempting to use it as weight or attempting to use it as weight loss drug. But, dinitrophenol really loss drug. But, dinitrophenol really loss drug. But, dinitrophenol really illustrates a principle, which is that illustrates a principle, which is that illustrates a principle, which is that your metabolism your metabolism your metabolism includes things like thyroid hormone and includes things like thyroid hormone and includes things like thyroid hormone and growth hormone, etc. But, your body growth hormone, etc. But, your body growth hormone, etc. But, your body temperature and the way you utilize temperature and the way you utilize temperature and the way you utilize energy is controlled by your nervous system. is controlled by your nervous system. is controlled by your nervous system. And the way dinitrophenol works is by And the way dinitrophenol works is by And the way dinitrophenol works is by changing the neurons and the way that changing the neurons and the way that changing the neurons and the way that the neurons that connect to fat the neurons that connect to fat the neurons that connect to fat change the way fat burns up. So, we are change the way fat burns up. So, we are change the way fat burns up. So, we are not going to suggest, I am not going to suggest, I am not going to suggest, I am not suggesting that you use dinitrophenol. suggesting that you use dinitrophenol. suggesting that you use dinitrophenol. However, there are other things that you However, there are other things that you However, there are other things that you can do can do can do that can change the relationship between that can change the relationship between that can change the relationship between these neurons and the fat of your body these neurons and the fat of your body these neurons and the fat of your body in ways that can powerfully accelerate in ways that can powerfully accelerate in ways that can powerfully accelerate fat loss. fat loss. fat loss. And I don't know why we don't hear about And I don't know why we don't hear about And I don't know why we don't hear about these things more, but probably because these things more, but probably because these things more, but probably because most of what you see out there on the most of what you see out there on the most of what you see out there on the internet focuses more on what you could internet focuses more on what you could internet focuses more on what you could eat and should eat or shouldn't eat. It eat and should eat or shouldn't eat. It eat and should eat or shouldn't eat. It concentrates on exercise regimens, which concentrates on exercise regimens, which concentrates on exercise regimens, which we will also talk about, but we will also talk about, but we will also talk about, but the burn factor, your thermogenic the burn factor, your thermogenic the burn factor, your thermogenic environment, is environment, is environment, is one of the, if not the most important one of the, if not the most important one of the, if not the most important factors in this business of fat loss. factors in this business of fat loss. factors in this business of fat loss. And since I'm a neuroscientist, that's And since I'm a neuroscientist, that's And since I'm a neuroscientist, that's what we're going to talk about. what we're going to talk about. what we're going to talk about. So, let's talk about fat utilization. So, let's talk about fat utilization. So, let's talk about fat utilization. Let's talk about how fat is converted Let's talk about how fat is converted Let's talk about how fat is converted into energy, into energy, into energy, which is sometimes also called fat which is sometimes also called fat which is sometimes also called fat burning. What I'd like you to know is that this What I'd like you to know is that this What I'd like you to know is that this is a two-part process, okay? In reality, is a two-part process, okay? In reality, is a two-part process, okay? In reality, there are many biochemical steps. And if there are many biochemical steps. And if there are many biochemical steps. And if you log onto the internet or you open up you log onto the internet or you open up you log onto the internet or you open up a textbook and you want to learn about a textbook and you want to learn about a textbook and you want to learn about fat utilization, you're going to see a fat utilization, you're going to see a fat utilization, you're going to see a lot of chemistry. And I'm happy to go lot of chemistry. And I'm happy to go lot of chemistry. And I'm happy to go deep into that chemistry if you like, deep into that chemistry if you like, deep into that chemistry if you like, but I think most of you are probably but I think most of you are probably but I think most of you are probably interested in what are the leverage interested in what are the leverage interested in what are the leverage points. Where can you exert control over points. Where can you exert control over points. Where can you exert control over this process in ways that benefit you. this process in ways that benefit you. this process in ways that benefit you. So, I'm going to focus mainly on those, So, I'm going to focus mainly on those, So, I'm going to focus mainly on those, okay? This is not okay? This is not okay? This is not to upset the aficionados, and I will put to upset the aficionados, and I will put to upset the aficionados, and I will put in some nomenclature, but here we go. in some nomenclature, but here we go. in some nomenclature, but here we go. There's two parts to this process. One There's two parts to this process. One There's two parts to this process. One is fat mobilization. is fat mobilization. is fat mobilization. And the second is fat oxidation or And the second is fat oxidation or And the second is fat oxidation or utilization, okay? So, the first thing utilization, okay? So, the first thing utilization, okay? So, the first thing that has to happen for body fat to get that has to happen for body fat to get that has to happen for body fat to get burned up or used and reduced burned up or used and reduced burned up or used and reduced is that it has to get mobilized. And is that it has to get mobilized. And is that it has to get mobilized. And that's a process called lipolysis, but I that's a process called lipolysis, but I that's a process called lipolysis, but I actually don't care if you know the name actually don't care if you know the name actually don't care if you know the name lipolysis, you just have to move that lipolysis, you just have to move that lipolysis, you just have to move that fat out of the out of the out of the position that it's in. You have to get position that it's in. You have to get position that it's in. You have to get it out of the fat cells, all right? Fat it out of the fat cells, all right? Fat it out of the fat cells, all right? Fat cells can be visceral, around our cells can be visceral, around our cells can be visceral, around our viscera, our organs, or they can be viscera, our organs, or they can be viscera, our organs, or they can be subcutaneous, under our skin. Most subcutaneous, under our skin. Most subcutaneous, under our skin. Most people are thinking about people are thinking about people are thinking about subcutaneous fat when they think about subcutaneous fat when they think about subcutaneous fat when they think about fat. So, here's the deal, and if you're want more here's the deal, and if you're want more here's the deal, and if you're want more detail, great. detail, great. detail, great. I'll touch on that in a bit, but I'll touch on that in a bit, but I'll touch on that in a bit, but basically stored fat basically stored fat basically stored fat has two parts that are relevant here. has two parts that are relevant here. has two parts that are relevant here. It's got the fatty acid part, and that's It's got the fatty acid part, and that's It's got the fatty acid part, and that's the part that your body can use, and the part that your body can use, and the part that your body can use, and that's attached to something called that's attached to something called that's attached to something called glycerol, and they're linked by a glycerol, and they're linked by a glycerol, and they're linked by a backbone. So, already probably too much backbone. So, already probably too much backbone. So, already probably too much chemistry for both you, but what you chemistry for both you, but what you chemistry for both you, but what you want is you want to break the backbone. want is you want to break the backbone. want is you want to break the backbone. So, if you just can remember to mobilize So, if you just can remember to mobilize So, if you just can remember to mobilize fat, you got to break the backbone fat, you got to break the backbone fat, you got to break the backbone between glycerol and these fatty acids, between glycerol and these fatty acids, between glycerol and these fatty acids, okay? That's accomplished by an enzyme okay? That's accomplished by an enzyme okay? That's accomplished by an enzyme called lipase, called lipase, called lipase, but you can forget all that if you want. but you can forget all that if you want. but you can forget all that if you want. Remember, we're just trying to mobilize Remember, we're just trying to mobilize Remember, we're just trying to mobilize fat. So, the first step is to get those fat. So, the first step is to get those fat. So, the first step is to get those fatty acids moving around in the fatty acids moving around in the fatty acids moving around in the bloodstream, to get them out of those bloodstream, to get them out of those bloodstream, to get them out of those fat cells, fat cells, fat cells, and then they can travel and be used and then they can travel and be used and then they can travel and be used for energy. And that second part, for energy. And that second part, for energy. And that second part, remember, first part is mobilization, remember, first part is mobilization, remember, first part is mobilization, the second part is oxidation, is then the second part is oxidation, is then the second part is oxidation, is then those fatty acids, those are potential those fatty acids, those are potential those fatty acids, those are potential fuel. They're just potential fuel, but fuel. They're just potential fuel, but fuel. They're just potential fuel, but you haven't burned the fat yet. You've you haven't burned the fat yet. You've you haven't burned the fat yet. You've just moved it out of your fat cells. just moved it out of your fat cells. just moved it out of your fat cells. They're going to go into cells They're going to go into cells They're going to go into cells that can use them for energy. that can use them for energy. that can use them for energy. And once they are inside those cells, And once they are inside those cells, And once they are inside those cells, they're still not burned up. You need to they're still not burned up. You need to they're still not burned up. You need to oxidize them. You think oxidation is the oxidize them. You think oxidation is the oxidize them. You think oxidation is the burn up part. burn up part. burn up part. They need to be moved into the They need to be moved into the They need to be moved into the mitochondria. And then they can be converted into ATP, And then they can be converted into ATP, And then they can be converted into ATP, into energy. So, just to really zoom out into energy. So, just to really zoom out into energy. So, just to really zoom out again to make sure I don't lose anybody, again to make sure I don't lose anybody, again to make sure I don't lose anybody, you got to mobilize the fat, then you got to mobilize the fat, then you got to mobilize the fat, then you have to oxidize the fat. You have to In have to oxidize the fat. You have to In have to oxidize the fat. You have to In other words, you have to mobilize it, other words, you have to mobilize it, other words, you have to mobilize it, then you actually have to convert it then you actually have to convert it then you actually have to convert it into energy. If you just mobilize it into energy. If you just mobilize it into energy. If you just mobilize it and you don't convert it into energy, and you don't convert it into energy, and you don't convert it into energy, you don't oxidize it, it can be returned you don't oxidize it, it can be returned you don't oxidize it, it can be returned to body fat. to body fat. to body fat. And many of the things that the nervous And many of the things that the nervous And many of the things that the nervous system can do is to increase the system can do is to increase the system can do is to increase the mobilization of fat, mobilization of fat, mobilization of fat, but also the oxidation of fat. Okay? So, but also the oxidation of fat. Okay? So, but also the oxidation of fat. Okay? So, you have two opportunities to burn more you have two opportunities to burn more you have two opportunities to burn more fat. And both of those opportunities are fat. And both of those opportunities are fat. And both of those opportunities are governed by your nervous system, by governed by your nervous system, by governed by your nervous system, by neurons that literally send little wires neurons that literally send little wires neurons that literally send little wires that we call axons into fat and release that we call axons into fat and release that we call axons into fat and release chemicals that chemicals that chemicals that provide a stimulus for more of that fat provide a stimulus for more of that fat provide a stimulus for more of that fat to be mobilized and then later to be mobilized and then later to be mobilized and then later for more of that fat to be burned up. for more of that fat to be burned up. for more of that fat to be burned up. Okay? So, Okay? So, Okay? So, we could go really deep on this, but I'm we could go really deep on this, but I'm we could go really deep on this, but I'm not going to go much deeper than that not going to go much deeper than that not going to go much deeper than that because this isn't a biochemistry of because this isn't a biochemistry of because this isn't a biochemistry of fatty acid metabolism lecture. This is fatty acid metabolism lecture. This is fatty acid metabolism lecture. This is about how to burn fat using your nervous about how to burn fat using your nervous about how to burn fat using your nervous system. But remember, there's a system. But remember, there's a system. But remember, there's a mobilization step and then there's an mobilization step and then there's an mobilization step and then there's an oxidation step. I think anyone of you, oxidation step. I think anyone of you, oxidation step. I think anyone of you, all of you should be able to internalize all of you should be able to internalize all of you should be able to internalize that. Mobilize, then oxidize. that. Mobilize, then oxidize. that. Mobilize, then oxidize. Okay? Mobilize, then oxidize. Okay? Mobilize, then oxidize. Okay? Mobilize, then oxidize. So, what are these neurons that connect So, what are these neurons that connect So, what are these neurons that connect to fat doing? What are they releasing to fat doing? What are they releasing to fat doing? What are they releasing exactly? How do they actually increase exactly? How do they actually increase exactly? How do they actually increase fat mobilization and how do they fat mobilization and how do they fat mobilization and how do they increase fat oxidation, burning of fat? increase fat oxidation, burning of fat? increase fat oxidation, burning of fat? Well, there are a couple of things that Well, there are a couple of things that Well, there are a couple of things that they release that encourage that they release that encourage that they release that encourage that process. And the main one that you need process. And the main one that you need process. And the main one that you need to know about is epinephrine or to know about is epinephrine or to know about is epinephrine or adrenaline. The conversion of these fatty acids into The conversion of these fatty acids into The conversion of these fatty acids into ATP in the mitochondria of cells is ATP in the mitochondria of cells is ATP in the mitochondria of cells is favored by adrenaline. favored by adrenaline. favored by adrenaline. Okay? And adrenaline is released from Okay? And adrenaline is released from Okay? And adrenaline is released from two sources. two sources. two sources. Adrenaline is released from the adrenal Adrenaline is released from the adrenal Adrenaline is released from the adrenal glands, which sit atop our kidneys in glands, which sit atop our kidneys in glands, which sit atop our kidneys in our lower back. our lower back. our lower back. And it's also released And it's also released And it's also released from the so-called sympathetic nervous from the so-called sympathetic nervous from the so-called sympathetic nervous system, although that name is a bit of a system, although that name is a bit of a system, although that name is a bit of a misnomer because it has nothing to do with because it has nothing to do with because it has nothing to do with sympathy. Has to do with stimulating sympathy. Has to do with stimulating sympathy. Has to do with stimulating alertness and promoting action of the alertness and promoting action of the alertness and promoting action of the body. There's a big mistake in the literature a big mistake in the literature a big mistake in the literature that is finally being corrected among that is finally being corrected among that is finally being corrected among those who know. those who know. those who know. The mistake in the literature is that The mistake in the literature is that The mistake in the literature is that the adrenal glands and the release of the adrenal glands and the release of the adrenal glands and the release of adrenaline is what stimulates fat loss adrenaline is what stimulates fat loss adrenaline is what stimulates fat loss and fat oxidation. and fat oxidation. and fat oxidation. In fact, it was thought for a long time In fact, it was thought for a long time In fact, it was thought for a long time that adrenaline swimming around in your that adrenaline swimming around in your that adrenaline swimming around in your body of when you're fasted because body of when you're fasted because body of when you're fasted because fasting can increase adrenaline or when fasting can increase adrenaline or when fasting can increase adrenaline or when you're engaging in intense exercise or you're engaging in intense exercise or you're engaging in intense exercise or when you're stressed is going to promote when you're stressed is going to promote when you're stressed is going to promote fat oxidation. That's actually not the fat oxidation. That's actually not the fat oxidation. That's actually not the case. The adrenaline that stimulates fat The adrenaline that stimulates fat The adrenaline that stimulates fat oxidation, the burning of fat, is coming oxidation, the burning of fat, is coming oxidation, the burning of fat, is coming from neurons that actually connect to from neurons that actually connect to from neurons that actually connect to the fat. the fat. the fat. Not hormones like adrenaline that are Not hormones like adrenaline that are Not hormones like adrenaline that are swimming around in your system. It's a swimming around in your system. It's a swimming around in your system. It's a local process. And this is very local process. And this is very local process. And this is very important because it means that what you important because it means that what you important because it means that what you do, the specific patterns of movements do, the specific patterns of movements do, the specific patterns of movements and the specific environment you create and the specific environment you create and the specific environment you create that can stimulate these particular that can stimulate these particular that can stimulate these particular neurons to activate fat, meaning to activate fat, meaning to activate fat, meaning to release fat, to mobilize it, and then to release fat, to mobilize it, and then to release fat, to mobilize it, and then to burn it is going to be a powerful lever burn it is going to be a powerful lever burn it is going to be a powerful lever that you can use in order to increase that you can use in order to increase that you can use in order to increase fat loss. So, what have we said so far? fat loss. So, what have we said so far? fat loss. So, what have we said so far? We've said that you got to mobilize and We've said that you got to mobilize and We've said that you got to mobilize and you got to burn fat and that your you got to burn fat and that your you got to burn fat and that your nervous system is in control of that nervous system is in control of that nervous system is in control of that process. It's not just about calorie process. It's not just about calorie process. It's not just about calorie deficit. Okay, so let's talk about how to Okay, so let's talk about how to Okay, so let's talk about how to activate the nervous system in ways that activate the nervous system in ways that activate the nervous system in ways that it promotes more liberation, movement, it promotes more liberation, movement, it promotes more liberation, movement, mobilization of fat, and more oxidation mobilization of fat, and more oxidation mobilization of fat, and more oxidation of fat. of fat. of fat. So, one of the most powerful ways to So, one of the most powerful ways to So, one of the most powerful ways to stimulate epinephrine, which is also stimulate epinephrine, which is also stimulate epinephrine, which is also called adrenaline, from these neurons called adrenaline, from these neurons called adrenaline, from these neurons that connect to fat and to thereby that connect to fat and to thereby that connect to fat and to thereby stimulate more fat mobilization and stimulate more fat mobilization and stimulate more fat mobilization and oxidation is through movement. oxidation is through movement. oxidation is through movement. But, I'm not talking about exercise. The But, I'm not talking about exercise. The But, I'm not talking about exercise. The type of movement that I'm referring to type of movement that I'm referring to type of movement that I'm referring to is extremely subtle. is extremely subtle. is extremely subtle. And some of you may be familiar with And some of you may be familiar with And some of you may be familiar with this type of movement, but I'm guessing type of movement, but I'm guessing type of movement, but I'm guessing you're probably not familiar with what you're probably not familiar with what you're probably not familiar with what I'm about to tell you, which is that I'm about to tell you, which is that I'm about to tell you, which is that shiver or shivering shiver or shivering shiver or shivering is a strong stimulus for the release of is a strong stimulus for the release of is a strong stimulus for the release of adrenaline, epinephrine, into fat and the increase epinephrine, into fat and the increase epinephrine, into fat and the increase in fat oxidation and mobilization. in fat oxidation and mobilization. in fat oxidation and mobilization. But, shiver is not just induced by cold But, shiver is not just induced by cold But, shiver is not just induced by cold and there are other subtle forms of and there are other subtle forms of and there are other subtle forms of movement that can greatly increase fat movement that can greatly increase fat movement that can greatly increase fat metabolism and fat loss. metabolism and fat loss. metabolism and fat loss. There was a group in England during the There was a group in England during the There was a group in England during the 1960s and 70s that discovered a pathway 1960s and 70s that discovered a pathway 1960s and 70s that discovered a pathway by which subtle forms of movement can by which subtle forms of movement can by which subtle forms of movement can greatly increase fat loss. greatly increase fat loss. greatly increase fat loss. This is the work of This is the work of This is the work of Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in the thermogenesis literature. And I the thermogenesis literature. And I the thermogenesis literature. And I learned about this early on when I was learned about this early on when I was learned about this early on when I was an undergraduate and I asked, "How did an undergraduate and I asked, "How did an undergraduate and I asked, "How did they come across this?" And here's how they come across this?" And here's how they come across this?" And here's how the story goes. the story goes. the story goes. They were aware that some people They were aware that some people They were aware that some people overeat and yet don't put on weight. overeat and yet don't put on weight. overeat and yet don't put on weight. Other people overeat even just a little Other people overeat even just a little Other people overeat even just a little bit and they seem to accumulate extra bit and they seem to accumulate extra bit and they seem to accumulate extra adipose tissue. adipose tissue. adipose tissue. Now, this is long before all the Now, this is long before all the Now, this is long before all the discussions about microbiome and hormone discussions about microbiome and hormone discussions about microbiome and hormone factors and you know, it's long before factors and you know, it's long before factors and you know, it's long before it many of the hormone factors besides it many of the hormone factors besides it many of the hormone factors besides insulin had even been discovered. insulin had even been discovered. insulin had even been discovered. What they did was they examined people What they did was they examined people What they did was they examined people who overate and did not gain weight. who overate and did not gain weight. who overate and did not gain weight. And what they observed was that those And what they observed was that those And what they observed was that those people engaged in lots of subtle people engaged in lots of subtle people engaged in lots of subtle movement throughout the day. In other movement throughout the day. In other movement throughout the day. In other words, they were fidgeters. words, they were fidgeters. words, they were fidgeters. And that's what they called them. I'm And that's what they called them. I'm And that's what they called them. I'm not going to do the British the British not going to do the British the British not going to do the British the British accent version of fidgeters. accent version of fidgeters. accent version of fidgeters. But Rothwell and Stock were British. But Rothwell and Stock were British. But Rothwell and Stock were British. What they found were people that overeat What they found were people that overeat What they found were people that overeat but don't gain weight as a consequence. but don't gain weight as a consequence. but don't gain weight as a consequence. And in fact, many people who had low And in fact, many people who had low And in fact, many people who had low levels of body fat levels of body fat levels of body fat had a lot of resting had a lot of resting had a lot of resting tremor, not of the Parkinsonian type, tremor, not of the Parkinsonian type, tremor, not of the Parkinsonian type, but they would bounce their knee while but they would bounce their knee while but they would bounce their knee while they were sitting. When they would talk, they were sitting. When they would talk, they were sitting. When they would talk, they would engage in very angular they would engage in very angular they would engage in very angular movements. They were sort of electric. movements. They were sort of electric. movements. They were sort of electric. In fact, at now in science I was In fact, at now in science I was In fact, at now in science I was chuckling about this as I was diving chuckling about this as I was diving chuckling about this as I was diving back into this literature because the back into this literature because the back into this literature because the other day I heard a wonderful lecture other day I heard a wonderful lecture other day I heard a wonderful lecture on a totally different topic from a on a totally different topic from a on a totally different topic from a colleague of mine and we all adore him. colleague of mine and we all adore him. colleague of mine and we all adore him. He's over in Europe and he's this He's over in Europe and he's this He's over in Europe and he's this tremendously successful scientist so we tremendously successful scientist so we tremendously successful scientist so we like to poke fun at him. And every one like to poke fun at him. And every one like to poke fun at him. And every one of his movements is incredibly electric of his movements is incredibly electric of his movements is incredibly electric and staccato. And he's rail thin and he and staccato. And he's rail thin and he and staccato. And he's rail thin and he eats like a horse. And so it fits very eats like a horse. And so it fits very eats like a horse. And so it fits very well into the discovery of Rothwell and well into the discovery of Rothwell and well into the discovery of Rothwell and Stock who discovered that fidgeters, people who discovered that fidgeters, people who discovered that fidgeters, people that bounce their knee, that bounce their knee, that bounce their knee, people that have a head bob while people that have a head bob while people that have a head bob while they're listening, people that nod a they're listening, people that nod a they're listening, people that nod a lot, people that stand up and sit down a lot, people that stand up and sit down a lot, people that stand up and sit down a lot throughout the day, and people that lot throughout the day, and people that lot throughout the day, and people that pace burn anywhere from 800 to 2,500 calories burn anywhere from 800 to 2,500 calories burn anywhere from 800 to 2,500 calories more than more than more than the control group in the experiments the control group in the experiments the control group in the experiments that they looked at. And indeed, there's that they looked at. And indeed, there's that they looked at. And indeed, there's been a modern look into all this and been a modern look into all this and been a modern look into all this and these numbers check out that simply these numbers check out that simply these numbers check out that simply moving around a lot even if those are moving around a lot even if those are moving around a lot even if those are subtle movements subtle movements subtle movements greatly increases the amount of energy greatly increases the amount of energy greatly increases the amount of energy that you burn. And people who overeat, that you burn. And people who overeat, that you burn. And people who overeat, the people who can have the second the people who can have the second the people who can have the second or the third donut or donuts at all and or the third donut or donuts at all and or the third donut or donuts at all and don't seem to put on weight to the same don't seem to put on weight to the same don't seem to put on weight to the same degree they are people that move around a lot they are people that move around a lot they are people that move around a lot even when seated. They're people that even when seated. They're people that even when seated. They're people that will often move their limbs very quickly will often move their limbs very quickly will often move their limbs very quickly as well. They There even have been as well. They There even have been as well. They There even have been studies that have explored studies that have explored studies that have explored other things that correlate with other things that correlate with other things that correlate with fidgeters. Fidgeters stand up very fidgeters. Fidgeters stand up very fidgeters. Fidgeters stand up very quickly at the end of a lecture or they quickly at the end of a lecture or they quickly at the end of a lecture or they start to gather their things very start to gather their things very start to gather their things very quickly whereas non-fidgeters don't. So, quickly whereas non-fidgeters don't. So, quickly whereas non-fidgeters don't. So, dogs like my bulldog Costello definitely dogs like my bulldog Costello definitely dogs like my bulldog Costello definitely not a fidgeter. Every movement is not a fidgeter. Every movement is not a fidgeter. Every movement is incredibly slow and deliberate. Sitting incredibly slow and deliberate. Sitting incredibly slow and deliberate. Sitting down is a process if you ask him to sit down is a process if you ask him to sit down is a process if you ask him to sit down it's sort of a slow-motion. You ask down it's sort of a slow-motion. You ask down it's sort of a slow-motion. You ask him to sit get up and he kind of looks him to sit get up and he kind of looks him to sit get up and he kind of looks at you, sighs, and stands up. The at you, sighs, and stands up. The at you, sighs, and stands up. The fidgeters are the opposite of that, fidgeters are the opposite of that, fidgeters are the opposite of that, right? You say, "How are you doing?" and right? You say, "How are you doing?" and right? You say, "How are you doing?" and they go, "Great!" So, even sometimes they go, "Great!" So, even sometimes they go, "Great!" So, even sometimes their speech will be accelerated their speech will be accelerated their speech will be accelerated although not always, but staccato although not always, but staccato although not always, but staccato movements, fidgeting, etc. movements, fidgeting, etc. movements, fidgeting, etc. And in 2015 and again in And in 2015 and again in And in 2015 and again in 2017 there've been studies that have 2017 there've been studies that have 2017 there've been studies that have been have explored this using some modern have explored this using some modern have explored this using some modern metabolic tracking and indeed simply metabolic tracking and indeed simply metabolic tracking and indeed simply moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing your knee, standing up and pacing your knee, standing up and pacing your knee, standing up and pacing several times or many times throughout several times or many times throughout several times or many times throughout the day the day the day led to considerable amounts of fat loss led to considerable amounts of fat loss led to considerable amounts of fat loss and weight loss when people were and weight loss when people were and weight loss when people were ingesting amount of food. If they ingesting amount of food. If they ingesting amount of food. If they overate they were able to compensate and overate they were able to compensate and overate they were able to compensate and burn off that food and if they were burn off that food and if they were burn off that food and if they were trying to lose weight trying to lose weight trying to lose weight and they incorporated this fidgeting and they incorporated this fidgeting and they incorporated this fidgeting protocol of deliberately trying to protocol of deliberately trying to protocol of deliberately trying to fidget more and move around during the fidget more and move around during the fidget more and move around during the day, pace, stand up more quickly, sit day, pace, stand up more quickly, sit day, pace, stand up more quickly, sit down more often, sit down and stand up down more often, sit down and stand up down more often, sit down and stand up more often rather more often rather more often rather they found that they greatly increased they found that they greatly increased they found that they greatly increased their weight loss anywhere from 20 to their weight loss anywhere from 20 to their weight loss anywhere from 20 to 30% increases and in some cases, you 30% increases and in some cases, you 30% increases and in some cases, you know, there are the always those few know, there are the always those few know, there are the always those few people who burned a lot more. It seems people who burned a lot more. It seems people who burned a lot more. It seems to work best in people who are already to work best in people who are already to work best in people who are already slightly overweight. So, for people that slightly overweight. So, for people that slightly overweight. So, for people that are overweight, who are kind of averse are overweight, who are kind of averse are overweight, who are kind of averse to exercise, fidgeting might actually be to exercise, fidgeting might actually be to exercise, fidgeting might actually be a good entry point. And a good entry point. And a good entry point. And 800 to 2,500 calories is a considerable 800 to 2,500 calories is a considerable 800 to 2,500 calories is a considerable amount of calories when you really think amount of calories when you really think amount of calories when you really think about it. Now, why am I telling you about it. Now, why am I telling you about it. Now, why am I telling you this? Well, there's clearly a tool to this? Well, there's clearly a tool to this? Well, there's clearly a tool to export from this, which is that you can export from this, which is that you can export from this, which is that you can increase the amount of calories burned increase the amount of calories burned increase the amount of calories burned without having to go on additional long without having to go on additional long without having to go on additional long runs. I do hope that people are runs. I do hope that people are runs. I do hope that people are exercising regularly because it's so exercising regularly because it's so exercising regularly because it's so important for other aspects of brain and important for other aspects of brain and important for other aspects of brain and body health, but body health, but body health, but nevertheless, we all we are all time nevertheless, we all we are all time nevertheless, we all we are all time limited, and we are not all so ready to limited, and we are not all so ready to limited, and we are not all so ready to embrace exercise. I have a family member embrace exercise. I have a family member embrace exercise. I have a family member who has been slowly coaxed into exercise, has been slowly coaxed into exercise, has been slowly coaxed into exercise, but if I were to tell her, for instance, but if I were to tell her, for instance, but if I were to tell her, for instance, you need to fidget more, she'd probably you need to fidget more, she'd probably you need to fidget more, she'd probably go for it. So, go for it. So, go for it. So, this is a powerful way to increase the this is a powerful way to increase the this is a powerful way to increase the calories that are burned. Now, calories that are burned. Now, calories that are burned. Now, that's great, and you can think about that's great, and you can think about that's great, and you can think about the protocols, but I want to the protocols, but I want to the protocols, but I want to nest that protocol in what I said nest that protocol in what I said nest that protocol in what I said before, which is that which is that which is that fat is controlled by these neurons and fat is controlled by these neurons and fat is controlled by these neurons and the epinephrine they release. the epinephrine they release. the epinephrine they release. You might say, "Well, how could these You might say, "Well, how could these You might say, "Well, how could these little micro movements lead to so much little micro movements lead to so much little micro movements lead to so much caloric burn?" caloric burn?" caloric burn?" And that's where it really gets And that's where it really gets And that's where it really gets interesting. Rothwell and Stock and interesting. Rothwell and Stock and interesting. Rothwell and Stock and others that they worked with others that they worked with others that they worked with subsequently found that these little subsequently found that these little subsequently found that these little fidgety movements, the engagement of fidgety movements, the engagement of fidgety movements, the engagement of certain aspects of our musculature that certain aspects of our musculature that certain aspects of our musculature that are nothing like exercise. It's not are nothing like exercise. It's not are nothing like exercise. It's not these large coordinated or rhythmic uh these large coordinated or rhythmic uh these large coordinated or rhythmic uh body movements, but rather subtle little body movements, but rather subtle little body movements, but rather subtle little bits of fidgety movement, and here I am bits of fidgety movement, and here I am bits of fidgety movement, and here I am doing a lot of fidgety movement doing a lot of fidgety movement doing a lot of fidgety movement as an example, tapping the pen, this as an example, tapping the pen, this as an example, tapping the pen, this kind of thing. There's I was probably kind of thing. There's I was probably kind of thing. There's I was probably that kid in class most of the time. I that kid in class most of the time. I that kid in class most of the time. I was like I try not to do it to irritate was like I try not to do it to irritate was like I try not to do it to irritate people, but I was definitely a knee people, but I was definitely a knee people, but I was definitely a knee bouncer. Um I'm not particularly lean or not, Um I'm not particularly lean or not, Um I'm not particularly lean or not, but um you know, I was definitely this is a you know, I was definitely this is a you know, I was definitely this is a common activity for me. People that do common activity for me. People that do common activity for me. People that do that sort of thing, it turns out that sort of thing, it turns out that sort of thing, it turns out that it's not the kind of caloric burn that it's not the kind of caloric burn that it's not the kind of caloric burn that we normally think of like, oh, you're we normally think of like, oh, you're we normally think of like, oh, you're running, lifting weights, swimming, running, lifting weights, swimming, running, lifting weights, swimming, yoga, etc. yoga, etc. yoga, etc. Those subtle movements of our core Those subtle movements of our core Those subtle movements of our core musculature, not just the core, but all our limbs and not just the core, but all our limbs and not just the core, but all our limbs and our and our musculature, those low-level our and our musculature, those low-level our and our musculature, those low-level movements, they trigger epinephrine release from they trigger epinephrine release from they trigger epinephrine release from these neurons, and they stimulate the these neurons, and they stimulate the these neurons, and they stimulate the mobilization of fat. And then that fat mobilization of fat. And then that fat mobilization of fat. And then that fat is oxidized at higher rates. And I find is oxidized at higher rates. And I find is oxidized at higher rates. And I find this fascinating. I wish more people this fascinating. I wish more people this fascinating. I wish more people knew about it, which is why I'm telling knew about it, which is why I'm telling knew about it, which is why I'm telling you about it today. you about it today. you about it today. This has nothing to do with exercise in This has nothing to do with exercise in This has nothing to do with exercise in the traditional form, and yet 800 to the traditional form, and yet 800 to the traditional form, and yet 800 to 2,500 calories per day, that's a 2,500 calories per day, that's a 2,500 calories per day, that's a considerable amount of fat oxidized. If considerable amount of fat oxidized. If considerable amount of fat oxidized. If you're are in a calorie maintenance you're are in a calorie maintenance you're are in a calorie maintenance mode, or a if you're subcaloric, that's mode, or a if you're subcaloric, that's mode, or a if you're subcaloric, that's going to add to still additional fat going to add to still additional fat going to add to still additional fat loss. The data on this are tremendous. loss. The data on this are tremendous. loss. The data on this are tremendous. I'll link to a few studies. If you're I'll link to a few studies. If you're I'll link to a few studies. If you're really interested in learning about really interested in learning about really interested in learning about what's called NEAT, N E A T, which is what's called NEAT, N E A T, which is what's called NEAT, N E A T, which is non-exercise activity thermogenesis, NEAT. activity thermogenesis, NEAT. activity thermogenesis, NEAT. So, what's the protocol? Fidget. So, what's the protocol? Fidget. So, what's the protocol? Fidget. If you're really interested in burning If you're really interested in burning If you're really interested in burning calories and you already exercise, you calories and you already exercise, you calories and you already exercise, you want to burn more, or you don't have the want to burn more, or you don't have the want to burn more, or you don't have the opportunity to exercise, or you're opportunity to exercise, or you're opportunity to exercise, or you're averse to exercise for whatever reason, averse to exercise for whatever reason, averse to exercise for whatever reason, fidgeting movements, staccato movements, fidgeting movements, staccato movements, fidgeting movements, staccato movements, standing up, walking around, pacing, all standing up, walking around, pacing, all standing up, walking around, pacing, all the sort of nervous activities that the sort of nervous activities that the sort of nervous activities that we're so critical of in other people and we're so critical of in other people and we're so critical of in other people and sometimes in ourselves, are actually sometimes in ourselves, are actually sometimes in ourselves, are actually mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat and a lot of energy. and a lot of energy. and a lot of energy. And while this probably won't compensate And while this probably won't compensate And while this probably won't compensate for chronic overeating, for chronic overeating, for chronic overeating, the caloric burn from this is the caloric burn from this is the caloric burn from this is considerable, and very likely can offset considerable, and very likely can offset considerable, and very likely can offset a, you know, a meal that had excessive a, you know, a meal that had excessive a, you know, a meal that had excessive calories or a kind of steady state of calories or a kind of steady state of calories or a kind of steady state of accumu- of eating too much. And it also accumu- of eating too much. And it also accumu- of eating too much. And it also starts to open up all sorts of thoughts starts to open up all sorts of thoughts starts to open up all sorts of thoughts and discussion about, you know, you when and discussion about, you know, you when and discussion about, you know, you when you travel, you tend to eat foods that you travel, you tend to eat foods that you travel, you tend to eat foods that are kind of outside your normal are kind of outside your normal are kind of outside your normal ones. We tend to eat, uh, you know, ones. We tend to eat, uh, you know, ones. We tend to eat, uh, you know, foods that aren't so great for us. We foods that aren't so great for us. We foods that aren't so great for us. We also tend to be a little bit more also tend to be a little bit more also tend to be a little bit more sedentary when we travel, we're on the sedentary when we travel, we're on the sedentary when we travel, we're on the plane, etc. plane, etc. plane, etc. But, all of that aside, all of that aside, all of that aside, just the use of something like low-level just the use of something like low-level just the use of something like low-level movement, and it's almost like a tremor, movement, and it's almost like a tremor, movement, and it's almost like a tremor, but also these like short, small, but also these like short, small, but also these like short, small, fidgety movements. I'm intentionally fidgety movements. I'm intentionally fidgety movements. I'm intentionally doing a lot of these today, so you have doing a lot of these today, so you have doing a lot of these today, so you have examples that you can use that examples that you can use that examples that you can use that to select from, if you like. to select from, if you like. to select from, if you like. These can have a major effect on fat These can have a major effect on fat These can have a major effect on fat loss. And it raises a second tool. And it raises a second tool. And it raises a second tool. If these low, meaning these small If these low, meaning these small If these low, meaning these small movements that we engage in, trigger movements that we engage in, trigger movements that we engage in, trigger epinephrine, adrenaline release from epinephrine, adrenaline release from epinephrine, adrenaline release from these neurons of the sympathetic nervous these neurons of the sympathetic nervous these neurons of the sympathetic nervous system that innervate fat, and increase system that innervate fat, and increase system that innervate fat, and increase fat mobilization and oxidation, fat mobilization and oxidation, fat mobilization and oxidation, now it should make sense now it should make sense now it should make sense why shivering why shivering why shivering is one of the strongest stimulus stimuli is one of the strongest stimulus stimuli is one of the strongest stimulus stimuli that one can incorporate to stimulate that one can incorporate to stimulate that one can incorporate to stimulate fat loss. fat loss. fat loss. Now, shivering is almost always Now, shivering is almost always Now, shivering is almost always associated with cold. We think associated with cold. We think associated with cold. We think shivering, we think cold, because when shivering, we think cold, because when shivering, we think cold, because when we get cold, we shiver. we get cold, we shiver. we get cold, we shiver. And there are two ways that shivering And there are two ways that shivering And there are two ways that shivering can increase fat loss. can increase fat loss. can increase fat loss. And there are several ways that you can And there are several ways that you can And there are several ways that you can use shivering, you can leverage use shivering, you can leverage use shivering, you can leverage shivering, and you can leverage cold to shivering, and you can leverage cold to shivering, and you can leverage cold to accelerate fat loss. But, you have to do accelerate fat loss. But, you have to do accelerate fat loss. But, you have to do it correctly. And most of the people it correctly. And most of the people it correctly. And most of the people that are using cold, and frankly that are using cold, and frankly that are using cold, and frankly suggesting cold as a means to increase suggesting cold as a means to increase suggesting cold as a means to increase metabolism fat loss, are suggesting the metabolism fat loss, are suggesting the metabolism fat loss, are suggesting the exact wrong protocol. In fact, the one exact wrong protocol. In fact, the one exact wrong protocol. In fact, the one I'm going to recommend is 180° in the I'm going to recommend is 180° in the I'm going to recommend is 180° in the opposite direction to the typical opposite direction to the typical opposite direction to the typical protocol that you'd hear about. So, protocol that you'd hear about. So, protocol that you'd hear about. So, let's talk about how to use cold and how let's talk about how to use cold and how let's talk about how to use cold and how to leverage shiver to leverage shiver to leverage shiver as a particularly strong stimulus to as a particularly strong stimulus to as a particularly strong stimulus to increase fat loss mo- through increase fat loss mo- through increase fat loss mo- through mobilization and oxidation of these mobilization and oxidation of these mobilization and oxidation of these fatty acids. So, in recent years there's fatty acids. So, in recent years there's fatty acids. So, in recent years there's been a growing interest in the use of been a growing interest in the use of been a growing interest in the use of cold for various things like improving cold for various things like improving cold for various things like improving stress tolerance, improving metabolism, stress tolerance, improving metabolism, stress tolerance, improving metabolism, recovery from exercise. I've talked recovery from exercise. I've talked recovery from exercise. I've talked about a number of those things and the about a number of those things and the about a number of those things and the uses of cold on this podcast. In fact, uses of cold on this podcast. In fact, uses of cold on this podcast. In fact, did an episode on how to supercharge did an episode on how to supercharge did an episode on how to supercharge performance through palmer cooling, performance through palmer cooling, performance through palmer cooling, cooling the palms in specific ways or cooling the palms in specific ways or cooling the palms in specific ways or the bottoms of the feet. And if you're the bottoms of the feet. And if you're the bottoms of the feet. And if you're interested in that and how to improve interested in that and how to improve interested in that and how to improve performance in endurance and strength, performance in endurance and strength, performance in endurance and strength, you can check out that episode. But, you can check out that episode. But, you can check out that episode. But, most people out there are using cold most people out there are using cold most people out there are using cold exposure typically by taking cold showers typically by taking cold showers typically by taking cold showers or by getting into cold water of some or by getting into cold water of some or by getting into cold water of some other kind, a lake or a river or a cold other kind, a lake or a river or a cold other kind, a lake or a river or a cold bath or an ice bath. bath or an ice bath. bath or an ice bath. And they are doing that probably with And they are doing that probably with And they are doing that probably with mixed goals, meaning they both would mixed goals, meaning they both would mixed goals, meaning they both would like to increase their metabolism and like to increase their metabolism and like to increase their metabolism and burn fat as well as improve mental burn fat as well as improve mental burn fat as well as improve mental resilience. Since today we're talking about Since today we're talking about Since today we're talking about accelerating fat loss through the use of accelerating fat loss through the use of accelerating fat loss through the use of science-based tools, I want to emphasize science-based tools, I want to emphasize science-based tools, I want to emphasize a study that was published in nature a study that was published in nature a study that was published in nature just a couple years ago showing just a couple years ago showing just a couple years ago showing exactly how cold exactly how cold exactly how cold increases metabolism and fat loss. Okay. increases metabolism and fat loss. Okay. increases metabolism and fat loss. Okay. So, we have several kinds of fat. So, we have several kinds of fat. So, we have several kinds of fat. Three kinds, in fact. We have white fat, Three kinds, in fact. We have white fat, Three kinds, in fact. We have white fat, white adipose tissue, and we have brown white adipose tissue, and we have brown white adipose tissue, and we have brown fat or brown adipose tissue. fat or brown adipose tissue. fat or brown adipose tissue. And there's a third kind which is a And there's a third kind which is a And there's a third kind which is a beige adipose tissue. beige adipose tissue. beige adipose tissue. White fat is the type that we White fat is the type that we White fat is the type that we traditionally think of as fat, traditionally think of as fat, traditionally think of as fat, subcutaneous fat. subcutaneous fat. subcutaneous fat. And it is not particularly rich in And it is not particularly rich in And it is not particularly rich in mitochondria. It is there as an energy mitochondria. It is there as an energy mitochondria. It is there as an energy storage site. storage site. storage site. And we have to mobilize the fat out as And we have to mobilize the fat out as And we have to mobilize the fat out as we talked about before, and burn it up we talked about before, and burn it up we talked about before, and burn it up elsewhere. Brown fat Brown fat Brown fat largely exists between our shoulder largely exists between our shoulder largely exists between our shoulder blades and on the back of our neck, blades and on the back of our neck, blades and on the back of our neck, between the scapulae, between the scapulae, between the scapulae, and it's rich with mitochondria, which and it's rich with mitochondria, which and it's rich with mitochondria, which is why it's called brown fat. is why it's called brown fat. is why it's called brown fat. And brown fat has a particular And brown fat has a particular And brown fat has a particular biochemical cascade, whereby it can take biochemical cascade, whereby it can take biochemical cascade, whereby it can take food energy food energy food energy and it can take food, basically, break it can take food, basically, break it can take food, basically, break it down, and convert it into energy within down, and convert it into energy within down, and convert it into energy within those cells. And there are some those cells. And there are some those cells. And there are some additional steps involved, but unlike additional steps involved, but unlike additional steps involved, but unlike fatty acids from white fat, which have fatty acids from white fat, which have fatty acids from white fat, which have to travel elsewhere, get broken down in to travel elsewhere, get broken down in to travel elsewhere, get broken down in mitochondria and convert into ATP, mitochondria and convert into ATP, mitochondria and convert into ATP, etc., used by the mitochondria, rather. used by the mitochondria, rather. used by the mitochondria, rather. Brown fat is thermogenic. It can Brown fat is thermogenic. It can Brown fat is thermogenic. It can actually use energy directly. It skips a actually use energy directly. It skips a actually use energy directly. It skips a step, and I don't want to get diverted step, and I don't want to get diverted step, and I don't want to get diverted by going into all the biochemistry by going into all the biochemistry by going into all the biochemistry of it. Beige fat is sort of in between. of it. Beige fat is sort of in between. of it. Beige fat is sort of in between. It's white fat that could be brown fat, It's white fat that could be brown fat, It's white fat that could be brown fat, because it has some mitochondria in it, because it has some mitochondria in it, because it has some mitochondria in it, but not as many as brown fat. but not as many as brown fat. but not as many as brown fat. Now, cold exposure does several things. Now, cold exposure does several things. Now, cold exposure does several things. Making ourselves cold Making ourselves cold Making ourselves cold can allow us to build up mental can allow us to build up mental can allow us to build up mental resilience, because getting into cold of any kind, because getting into cold of any kind, because getting into cold of any kind, doesn't matter if it's a cryo chamber, doesn't matter if it's a cryo chamber, doesn't matter if it's a cryo chamber, doesn't matter if it's a cold day and doesn't matter if it's a cold day and doesn't matter if it's a cold day and you forgot your sweater or your parka, you forgot your sweater or your parka, you forgot your sweater or your parka, it doesn't matter if it's an ice bath or it doesn't matter if it's an ice bath or it doesn't matter if it's an ice bath or you're lying down in the snow. you're lying down in the snow. you're lying down in the snow. Cold causes the release of adrenaline Cold causes the release of adrenaline Cold causes the release of adrenaline from your adrenals, from your adrenals, from your adrenals, and it causes the release of epinephrine and it causes the release of epinephrine and it causes the release of epinephrine from these neurons that connect to fat. from these neurons that connect to fat. from these neurons that connect to fat. Now, the big effects of cold the big effects of cold the big effects of cold on metabolism and fat burning are going on metabolism and fat burning are going on metabolism and fat burning are going to be through two routes. One is that if to be through two routes. One is that if to be through two routes. One is that if you expose yourself to cold, you have you expose yourself to cold, you have you expose yourself to cold, you have the opportunity to trigger activation of the opportunity to trigger activation of the opportunity to trigger activation of brown fat, as well as to convert more brown fat, as well as to convert more brown fat, as well as to convert more beige fat into true brown fat. So, you beige fat into true brown fat. So, you beige fat into true brown fat. So, you essentially create a stronger or a essentially create a stronger or a essentially create a stronger or a hotter furnace. That's the way to think hotter furnace. That's the way to think hotter furnace. That's the way to think about brown fat. It's like a furnace. about brown fat. It's like a furnace. about brown fat. It's like a furnace. And so, with this principle that we And so, with this principle that we And so, with this principle that we started with of calories in versus started with of calories in versus started with of calories in versus calories burned, what you're doing is calories burned, what you're doing is calories burned, what you're doing is you're increasing the amount of burning. you're increasing the amount of burning. you're increasing the amount of burning. You're increasing the burn You're increasing the burn You're increasing the burn of energy of energy of energy by increasing the intensity of the heat by increasing the intensity of the heat by increasing the intensity of the heat inside you, so to speak. Okay? I'm inside you, so to speak. Okay? I'm inside you, so to speak. Okay? I'm talking here is kind of metaphorically. talking here is kind of metaphorically. talking here is kind of metaphorically. Now, how can you do that? Well, how can you do that? Well, how can you do that? Well, if you get into cold water or an ice if you get into cold water or an ice if you get into cold water or an ice bath or a cold day, bath or a cold day, bath or a cold day, and you try and remain calm and resist and you try and remain calm and resist and you try and remain calm and resist shivering, you actually short-circuit you actually short-circuit you actually short-circuit this mechanism for increasing brown fat this mechanism for increasing brown fat this mechanism for increasing brown fat thermogenesis. The paper published in thermogenesis. The paper published in thermogenesis. The paper published in Nature shows that it is shivering itself Nature shows that it is shivering itself Nature shows that it is shivering itself that causes the brown fat to increase that causes the brown fat to increase that causes the brown fat to increase your burning, your burn rate, and your burning, your burn rate, and your burning, your burn rate, and your metabolism. And it works like this. When metabolism. And it works like this. When metabolism. And it works like this. When you get into cold and you shiver, the you get into cold and you shiver, the you get into cold and you shiver, the shivering those that low-level movement shivering those that low-level movement shivering those that low-level movement of the muscle, those small movements, of the muscle, those small movements, of the muscle, those small movements, triggers the release of a molecule triggers the release of a molecule triggers the release of a molecule called succinate. S U C I N A T E, called succinate. S U C I N A T E, called succinate. S U C I N A T E, succinate. And succinate acts on the succinate. And succinate acts on the succinate. And succinate acts on the brown fat to increase brown fat brown fat to increase brown fat brown fat to increase brown fat thermogenesis and fat burning overall. thermogenesis and fat burning overall. thermogenesis and fat burning overall. It actually increases body heat through It actually increases body heat through It actually increases body heat through this brown fat thermogenesis pathway. this brown fat thermogenesis pathway. this brown fat thermogenesis pathway. And it also over time can increase the And it also over time can increase the And it also over time can increase the amount of brown fat by converting amount of brown fat by converting amount of brown fat by converting beige fat into true brown fat. Now, how beige fat into true brown fat. Now, how beige fat into true brown fat. Now, how much cold exposure and how often? That's much cold exposure and how often? That's much cold exposure and how often? That's the key. the key. the key. But before I give that detail or set of But before I give that detail or set of But before I give that detail or set of details, remember, if you resist the details, remember, if you resist the details, remember, if you resist the shiver, you are not going to get the increased you are not going to get the increased you are not going to get the increased metabolic effect because you are not metabolic effect because you are not metabolic effect because you are not going to get the succinate release. going to get the succinate release. going to get the succinate release. So, if you want to get So, if you want to get So, if you want to get your body heat, your thermogenic level your body heat, your thermogenic level your body heat, your thermogenic level to go up, you need to shiver. So, now we to go up, you need to shiver. So, now we to go up, you need to shiver. So, now we have the NEAT, the non-exercise activity have the NEAT, the non-exercise activity have the NEAT, the non-exercise activity thermogenesis, so low levels of activity thermogenesis, so low levels of activity thermogenesis, so low levels of activity as I described before, which are done as I described before, which are done as I described before, which are done away from cold. Maybe do them in cold as away from cold. Maybe do them in cold as away from cold. Maybe do them in cold as well, as well as shiver in response to well, as well as shiver in response to well, as well as shiver in response to cold. And so, the shiver itself is cold. And so, the shiver itself is cold. And so, the shiver itself is valuable for triggering the release of valuable for triggering the release of valuable for triggering the release of succinate. In fact, succinate is being succinate. In fact, succinate is being succinate. In fact, succinate is being evolved now by various drug evolved now by various drug evolved now by various drug manufacturers as a potential treatment manufacturers as a potential treatment manufacturers as a potential treatment for obesity, although it hasn't really for obesity, although it hasn't really for obesity, although it hasn't really hit the market in its final form yet. hit the market in its final form yet. hit the market in its final form yet. Succinate is powerful for its effects on Succinate is powerful for its effects on Succinate is powerful for its effects on brown fat. brown fat. brown fat. So, how many times a week do you need to So, how many times a week do you need to So, how many times a week do you need to expose yourself to cold will depend on expose yourself to cold will depend on expose yourself to cold will depend on how much fat you're trying to lose and how much fat you're trying to lose and how much fat you're trying to lose and how much you're trying to increase your how much you're trying to increase your how much you're trying to increase your metabolism. There are studies that metabolism. There are studies that metabolism. There are studies that describe positive effects on fat loss of describe positive effects on fat loss of describe positive effects on fat loss of exposing yourself to cold either through exposing yourself to cold either through exposing yourself to cold either through cold shower or through ice bath or other cold shower or through ice bath or other cold shower or through ice bath or other cold water. It doesn't have to actually cold water. It doesn't have to actually cold water. It doesn't have to actually have ice in it provided it's cold enough have ice in it provided it's cold enough have ice in it provided it's cold enough for anytime anywhere, excuse me, between for anytime anywhere, excuse me, between for anytime anywhere, excuse me, between one and five times per week. But, it one and five times per week. But, it one and five times per week. But, it turns out that just one exposure per turns out that just one exposure per turns out that just one exposure per week can be valuable. The question then week can be valuable. The question then week can be valuable. The question then is how long to get into that cold is how long to get into that cold is how long to get into that cold environment and environment and environment and how cold should that environment be? how cold should that environment be? how cold should that environment be? So, first let's talk about how long to So, first let's talk about how long to So, first let's talk about how long to get into that cold environment. get into that cold environment. get into that cold environment. The answer here might be a little bit The answer here might be a little bit The answer here might be a little bit different than you might imagine. Most different than you might imagine. Most different than you might imagine. Most of you might think, "Oh, well, if 1 of you might think, "Oh, well, if 1 of you might think, "Oh, well, if 1 minute is good, 3 minutes is better, and minute is good, 3 minutes is better, and minute is good, 3 minutes is better, and if 3 minutes is better, then 10 minutes if 3 minutes is better, then 10 minutes if 3 minutes is better, then 10 minutes is best." is best." is best." But, remember, the goal is to get the But, remember, the goal is to get the But, remember, the goal is to get the shiver-induced release of succinate so shiver-induced release of succinate so shiver-induced release of succinate so that succinate can trigger the brown that succinate can trigger the brown that succinate can trigger the brown fat. It turns out that if you want to trigger It turns out that if you want to trigger It turns out that if you want to trigger the shiver, what you want to do is to the shiver, what you want to do is to the shiver, what you want to do is to get into the cold get into the cold get into the cold and then get out of the cold and then get out of the cold and then get out of the cold and typically not dry off typically not dry off typically not dry off and then get back into the cold and out and then get back into the cold and out and then get back into the cold and out of the cold. That will definitely of the cold. That will definitely of the cold. That will definitely stimulate more shivering than just stimulate more shivering than just stimulate more shivering than just getting into the cold itself. So, what getting into the cold itself. So, what getting into the cold itself. So, what I'm not referring to is getting into the I'm not referring to is getting into the I'm not referring to is getting into the cold environment like an ice bath and cold environment like an ice bath and cold environment like an ice bath and waiting until you shiver and staying waiting until you shiver and staying waiting until you shiver and staying there shivering. Okay? You also don't there shivering. Okay? You also don't there shivering. Okay? You also don't want to get hypothermic and I want to be want to get hypothermic and I want to be want to get hypothermic and I want to be clear you want to clear you want to clear you want to you want to get approval from your you want to get approval from your you want to get approval from your doctor before you do any of this. doctor before you do any of this. doctor before you do any of this. When you get into cold water, there are When you get into cold water, there are When you get into cold water, there are two factors that will dictate whether or two factors that will dictate whether or two factors that will dictate whether or not you shiver. not you shiver. not you shiver. Probably three, but let's just talk Probably three, but let's just talk Probably three, but let's just talk about the main two. One is how cold it about the main two. One is how cold it about the main two. One is how cold it is. So, how cold should it be? And look, is. So, how cold should it be? And look, is. So, how cold should it be? And look, if you get into water that's very, very if you get into water that's very, very if you get into water that's very, very cold, it can actually shock your heart. cold, it can actually shock your heart. cold, it can actually shock your heart. It can actually give you a heart attack It can actually give you a heart attack It can actually give you a heart attack if it's truly, truly if it's truly, truly if it's truly, truly ice cold and you're not adapted to that. ice cold and you're not adapted to that. ice cold and you're not adapted to that. So, proceed with caution, please. I'm So, proceed with caution, please. I'm So, proceed with caution, please. I'm not a physician and I'm not I don't want not a physician and I'm not I don't want not a physician and I'm not I don't want to see anyone get hurt. Cold just cold enough to be Cold just cold enough to be Cold just cold enough to be uncomfortable is a good place to start. uncomfortable is a good place to start. uncomfortable is a good place to start. So, for some of you that's going to be So, for some of you that's going to be So, for some of you that's going to be 60°. For some of you that's going to be 60°. For some of you that's going to be 60°. For some of you that's going to be 55°. For some of you it's going to be 55°. For some of you it's going to be 55°. For some of you it's going to be high 30s, right? Depends on how cold high 30s, right? Depends on how cold high 30s, right? Depends on how cold adapted you are and people vary in terms adapted you are and people vary in terms adapted you are and people vary in terms of how well they tolerate the cold. So, of how well they tolerate the cold. So, of how well they tolerate the cold. So, what you need to do is find a what you need to do is find a what you need to do is find a temperature that you can get into one to temperature that you can get into one to temperature that you can get into one to five, probably one to three times a week five, probably one to three times a week five, probably one to three times a week if you really want this to accelerate if you really want this to accelerate if you really want this to accelerate fat loss and you want to get in until fat loss and you want to get in until fat loss and you want to get in until you just start to shiver and then you just start to shiver and then you just start to shiver and then you want to get out and not dry off. want to get out and not dry off. want to get out and not dry off. Wait anywhere from one to three minutes Wait anywhere from one to three minutes Wait anywhere from one to three minutes and then get back into the cold. and then get back into the cold. and then get back into the cold. Now, you'll notice when you get back Now, you'll notice when you get back Now, you'll notice when you get back into the cold, it'll almost seem into the cold, it'll almost seem into the cold, it'll almost seem soothing. It might actually not induce soothing. It might actually not induce soothing. It might actually not induce shiver It might take away the shiver It might take away the shiver It might take away the shiver that you were that you had. So, here's a that you were that you had. So, here's a that you were that you had. So, here's a potential kind of sets reps protocol potential kind of sets reps protocol potential kind of sets reps protocol that you can play with. Find a that you can play with. Find a that you can play with. Find a temperature that induces shiver for you. temperature that induces shiver for you. temperature that induces shiver for you. That's going to vary depending on your That's going to vary depending on your That's going to vary depending on your cold tolerance and how cold adapted you cold tolerance and how cold adapted you cold tolerance and how cold adapted you are. One to three, maybe five times a are. One to three, maybe five times a are. One to three, maybe five times a week, get in until you or get under the week, get in until you or get under the week, get in until you or get under the shower or it is until you start to shower or it is until you start to shower or it is until you start to shiver, genuinely shiver. shiver, genuinely shiver. shiver, genuinely shiver. Then, after about a minute or so, get out, after about a minute or so, get out, after about a minute or so, get out, spend 1 to 3 minutes out, but don't dry spend 1 to 3 minutes out, but don't dry spend 1 to 3 minutes out, but don't dry off, get back in off, get back in off, get back in for anywhere from 1 to 3 minutes, but for anywhere from 1 to 3 minutes, but for anywhere from 1 to 3 minutes, but try and access the shiver point again. try and access the shiver point again. try and access the shiver point again. And you might do three repetitions of And you might do three repetitions of And you might do three repetitions of that. So, it's three times in and three that. So, it's three times in and three that. So, it's three times in and three times out total. Okay? That's a great times out total. Okay? That's a great times out total. Okay? That's a great starting place. starting place. starting place. And what you don't want to do what you don't want to do what you don't want to do is build up your tolerance to cold so is build up your tolerance to cold so is build up your tolerance to cold so fast that pretty soon you're able to fast that pretty soon you're able to fast that pretty soon you're able to resist the shiver because of remember, resist the shiver because of remember, resist the shiver because of remember, the shiver is the source of the shiver is the source of the shiver is the source of the succinate release that will trigger succinate release that will trigger succinate release that will trigger brown fat thermogenesis. brown fat thermogenesis. brown fat thermogenesis. So, if you'd like to see this protocol So, if you'd like to see this protocol So, if you'd like to see this protocol spelled out, you can access it zero cost spelled out, you can access it zero cost spelled out, you can access it zero cost at a website, which is the at a website, which is the at a website, which is the coldplunge.com. The cold plunge is a company, they make The cold plunge is a company, they make The cold plunge is a company, they make cold plunges, and they were kind enough cold plunges, and they were kind enough cold plunges, and they were kind enough to gift one to the Huberman Lab podcast. to gift one to the Huberman Lab podcast. to gift one to the Huberman Lab podcast. But, I want to emphasize that these But, I want to emphasize that these But, I want to emphasize that these protocols are free of cost. The folks at protocols are free of cost. The folks at protocols are free of cost. The folks at The Cold Plunge are not just interested The Cold Plunge are not just interested The Cold Plunge are not just interested in marketing their product, but one of marketing their product, but one of marketing their product, but one of their main interests is encouraging their main interests is encouraging their main interests is encouraging people to engage in cold exposure for people to engage in cold exposure for people to engage in cold exposure for particular endpoints and goals, like fat particular endpoints and goals, like fat particular endpoints and goals, like fat loss, resilience, etc., resisting loss, resilience, etc., resisting loss, resilience, etc., resisting inflammation. But, their main focus is providing people their main focus is providing people their main focus is providing people protocols and encouraging people to use protocols and encouraging people to use protocols and encouraging people to use cold exposure of various kinds, not just cold exposure of various kinds, not just cold exposure of various kinds, not just through their products, but through cold through their products, but through cold through their products, but through cold rivers and rivers and rivers and jumps in the ocean and things like cold jumps in the ocean and things like cold jumps in the ocean and things like cold showers, whatever is showers, whatever is showers, whatever is most convenient and accessible for most convenient and accessible for most convenient and accessible for various people. And so, we needed a various people. And so, we needed a various people. And so, we needed a place where we could house these place where we could house these place where we could house these protocols in a permanent way, protocols in a permanent way, protocols in a permanent way, and not just for this episode. But, so and not just for this episode. But, so and not just for this episode. But, so what they've agreed to do is to post the what they've agreed to do is to post the what they've agreed to do is to post the protocols there. They should be very protocols there. They should be very protocols there. They should be very easy to find on their website. This easy to find on their website. This easy to find on their website. This particular protocol we're referring to as the protocol we're referring to as the protocol we're referring to as the fat loss fat loss fat loss optimization protocol, for lack of a optimization protocol, for lack of a optimization protocol, for lack of a better name. And it's really grounded in better name. And it's really grounded in better name. And it's really grounded in how cold can be used to induce shiver. how cold can be used to induce shiver. how cold can be used to induce shiver. And again, it doesn't really matter how And again, it doesn't really matter how And again, it doesn't really matter how you're accessing that cold provided you you're accessing that cold provided you you're accessing that cold provided you access the shiver and you're moving from access the shiver and you're moving from access the shiver and you're moving from the cold environment to a slightly the cold environment to a slightly the cold environment to a slightly warmer environment. So, getting out of warmer environment. So, getting out of warmer environment. So, getting out of the cold shower, getting out of the ice the cold shower, getting out of the ice the cold shower, getting out of the ice bath, et cetera, or out of the cold bath, et cetera, or out of the cold bath, et cetera, or out of the cold plunge, and then back in because it plunge, and then back in because it plunge, and then back in because it turns out that the cooling and turns out that the cooling and turns out that the cooling and re-warming process of the body is where re-warming process of the body is where re-warming process of the body is where shiver kicks in. shiver kicks in. shiver kicks in. And so, And so, And so, that's distinctly different than just that's distinctly different than just that's distinctly different than just trying to get into the cold and stay in trying to get into the cold and stay in trying to get into the cold and stay in the cold for as long as possible. And if the cold for as long as possible. And if the cold for as long as possible. And if you zoom out a little bit and think you zoom out a little bit and think you zoom out a little bit and think about some examples in life, you'll about some examples in life, you'll about some examples in life, you'll understand why that must be the case. understand why that must be the case. understand why that must be the case. For instance, people who do a lot of For instance, people who do a lot of For instance, people who do a lot of cold water swims, you have these polar cold water swims, you have these polar cold water swims, you have these polar bear clubs, I think they call bear clubs, I think they call bear clubs, I think they call themselves, who do these cold water swims. I would who do these cold water swims. I would who do these cold water swims. I would sometimes see these people swimming back sometimes see these people swimming back sometimes see these people swimming back and forth to Alcatraz and stuff like and forth to Alcatraz and stuff like and forth to Alcatraz and stuff like that, which just seems that, which just seems that, which just seems risky and, you know, they tell me it's risky and, you know, they tell me it's risky and, you know, they tell me it's very stimulating for the mind and body. very stimulating for the mind and body. very stimulating for the mind and body. Great. Sometimes those people are very Great. Sometimes those people are very Great. Sometimes those people are very lean. Often times they're not. And they're Often times they're not. And they're Often times they're not. And they're getting a lot of cold exposure. And one getting a lot of cold exposure. And one getting a lot of cold exposure. And one of the things that happens is if you of the things that happens is if you of the things that happens is if you expose yourself to cold over and over, expose yourself to cold over and over, expose yourself to cold over and over, you adapt, you become cold adapted. And you adapt, you become cold adapted. And you adapt, you become cold adapted. And when you do that, you no longer get the when you do that, you no longer get the when you do that, you no longer get the epinephrine, the adrenaline release from epinephrine, the adrenaline release from epinephrine, the adrenaline release from the cold, and therefore you don't get the cold, and therefore you don't get the cold, and therefore you don't get the succinate release and the shivering the succinate release and the shivering the succinate release and the shivering and the brown fat thermogenic effect and the brown fat thermogenic effect and the brown fat thermogenic effect quite as intensely. So, if you want to quite as intensely. So, if you want to quite as intensely. So, if you want to use cold for other reasons, and use cold for other reasons, and use cold for other reasons, and certainly cold water swims can be fun, certainly cold water swims can be fun, certainly cold water swims can be fun, um and there's uh you know, as long as um and there's uh you know, as long as um and there's uh you know, as long as you can do them safely, they're you can do them safely, they're you can do them safely, they're great. I've done gotten into cold water great. I've done gotten into cold water great. I've done gotten into cold water swimming for some period of time. Uh you swimming for some period of time. Uh you swimming for some period of time. Uh you can use cold for resilience, et cetera, can use cold for resilience, et cetera, can use cold for resilience, et cetera, but if you want to use cold to increase but if you want to use cold to increase but if you want to use cold to increase fat loss, then getting this shiver fat loss, then getting this shiver fat loss, then getting this shiver process going, the cooling and process going, the cooling and process going, the cooling and re-warming, which accelerates the amount re-warming, which accelerates the amount re-warming, which accelerates the amount of or increases the amount of shiver, of or increases the amount of shiver, of or increases the amount of shiver, that's going to be the way to go. that's going to be the way to go. that's going to be the way to go. One note about cold and some of the One note about cold and some of the One note about cold and some of the factors that it releases. A few years factors that it releases. A few years factors that it releases. A few years back, there was a lot of excitement back, there was a lot of excitement back, there was a lot of excitement about this hormone called irisin, i r i about this hormone called irisin, i r i about this hormone called irisin, i r i s i N, which was associated with cold, s i N, which was associated with cold, s i N, which was associated with cold, and there was a lot of excitement about and there was a lot of excitement about and there was a lot of excitement about its potential role in increasing its potential role in increasing its potential role in increasing metabolism, so much so that people were metabolism, so much so that people were metabolism, so much so that people were starting to explore this as a potential starting to explore this as a potential starting to explore this as a potential fat loss drug. To my knowledge, that fat loss drug. To my knowledge, that fat loss drug. To my knowledge, that went nowhere. The science eventually went nowhere. The science eventually went nowhere. The science eventually shifted over to succinate as the main shifted over to succinate as the main shifted over to succinate as the main factor in cold-induced thermogenesis factor in cold-induced thermogenesis factor in cold-induced thermogenesis through this brown fat pathway. But, if through this brown fat pathway. But, if through this brown fat pathway. But, if anyone out there is aware of any anyone out there is aware of any anyone out there is aware of any positive effects of irisin, or you know positive effects of irisin, or you know positive effects of irisin, or you know of any science of irisin that I'm of any science of irisin that I'm of any science of irisin that I'm overlooking here, or that I'm speaking overlooking here, or that I'm speaking overlooking here, or that I'm speaking about incorrectly, please let me know. about incorrectly, please let me know. about incorrectly, please let me know. I'd be very curious to learn. I'd be very curious to learn. I'd be very curious to learn. Now, I want to just talk about brown fat a I want to just talk about brown fat a I want to just talk about brown fat a little bit more, little bit more, little bit more, and talk about a period in your life in and talk about a period in your life in and talk about a period in your life in which you were rich with brown fat. You which you were rich with brown fat. You which you were rich with brown fat. You had a ton of brown fat. And that's when had a ton of brown fat. And that's when had a ton of brown fat. And that's when you were a baby. you were a baby. you were a baby. Babies can't shiver. Babies can't shiver. Babies can't shiver. These neurons that release epinephrine These neurons that release epinephrine These neurons that release epinephrine into fat into fat into fat are not wired up, and really aren't are not wired up, and really aren't are not wired up, and really aren't present at sufficient levels, or in present at sufficient levels, or in present at sufficient levels, or in sufficient numbers, when you are a baby, sufficient numbers, when you are a baby, sufficient numbers, when you are a baby, and therefore you can't shiver as a and therefore you can't shiver as a and therefore you can't shiver as a baby, and you can't warm yourself up in baby, and you can't warm yourself up in baby, and you can't warm yourself up in cold environments very well. cold environments very well. cold environments very well. To compensate for that, To compensate for that, To compensate for that, Mother Nature installed in all of us Mother Nature installed in all of us Mother Nature installed in all of us an excess of brown fat early in life an excess of brown fat early in life an excess of brown fat early in life that exists again in the upper back, in that exists again in the upper back, in that exists again in the upper back, in the middle of the back, and the back of the middle of the back, and the back of the middle of the back, and the back of the neck. the neck. the neck. Over time, if we don't expose ourselves Over time, if we don't expose ourselves Over time, if we don't expose ourselves to cold environments, or do other things to cold environments, or do other things to cold environments, or do other things that make us shiver, that make us shiver, that make us shiver, we lose a lot of that brown fat. we lose a lot of that brown fat. we lose a lot of that brown fat. But, what's interesting about brown fat But, what's interesting about brown fat But, what's interesting about brown fat is that there's some evidence that brown is that there's some evidence that brown is that there's some evidence that brown fat, just like white fat, just like white fat, just like white fat, can both increase in size, but that you can both increase in size, but that you can both increase in size, but that you can also add new cells. Now, this is a can also add new cells. Now, this is a can also add new cells. Now, this is a little bit controversial. People always little bit controversial. People always little bit controversial. People always say you can't change the number of fat say you can't change the number of fat say you can't change the number of fat cells, you can just shrink them or cells, you can just shrink them or cells, you can just shrink them or increase their size. increase their size. increase their size. Well, it turns out that Well, it turns out that Well, it turns out that epinephrine released from these little epinephrine released from these little epinephrine released from these little nerve endings in brown fat and succinate nerve endings in brown fat and succinate nerve endings in brown fat and succinate circulating in the body circulating in the body circulating in the body may, and I want to underscore may, have may, and I want to underscore may, have may, and I want to underscore may, have the effect of increasing the amount of the effect of increasing the amount of the effect of increasing the amount of brown fat cells probably by converting brown fat cells probably by converting brown fat cells probably by converting these beige fat cells into brown fat. these beige fat cells into brown fat. these beige fat cells into brown fat. So, that allows us to become much as we So, that allows us to become much as we So, that allows us to become much as we were early in life where we metabolized were early in life where we metabolized were early in life where we metabolized like crazy and we'd heat ourselves up like crazy and we'd heat ourselves up like crazy and we'd heat ourselves up without shivering. without shivering. without shivering. Some people have taken the cold thing to Some people have taken the cold thing to Some people have taken the cold thing to the extreme, you know, putting ice packs the extreme, you know, putting ice packs the extreme, you know, putting ice packs on the back of their neck throughout the on the back of their neck throughout the on the back of their neck throughout the day. Uh did uh episode all about day. Uh did uh episode all about day. Uh did uh episode all about testosterone and estrogen and there's testosterone and estrogen and there's testosterone and estrogen and there's this um let's just call it a uh very this um let's just call it a uh very this um let's just call it a uh very niche uh I have to imagine very, very niche uh I have to imagine very, very niche uh I have to imagine very, very niche culture of people who are um niche culture of people who are um niche culture of people who are um wearing literally, I'm not joking, wearing literally, I'm not joking, wearing literally, I'm not joking, they're these uh cool pack ice pack they're these uh cool pack ice pack they're these uh cool pack ice pack underpants. They go by a name that I'm underpants. They go by a name that I'm underpants. They go by a name that I'm not going to repeat on here, but you can not going to repeat on here, but you can not going to repeat on here, but you can find them on Amazon. That's uh those are find them on Amazon. That's uh those are find them on Amazon. That's uh those are people that are using cold packs on the people that are using cold packs on the people that are using cold packs on the body and on the growing to try and body and on the growing to try and body and on the growing to try and increase things like testosterone. Um increase things like testosterone. Um increase things like testosterone. Um but as well to try and increase but as well to try and increase but as well to try and increase thermogenesis and trying to increase thermogenesis and trying to increase thermogenesis and trying to increase their metabolism. their metabolism. their metabolism. But just remember, if you become cold But just remember, if you become cold But just remember, if you become cold adapted, you're not going to get the fat adapted, you're not going to get the fat adapted, you're not going to get the fat burning effects to the same degree. So, burning effects to the same degree. So, burning effects to the same degree. So, cold is a powerful tool for fat loss, cold is a powerful tool for fat loss, cold is a powerful tool for fat loss, but you don't want to adapt. This is but you don't want to adapt. This is but you don't want to adapt. This is reminiscent of a rule that you hear reminiscent of a rule that you hear reminiscent of a rule that you hear about in endurance exercise and in about in endurance exercise and in about in endurance exercise and in strength exercise as well, which is that strength exercise as well, which is that strength exercise as well, which is that you want to use the minimal effective you want to use the minimal effective you want to use the minimal effective stimulus to promote growth or progress. stimulus to promote growth or progress. stimulus to promote growth or progress. So, growth of the muscle or improvements So, growth of the muscle or improvements So, growth of the muscle or improvements in endurance. in endurance. in endurance. If you go 10% further on a run or, you If you go 10% further on a run or, you If you go 10% further on a run or, you know, 10% faster, you will likely see an know, 10% faster, you will likely see an know, 10% faster, you will likely see an improvement in performance provided you improvement in performance provided you improvement in performance provided you recover the next time you come back and recover the next time you come back and recover the next time you come back and do that same round of exercise. You'll do that same round of exercise. You'll do that same round of exercise. You'll be able to do more work or complete the be able to do more work or complete the be able to do more work or complete the work more easily, et cetera. You've work more easily, et cetera. You've work more easily, et cetera. You've adapted. If you do 20% If you do 20% If you do 20% more distance or 20% more weight, you more distance or 20% more weight, you more distance or 20% more weight, you won't necessarily see the same won't necessarily see the same won't necessarily see the same commensurate level of gain or commensurate level of gain or commensurate level of gain or improvement. And so likewise with cold, improvement. And so likewise with cold, improvement. And so likewise with cold, if you're quickly moving from 30 seconds if you're quickly moving from 30 seconds if you're quickly moving from 30 seconds of exposure to 10 minutes of exposure, of exposure to 10 minutes of exposure, of exposure to 10 minutes of exposure, you're overlooking the opportunity to you're overlooking the opportunity to you're overlooking the opportunity to get the most fat loss and increase in get the most fat loss and increase in get the most fat loss and increase in metabolism by stepping it up in smaller increments. by stepping it up in smaller increments. by stepping it up in smaller increments. Okay? And this also speaks to the Okay? And this also speaks to the Okay? And this also speaks to the rationale for using cold exposure to rationale for using cold exposure to rationale for using cold exposure to accelerate fat loss for certain periods, accelerate fat loss for certain periods, accelerate fat loss for certain periods, but then maybe not doing it year-round. but then maybe not doing it year-round. but then maybe not doing it year-round. If fat loss is your goal, maybe use it If fat loss is your goal, maybe use it If fat loss is your goal, maybe use it for 2-3 months at a time and then stop for 2-3 months at a time and then stop for 2-3 months at a time and then stop for 2-3 months at a time because it is for 2-3 months at a time because it is for 2-3 months at a time because it is such a potent stimulus provided you such a potent stimulus provided you such a potent stimulus provided you engage in the short in the shiver. engage in the short in the shiver. engage in the short in the shiver. Next, I'd like to move to exercise and Next, I'd like to move to exercise and Next, I'd like to move to exercise and how particular timing and types of how particular timing and types of how particular timing and types of exercise can vastly improve fat loss. exercise can vastly improve fat loss. exercise can vastly improve fat loss. Before I do that, I just want to mention Before I do that, I just want to mention Before I do that, I just want to mention a really important reference for those a really important reference for those a really important reference for those of you that are interested in learning of you that are interested in learning of you that are interested in learning more about how neurons connect to fat. more about how neurons connect to fat. more about how neurons connect to fat. This is certainly a paper that you'd This is certainly a paper that you'd This is certainly a paper that you'd want to look at if you're interested in want to look at if you're interested in want to look at if you're interested in diving deep into the literature and diving deep into the literature and diving deep into the literature and reading all the various studies. It's a reading all the various studies. It's a reading all the various studies. It's a review and the title of the review is review and the title of the review is review and the title of the review is neural innervation of white adipose neural innervation of white adipose neural innervation of white adipose tissue and the control of lipolysis. tissue and the control of lipolysis. tissue and the control of lipolysis. That's neural innervation of white That's neural innervation of white That's neural innervation of white adipose tissue and the control of adipose tissue and the control of adipose tissue and the control of lipolysis. It was published in Frontiers lipolysis. It was published in Frontiers lipolysis. It was published in Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. in Neuroendocrinology. in Neuroendocrinology. You can find that free online. They have You can find that free online. They have You can find that free online. They have the full text available. The first the full text available. The first the full text available. The first author is a Bartness, b a r t n e s s. author is a Bartness, b a r t n e s s. author is a Bartness, b a r t n e s s. It's a great review and I've talked It's a great review and I've talked It's a great review and I've talked about a number of things that are about a number of things that are about a number of things that are mentioned in the review. Follow the mentioned in the review. Follow the mentioned in the review. Follow the references in that review and the references in that review and the references in that review and the reference trail, as we say, if you're reference trail, as we say, if you're reference trail, as we say, if you're interested in learning more about also interested in learning more about also interested in learning more about also how neurons control brown fat. how neurons control brown fat. how neurons control brown fat. And before I move to exercise, I also And before I move to exercise, I also And before I move to exercise, I also just want to highlight something that just want to highlight something that just want to highlight something that comes up every few years and has largely comes up every few years and has largely comes up every few years and has largely been considered myth now, but that is been considered myth now, but that is been considered myth now, but that is actually more interesting than most actually more interesting than most actually more interesting than most people might think, which is this issue people might think, which is this issue people might think, which is this issue of reduction. You know, in the '80s and '90s, there You know, in the '80s and '90s, there You know, in the '80s and '90s, there was uh there were a lot of commercials, uh there were a lot of commercials, uh there were a lot of commercials, late-night infomercials, uh late-night infomercials, uh late-night infomercials, uh where they would talk about spot where they would talk about spot where they would talk about spot reduction. You know, if you do sit-ups, reduction. You know, if you do sit-ups, reduction. You know, if you do sit-ups, will you lose abdominal fat? If you will you lose abdominal fat? If you will you lose abdominal fat? If you do hip raises or glute raises, will you do hip raises or glute raises, will you do hip raises or glute raises, will you lose glute and hip fat? And I think lose glute and hip fat? And I think lose glute and hip fat? And I think everybody now believes that and everybody now believes that and everybody now believes that and understands that understands that understands that fat metabolism is something that happens fat metabolism is something that happens fat metabolism is something that happens systemically throughout the body, that systemically throughout the body, that systemically throughout the body, that some body fat is {quote} more stubborn some body fat is {quote} more stubborn some body fat is {quote} more stubborn than others. Everyone varies in where than others. Everyone varies in where than others. Everyone varies in where they tend to store fat or lose fat last. they tend to store fat or lose fat last. they tend to store fat or lose fat last. Number of factors that influence that, Number of factors that influence that, Number of factors that influence that, and in particular, hormone receptors. and in particular, hormone receptors. and in particular, hormone receptors. But now, at least in the scientific now, at least in the scientific now, at least in the scientific literature, spot reduction and the possibility of spot reduction and the possibility of spot reduction and the possibility of real true spot reduction, reductions in real true spot reduction, reductions in real true spot reduction, reductions in fat in a targeted way, a body part or fat in a targeted way, a body part or fat in a targeted way, a body part or body area targeted way, is becoming more body area targeted way, is becoming more body area targeted way, is becoming more of a reality of a reality of a reality and maybe a reality soon, and maybe a reality soon, and maybe a reality soon, because exercise that triggers the activation of exercise that triggers the activation of exercise that triggers the activation of these nerve fibers, these neurons that these nerve fibers, these neurons that these nerve fibers, these neurons that innervate fat, in theory, if you can innervate fat, in theory, if you can innervate fat, in theory, if you can increase the amount of epinephrine increase the amount of epinephrine increase the amount of epinephrine released at those particular fat pads, released at those particular fat pads, released at those particular fat pads, as they're called, they're actually as they're called, they're actually as they're called, they're actually called fat pads in the scientific called fat pads in the scientific called fat pads in the scientific literature, in theory, you could increase in theory, you could increase in theory, you could increase mobilization from those particular body mobilization from those particular body mobilization from those particular body fat sites. fat sites. fat sites. Okay, so Okay, so Okay, so because the new view, that the modern because the new view, that the modern because the new view, that the modern understanding is that it's not understanding is that it's not understanding is that it's not adrenaline released systemically, kind adrenaline released systemically, kind adrenaline released systemically, kind of bathing all your fat tissue, but of bathing all your fat tissue, but of bathing all your fat tissue, but rather it's neurons releasing rather it's neurons releasing rather it's neurons releasing adrenaline, epinephrine locally, that in adrenaline, epinephrine locally, that in adrenaline, epinephrine locally, that in theory, exercise that stimulates the release of exercise that stimulates the release of exercise that stimulates the release of epinephrine or exercise coupled with epinephrine or exercise coupled with epinephrine or exercise coupled with things like shiver or low-grade shaking things like shiver or low-grade shaking things like shiver or low-grade shaking movement or these the neat, the movement or these the neat, the movement or these the neat, the non-exercise activity thermogenesis, non-exercise activity thermogenesis, non-exercise activity thermogenesis, could in theory lead to local could in theory lead to local could in theory lead to local enhancement of mobilization of fat enhancement of mobilization of fat enhancement of mobilization of fat tissue. So, I think that spot reduction actually So, I think that spot reduction actually So, I think that spot reduction actually will soon be something that's possible using soon be something that's possible using soon be something that's possible using the appropriate technology. What does the appropriate technology. What does the appropriate technology. What does this mean for you now? What what could this mean for you now? What what could this mean for you now? What what could you possibly do for this with this you possibly do for this with this you possibly do for this with this information now? Well, I think it speaks information now? Well, I think it speaks information now? Well, I think it speaks to the fact that if one is going to engage the fact that if one is going to engage the fact that if one is going to engage in exercise, in exercise, in exercise, that doing exercise that involve lots of that doing exercise that involve lots of that doing exercise that involve lots of different body parts and movements is likely to body parts and movements is likely to body parts and movements is likely to encourage the maintenance and or growth encourage the maintenance and or growth encourage the maintenance and or growth of these neurons that innervate fat of these neurons that innervate fat of these neurons that innervate fat throughout the body. What this means is throughout the body. What this means is throughout the body. What this means is changing up the pattern of exercise, changing up the pattern of exercise, changing up the pattern of exercise, engaging in novel types of movements may engaging in novel types of movements may engaging in novel types of movements may actually be one way that one can access actually be one way that one can access actually be one way that one can access these so-called stubborn body fat pads. these so-called stubborn body fat pads. these so-called stubborn body fat pads. Now, there's a little bit of speculation Now, there's a little bit of speculation Now, there's a little bit of speculation in the statement that I'm making, but if in the statement that I'm making, but if in the statement that I'm making, but if you think about it, it makes sense. If you think about it, it makes sense. If you think about it, it makes sense. If you become very adapted to a particular you become very adapted to a particular you become very adapted to a particular pattern of exercise, pattern of exercise, pattern of exercise, whether or not you're subcaloric or not, whether or not you're subcaloric or not, whether or not you're subcaloric or not, you're at maintenance calories or not, you're at maintenance calories or not, you're at maintenance calories or not, you're oxidizing some fat always, you're oxidizing some fat always, you're oxidizing some fat always, and you're utilizing the neurons that and you're utilizing the neurons that and you're utilizing the neurons that innervate fat in a regular way, and innervate fat in a regular way, and innervate fat in a regular way, and pretty soon this innervation is going to pretty soon this innervation is going to pretty soon this innervation is going to shut off because there's no reason why shut off because there's no reason why shut off because there's no reason why this neural innervation of fat should this neural innervation of fat should this neural innervation of fat should continue to release epinephrine unless continue to release epinephrine unless continue to release epinephrine unless you give it a strong stimulus like cold you give it a strong stimulus like cold you give it a strong stimulus like cold or the fidgeting or in this case to do or the fidgeting or in this case to do or the fidgeting or in this case to do novel forms of exercise. And there's novel forms of exercise. And there's novel forms of exercise. And there's some anecdotal some anecdotal some anecdotal evidence and there I don't even want to evidence and there I don't even want to evidence and there I don't even want to call it data, but anecdotal evidence call it data, but anecdotal evidence call it data, but anecdotal evidence that people who have quote and quote that people who have quote and quote that people who have quote and quote stubborn body fat, if they start to stubborn body fat, if they start to stubborn body fat, if they start to adopt new patterns of exercise, they can adopt new patterns of exercise, they can adopt new patterns of exercise, they can start to access those stubborn fat pads. start to access those stubborn fat pads. start to access those stubborn fat pads. And again, fat pads is the correct way And again, fat pads is the correct way And again, fat pads is the correct way to refer to these to refer to these to refer to these in the scientific literature. So, in the scientific literature. So, in the scientific literature. So, what we're focusing on today is the fact what we're focusing on today is the fact what we're focusing on today is the fact that fat that fat that fat indeed will be mobilized and oxidized in indeed will be mobilized and oxidized in indeed will be mobilized and oxidized in response to a deficit in calories, but response to a deficit in calories, but response to a deficit in calories, but that the way that neurons control those that the way that neurons control those that the way that neurons control those fat pads and those body fat stores fat pads and those body fat stores fat pads and those body fat stores afford you a lot more control than afford you a lot more control than afford you a lot more control than perhaps you ever previously thought. So, perhaps you ever previously thought. So, perhaps you ever previously thought. So, let's talk about movement and the more let's talk about movement and the more let's talk about movement and the more traditional kinds of movement, aka traditional kinds of movement, aka traditional kinds of movement, aka exercise, has been shown to lead to exercise, has been shown to lead to exercise, has been shown to lead to increases in metabolism and fat loss increases in metabolism and fat loss increases in metabolism and fat loss to greater degrees depending on whether to greater degrees depending on whether to greater degrees depending on whether or not, for instance, you're fasted when or not, for instance, you're fasted when or not, for instance, you're fasted when you do it or not, whether or not you do you do it or not, whether or not you do you do it or not, whether or not you do your cardio first or your resistance your cardio first or your resistance your cardio first or your resistance training first. And this is again in a training first. And this is again in a training first. And this is again in a literature for which there's a lot of literature for which there's a lot of literature for which there's a lot of controversy, but in digging through all controversy, but in digging through all controversy, but in digging through all the studies on this, we're finally the studies on this, we're finally the studies on this, we're finally starting to arrive at a consensus of starting to arrive at a consensus of starting to arrive at a consensus of when is best to do exercise and what when is best to do exercise and what when is best to do exercise and what types of exercise to do if your goal is types of exercise to do if your goal is types of exercise to do if your goal is fat loss. The topic of exercise is a fat loss. The topic of exercise is a fat loss. The topic of exercise is a kind of controversial one, not as kind of controversial one, not as kind of controversial one, not as controversial as nutrition and diet, controversial as nutrition and diet, controversial as nutrition and diet, which we will talk about in a few which we will talk about in a few which we will talk about in a few minutes, but minutes, but minutes, but it's a particularly interesting one it's a particularly interesting one it's a particularly interesting one because different types of exercise because different types of exercise because different types of exercise engage the musculature of the body and engage the musculature of the body and engage the musculature of the body and the heart and the lungs in different the heart and the lungs in different the heart and the lungs in different ways and can have vastly different effects on and can have vastly different effects on and can have vastly different effects on things like hormones and metabolism things like hormones and metabolism things like hormones and metabolism depending on whether or not it's of high depending on whether or not it's of high depending on whether or not it's of high intensity, moderate intensity, or low intensity, moderate intensity, or low intensity, moderate intensity, or low intensity. So, rather than think about intensity. So, rather than think about intensity. So, rather than think about weight training versus weight training versus weight training versus cardiovascular exercise, I think the cardiovascular exercise, I think the cardiovascular exercise, I think the most simple way, the most fluid way to most simple way, the most fluid way to most simple way, the most fluid way to have this conversation about exercise have this conversation about exercise have this conversation about exercise and fat loss is in terms of three and fat loss is in terms of three and fat loss is in terms of three general types of training, whether or general types of training, whether or general types of training, whether or not it's done with weights or body not it's done with weights or body not it's done with weights or body weight doesn't really matter. weight doesn't really matter. weight doesn't really matter. And those are high-intensity interval And those are high-intensity interval And those are high-intensity interval training, something that's seems to have training, something that's seems to have training, something that's seems to have gained a lot of popularity in recent gained a lot of popularity in recent gained a lot of popularity in recent years, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T, so years, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T, so years, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T, so high-intensity interval training, high-intensity interval training, high-intensity interval training, sprint interval training, so that's sprint interval training, so that's sprint interval training, so that's going to be very high intensity or SIT, going to be very high intensity or SIT, going to be very high intensity or SIT, or moderate intensity continuous or moderate intensity continuous or moderate intensity continuous training MICT. So, we've got hit, sit, training MICT. So, we've got hit, sit, training MICT. So, we've got hit, sit, and mict MICT. and mict MICT. and mict MICT. And we can get a little bit more precise And we can get a little bit more precise And we can get a little bit more precise if you'd like. Um I'm not somebody who if you'd like. Um I'm not somebody who if you'd like. Um I'm not somebody who measures my VO2 max or anything while I measures my VO2 max or anything while I measures my VO2 max or anything while I exercise. I generally know whether or exercise. I generally know whether or exercise. I generally know whether or not I'm doing something I could continue not I'm doing something I could continue not I'm doing something I could continue for a very long time or whether or not for a very long time or whether or not for a very long time or whether or not I'm doing something that I'm doing something that I'm doing something that uh I realize is going to be of short I realize is going to be of short I realize is going to be of short duration high intensity. But, if you'd duration high intensity. But, if you'd duration high intensity. But, if you'd like to map this to VO2 max, SIT, this like to map this to VO2 max, SIT, this like to map this to VO2 max, SIT, this uh sprint interval training was defined uh sprint interval training was defined uh sprint interval training was defined as all-out greater than 100% of VO2 max as all-out greater than 100% of VO2 max as all-out greater than 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that last 8 to 30 bursts of activity that last 8 to 30 bursts of activity that last 8 to 30 seconds interspersed with less intense recovery interspersed with less intense recovery interspersed with less intense recovery periods. So, this would be sprinting periods. So, this would be sprinting periods. So, this would be sprinting down field for 8 to 30 seconds, then down field for 8 to 30 seconds, then down field for 8 to 30 seconds, then maybe walking back maybe walking back maybe walking back for about a minute or two, and then for about a minute or two, and then for about a minute or two, and then sprinting again, and then continuing. sprinting again, and then continuing. sprinting again, and then continuing. So, that would be SIT hit HIIT So, that would be SIT hit HIIT So, that would be SIT hit HIIT is defined as submaximal, so 80 to 100% is defined as submaximal, so 80 to 100% is defined as submaximal, so 80 to 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that last of VO2 max bursts of activity that last of VO2 max bursts of activity that last 60 to 240 seconds interspersed with less 60 to 240 seconds interspersed with less 60 to 240 seconds interspersed with less intense recovery periods. So, on a intense recovery periods. So, on a intense recovery periods. So, on a standard 400-m track, just to give this standard 400-m track, just to give this standard 400-m track, just to give this a little bit of a visual, a little bit of a visual, a little bit of a visual, um you know, one a 4-minute mile would um you know, one a 4-minute mile would um you know, one a 4-minute mile would be fantastic for most people, although be fantastic for most people, although be fantastic for most people, although people run faster than that, of course. people run faster than that, of course. people run faster than that, of course. So, that's 4 60-second laps, but that's So, that's 4 60-second laps, but that's So, that's 4 60-second laps, but that's back-to-back-to-back. Um I think in my Um I think in my Um I think in my you know, in my best shape or maybe it you know, in my best shape or maybe it you know, in my best shape or maybe it was in my dreams, I don't recall which, was in my dreams, I don't recall which, was in my dreams, I don't recall which, I was able to do 60 seconds around the I was able to do 60 seconds around the I was able to do 60 seconds around the track, but of course I couldn't get that track, but of course I couldn't get that track, but of course I couldn't get that on the second or third or fourth. on the second or third or fourth. on the second or third or fourth. If I did, that was um If I did, that was um If I did, that was um certainly uh in fantasy land and not certainly uh in fantasy land and not certainly uh in fantasy land and not reality. But, 60 seconds would be about reality. But, 60 seconds would be about reality. But, 60 seconds would be about one revolution around the track, maybe one revolution around the track, maybe one revolution around the track, maybe 90 seconds depending on how fast maybe 90 seconds depending on how fast maybe 90 seconds depending on how fast uh one is running. uh one is running. uh one is running. So, 60 to 240 seconds MICT. So, 60 to 240 seconds MICT. So, 60 to 240 seconds MICT. Okay? This moderate intensity continuous Okay? This moderate intensity continuous Okay? This moderate intensity continuous training is steady-state cardio, sometimes called is steady-state cardio, sometimes called is steady-state cardio, sometimes called zone two cardio these days on the zone two cardio these days on the zone two cardio these days on the internet, which is performed internet, which is performed internet, which is performed continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 max or if you prefer heart rate 55 to max or if you prefer heart rate 55 to max or if you prefer heart rate 55 to 70% of max heart rate. Okay? So, we can 70% of max heart rate. Okay? So, we can 70% of max heart rate. Okay? So, we can think about high, medium, and low think about high, medium, and low think about high, medium, and low intensity exercise. Although low intensity exercise. Although low intensity exercise. Although low intensity um usually means that you could carry on um usually means that you could carry on um usually means that you could carry on a conversation or maybe you have to gasp a conversation or maybe you have to gasp a conversation or maybe you have to gasp every few steps or so while trying every few steps or so while trying every few steps or so while trying to talk and run. That's I think of going to talk and run. That's I think of going to talk and run. That's I think of going to be the most useful way to have this to be the most useful way to have this to be the most useful way to have this conversation that we're having now conversation that we're having now conversation that we're having now because there's so many different forms because there's so many different forms because there's so many different forms of exercise that people do and intensity of exercise that people do and intensity of exercise that people do and intensity is important. is important. is important. Let's ask the question that I think many Let's ask the question that I think many Let's ask the question that I think many of people are wondering about. of people are wondering about. of people are wondering about. It which is it better, meaning do you It which is it better, meaning do you It which is it better, meaning do you burn more fat if you do your exercise burn more fat if you do your exercise burn more fat if you do your exercise fasted? And fasted in this respect could fasted? And fasted in this respect could fasted? And fasted in this respect could be that you wake up in the morning, be that you wake up in the morning, be that you wake up in the morning, you've been fasting all night, you just you've been fasting all night, you just you've been fasting all night, you just hydrate, and you exercise. Or sometimes people and you exercise. Or sometimes people and you exercise. Or sometimes people will ingest caffeine. There's will ingest caffeine. There's will ingest caffeine. There's controversy as to whether or not that controversy as to whether or not that controversy as to whether or not that quote-unquote breaks the fast. Has to do quote-unquote breaks the fast. Has to do quote-unquote breaks the fast. Has to do with whether or not you're caffeine with whether or not you're caffeine with whether or not you're caffeine adapted, something for another episode. adapted, something for another episode. adapted, something for another episode. In any case, that would be fasted. So, In any case, that would be fasted. So, In any case, that would be fasted. So, probably not having eaten anything for probably not having eaten anything for probably not having eaten anything for anywhere from 3 to 24 hours or maybe anywhere from 3 to 24 hours or maybe anywhere from 3 to 24 hours or maybe even more. even more. even more. Cuz you could also be fasted in the Cuz you could also be fasted in the Cuz you could also be fasted in the afternoon if you had lunch at noon and afternoon if you had lunch at noon and afternoon if you had lunch at noon and it's 4:00 or 5:00 or 6:00 p.m. Is it it's 4:00 or 5:00 or 6:00 p.m. Is it it's 4:00 or 5:00 or 6:00 p.m. Is it Will you burn more fat if you exercise Will you burn more fat if you exercise Will you burn more fat if you exercise without in eating anything first, without in eating anything first, without in eating anything first, without ingesting any calories first? without ingesting any calories first? without ingesting any calories first? And people have tried to really split And people have tried to really split And people have tried to really split hairs on this every which way. People hairs on this every which way. People hairs on this every which way. People say, "Well, you can fat fast because fat say, "Well, you can fat fast because fat say, "Well, you can fat fast because fat and protein doesn't lead to as great and protein doesn't lead to as great and protein doesn't lead to as great increases in insulin increases in insulin increases in insulin as other things, maybe you can have a as other things, maybe you can have a as other things, maybe you can have a few almonds and then still train." And few almonds and then still train." And few almonds and then still train." And indeed, insulin indeed, insulin indeed, insulin will prevent fat oxidation. will prevent fat oxidation. will prevent fat oxidation. I want to be really clear. The burning I want to be really clear. The burning I want to be really clear. The burning part of fat in the cell, the part of fat in the cell, the part of fat in the cell, the movement of the fatty acid movement of the fatty acid movement of the fatty acid and in to mitochondria and the and in to mitochondria and the and in to mitochondria and the conversion to ATP, insulin inhibits that conversion to ATP, insulin inhibits that conversion to ATP, insulin inhibits that process. However, process. However, process. However, it's been shown that at least for short it's been shown that at least for short it's been shown that at least for short periods of training, it doesn't really periods of training, it doesn't really periods of training, it doesn't really seem to matter whether or not you eat seem to matter whether or not you eat seem to matter whether or not you eat before training or you don't if your before training or you don't if your before training or you don't if your goal is fat oxidation. Now, I want to goal is fat oxidation. Now, I want to goal is fat oxidation. Now, I want to put an asterisk near that because put an asterisk near that because put an asterisk near that because there's some exceptions, but there's some exceptions, but there's some exceptions, but there were several studies done there were several studies done there were several studies done that and the kind of the classic ones of that and the kind of the classic ones of that and the kind of the classic ones of these uh I'll read out to you. They these uh I'll read out to you. They these uh I'll read out to you. They What they basically did is they gave What they basically did is they gave What they basically did is they gave people glucose, sugar, blood to increase people glucose, sugar, blood to increase people glucose, sugar, blood to increase their blood sugar before training or their blood sugar before training or their blood sugar before training or not. And the kind of classic study of not. And the kind of classic study of not. And the kind of classic study of this is Alborg this is Alborg this is Alborg et al. So, 1976, so it goes way back, et al. So, 1976, so it goes way back, et al. So, 1976, so it goes way back, which is that glucose reduces fat which is that glucose reduces fat which is that glucose reduces fat burning in exercise. burning in exercise. burning in exercise. And then some other studies, if And then some other studies, if And then some other studies, if you want to look these up, they're very you want to look these up, they're very you want to look these up, they're very easy to find on PubMed. You put in easy to find on PubMed. You put in easy to find on PubMed. You put in Horowitz 1999. Horowitz 1999. Horowitz 1999. Um Lee et al. is another one where Um Lee et al. is another one where Um Lee et al. is another one where they have people drink milk with glucose they have people drink milk with glucose they have people drink milk with glucose in it, so sweet sugary milk before in it, so sweet sugary milk before in it, so sweet sugary milk before exercise, et cetera. And you can find a exercise, et cetera. And you can find a exercise, et cetera. And you can find a number of examples where eating before number of examples where eating before number of examples where eating before exercise reduces the amount of fat that's reduces the amount of fat that's reduces the amount of fat that's oxidized during the exercise. And you oxidized during the exercise. And you oxidized during the exercise. And you can also find a lot of studies showing can also find a lot of studies showing can also find a lot of studies showing that eating during exercise will or prior to eating during exercise will or prior to eating during exercise will or prior to exercise will not reduce the amount of exercise will not reduce the amount of exercise will not reduce the amount of fat that's oxidized. However, the types fat that's oxidized. However, the types fat that's oxidized. However, the types of exercise, whether or not it was of exercise, whether or not it was of exercise, whether or not it was medium intensity or high intensity or medium intensity or high intensity or medium intensity or high intensity or low intensity, is all over the map for low intensity, is all over the map for low intensity, is all over the map for these studies. So, it's very hard to these studies. So, it's very hard to these studies. So, it's very hard to target an ideal protocol. target an ideal protocol. target an ideal protocol. And then, if you look really deep in the And then, if you look really deep in the And then, if you look really deep in the literature, you start to find literature, you start to find literature, you start to find meta-analyses where people have actually meta-analyses where people have actually meta-analyses where people have actually aggregated all the findings and some aggregated all the findings and some aggregated all the findings and some modern studies where it points to some modern studies where it points to some modern studies where it points to some very specific and useful protocols. And very specific and useful protocols. And very specific and useful protocols. And so, here's the rule that or the protocol so, here's the rule that or the protocol so, here's the rule that or the protocol that I extracted from that literature. At a period of about 90 minutes At a period of about 90 minutes At a period of about 90 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise. I want of moderate-intensity exercise. I want of moderate-intensity exercise. I want to be clear. After at about or after 90 to be clear. After at about or after 90 to be clear. After at about or after 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercise, minutes of moderate intensity exercise, minutes of moderate intensity exercise, there's a switchover point there's a switchover point there's a switchover point whereby if you ate before the exercise, whereby if you ate before the exercise, whereby if you ate before the exercise, you will reduce Excuse me, you will burn you will reduce Excuse me, you will burn you will reduce Excuse me, you will burn far less fat far less fat far less fat from the 90-minute point onward than you from the 90-minute point onward than you from the 90-minute point onward than you would if you had gone into the training would if you had gone into the training would if you had gone into the training fasted. So, let me repeat that. If it's fasted. So, let me repeat that. If it's fasted. So, let me repeat that. If it's moderate intensity, so-called zone two moderate intensity, so-called zone two moderate intensity, so-called zone two cardio type exercise, cardio type exercise, cardio type exercise, at the 90-minute point, at the 90-minute point, at the 90-minute point, if you happen to have eaten before the if you happen to have eaten before the if you happen to have eaten before the exercise within 1 to 3 hours prior to exercise within 1 to 3 hours prior to exercise within 1 to 3 hours prior to the exercise, the exercise, the exercise, then you reduce the amount of fat that you reduce the amount of fat that you reduce the amount of fat that you will burn from 90 minutes onward. will burn from 90 minutes onward. will burn from 90 minutes onward. Whereas if you had fasted Whereas if you had fasted Whereas if you had fasted prior to the exercise, you hadn't eaten prior to the exercise, you hadn't eaten prior to the exercise, you hadn't eaten anything for 3 hours or more prior to anything for 3 hours or more prior to anything for 3 hours or more prior to the exercise, at the 90-minute point, the exercise, at the 90-minute point, the exercise, at the 90-minute point, you will 90 minutes of exercise, you will 90 minutes of exercise, you will 90 minutes of exercise, you will start to burn more fat than you will start to burn more fat than you will start to burn more fat than you would had you eaten. Now, 90 minutes of would had you eaten. Now, 90 minutes of would had you eaten. Now, 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercise is a lot. moderate intensity exercise is a lot. moderate intensity exercise is a lot. So, that's a that's a pretty long run, So, that's a that's a pretty long run, So, that's a that's a pretty long run, even if you're running at a pretty slow even if you're running at a pretty slow even if you're running at a pretty slow pace, like a 10 or 12-minute mile. pace, like a 10 or 12-minute mile. pace, like a 10 or 12-minute mile. That's a lot of running. That's a lot of running. That's a lot of running. That's a lot of swimming. So, that's a That's a lot of swimming. So, that's a That's a lot of swimming. So, that's a lot of walking. That's a lot of hiking. lot of walking. That's a lot of hiking. lot of walking. That's a lot of hiking. So, however, there are people who are So, however, there are people who are So, however, there are people who are going out hiking all day or running all going out hiking all day or running all going out hiking all day or running all day or walking all day. And if you want day or walking all day. And if you want day or walking all day. And if you want to burn more fat per unit time, you want to burn more fat per unit time, you want to burn more fat per unit time, you want to oxidize more fat, then you would do to oxidize more fat, then you would do to oxidize more fat, then you would do that fasted. that fasted. that fasted. Now, there are also studies that Now, there are also studies that Now, there are also studies that point to the fact that you don't have to point to the fact that you don't have to point to the fact that you don't have to wait to 90 minutes in order to get this wait to 90 minutes in order to get this wait to 90 minutes in order to get this enhanced fat-burning effect. enhanced fat-burning effect. enhanced fat-burning effect. The studies I was able to find and that The studies I was able to find and that The studies I was able to find and that look to me like quality peer-reviewed look to me like quality peer-reviewed look to me like quality peer-reviewed studies with no company bias or no studies with no company bias or no studies with no company bias or no product bias of any kind, product bias of any kind, product bias of any kind, so, there are studies that were largely so, there are studies that were largely so, there are studies that were largely funded by the federal government funded by the federal government funded by the federal government in the university context, in the university context, in the university context, point to the fact that if one does high point to the fact that if one does high point to the fact that if one does high intensity training or intensity training or intensity training or even the very high intensity forms of or even the very high intensity forms of or even the very high intensity forms of training like sprints or squats or training like sprints or squats or training like sprints or squats or deadlifts or deadlifts or deadlifts or any kind of activity that can't be any kind of activity that can't be any kind of activity that can't be maintained for more than these, you maintained for more than these, you maintained for more than these, you know, eight or I would say up to 60 know, eight or I would say up to 60 know, eight or I would say up to 60 seconds. So, a set of lifting weights seconds. So, a set of lifting weights seconds. So, a set of lifting weights repeated repeated. If that's done repeated repeated. If that's done repeated repeated. If that's done for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight training or powerlifting or these kinds training or powerlifting or these kinds training or powerlifting or these kinds of things or kettlebell swings of things or kettlebell swings of things or kettlebell swings or up to 60 minutes or up to 60 minutes or up to 60 minutes well, then the switchover point in which well, then the switchover point in which well, then the switchover point in which you can burn more fat if you go into you can burn more fat if you go into you can burn more fat if you go into that fasted comes earlier. that fasted comes earlier. that fasted comes earlier. And this makes sense because there's And this makes sense because there's And this makes sense because there's nothing holy about the 90-minute point nothing holy about the 90-minute point nothing holy about the 90-minute point for medium intensity zone two cardio. for medium intensity zone two cardio. for medium intensity zone two cardio. That 90-minute point is the point in That 90-minute point is the point in That 90-minute point is the point in which the body shifts over from mainly burning the body shifts over from mainly burning the body shifts over from mainly burning glycogen basically sugar that comes from muscles basically sugar that comes from muscles basically sugar that comes from muscles or the liver and realizes this is going or the liver and realizes this is going or the liver and realizes this is going on for a while I'm going to shift over on for a while I'm going to shift over on for a while I'm going to shift over to a to a to a storage site storage site storage site fuel that fuel that fuel that is in reserve like body fat. It's this is in reserve like body fat. It's this is in reserve like body fat. It's this is going to happen for a while, so I'm is going to happen for a while, so I'm is going to happen for a while, so I'm going to start tapping into body fat going to start tapping into body fat going to start tapping into body fat stores. Now, fat doesn't have a little stores. Now, fat doesn't have a little stores. Now, fat doesn't have a little brain there. It is innervated by brain there. It is innervated by brain there. It is innervated by neurons, but it doesn't have thoughts neurons, but it doesn't have thoughts neurons, but it doesn't have thoughts and you don't actually control this and you don't actually control this and you don't actually control this switch with your mind. This is something switch with your mind. This is something switch with your mind. This is something that has to do with the milieu of that has to do with the milieu of that has to do with the milieu of various hormones. What has to happen is various hormones. What has to happen is various hormones. What has to happen is insulin has to go down far enough. So, insulin has to go down far enough. So, insulin has to go down far enough. So, if you ate before the exercise, you'd if you ate before the exercise, you'd if you ate before the exercise, you'd have an increase in insulin. If you ate have an increase in insulin. If you ate have an increase in insulin. If you ate carbohydrates, you'd have a bigger carbohydrates, you'd have a bigger carbohydrates, you'd have a bigger increase in insulin. Fat and proteins increase in insulin. Fat and proteins increase in insulin. Fat and proteins indeed will have lower amounts of indeed will have lower amounts of indeed will have lower amounts of insulin and fasting will give you the insulin and fasting will give you the insulin and fasting will give you the lowest amount of insulin. Well, then lowest amount of insulin. Well, then lowest amount of insulin. Well, then that switchover point is going to come that switchover point is going to come that switchover point is going to come earlier in the exercise. And if you earlier in the exercise. And if you earlier in the exercise. And if you think about if you were to do something think about if you were to do something think about if you were to do something high intensity for 20, 30, 40 minutes, high intensity for 20, 30, 40 minutes, high intensity for 20, 30, 40 minutes, so maybe lift weights and then get into so maybe lift weights and then get into so maybe lift weights and then get into zone two cardio. If you were fasted, the zone two cardio. If you were fasted, the zone two cardio. If you were fasted, the literature says that you're going to literature says that you're going to literature says that you're going to burn more body fat burn more body fat burn more body fat per unit time than if you had eaten per unit time than if you had eaten per unit time than if you had eaten before or during the exercise. So, what before or during the exercise. So, what before or during the exercise. So, what does this mean? This means if you want does this mean? This means if you want does this mean? This means if you want to burn more body fat, if it's in your to burn more body fat, if it's in your to burn more body fat, if it's in your protocols and you're you know have been protocols and you're you know have been protocols and you're you know have been approved to do this safely, approved to do this safely, approved to do this safely, exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes. exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes. exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes. The higher the intensity, obviously, the The higher the intensity, obviously, the The higher the intensity, obviously, the shorter that bout is going to be, and shorter that bout is going to be, and shorter that bout is going to be, and then move over into zone two cardio. And then move over into zone two cardio. And then move over into zone two cardio. And if you do that fasted or the medium if you do that fasted or the medium if you do that fasted or the medium intensity cardio, I should say. And if intensity cardio, I should say. And if intensity cardio, I should say. And if you do that fasted, then indeed you will you do that fasted, then indeed you will you do that fasted, then indeed you will burn a higher percentage of body fat. burn a higher percentage of body fat. burn a higher percentage of body fat. If you need to eat or you like to eat If you need to eat or you like to eat If you need to eat or you like to eat before you train, that also can work. before you train, that also can work. before you train, that also can work. And if you train very intensely, you're And if you train very intensely, you're And if you train very intensely, you're likely to shift over to the fat burning likely to shift over to the fat burning likely to shift over to the fat burning pattern more quickly as well. So, again, pattern more quickly as well. So, again, pattern more quickly as well. So, again, this isn't really an issue of how long this isn't really an issue of how long this isn't really an issue of how long you exercise. It's an issue of how you exercise. It's an issue of how you exercise. It's an issue of how intensely you exercise and therefore intensely you exercise and therefore intensely you exercise and therefore what fuel source you're drawing from. what fuel source you're drawing from. what fuel source you're drawing from. So, hopefully I've made that clear. But So, hopefully I've made that clear. But So, hopefully I've made that clear. But basically, you need to deplete glycogen basically, you need to deplete glycogen basically, you need to deplete glycogen or through high-intensity exercise and or through high-intensity exercise and or through high-intensity exercise and then move to a steady-state exercise then move to a steady-state exercise then move to a steady-state exercise that will allow you to burn more fat. that will allow you to burn more fat. that will allow you to burn more fat. Or, you need to perform a medium-intensity you need to perform a medium-intensity you need to perform a medium-intensity or low-intensity type exercise for a or low-intensity type exercise for a or low-intensity type exercise for a long period of time before you shift long period of time before you shift long period of time before you shift over to burning fat. And indeed, it over to burning fat. And indeed, it over to burning fat. And indeed, it seems that going into all that fasted seems that going into all that fasted seems that going into all that fasted will facilitate the burning of more fat will facilitate the burning of more fat will facilitate the burning of more fat overall. But if you can't even get to the But if you can't even get to the But if you can't even get to the exercise, if you're somebody who just exercise, if you're somebody who just exercise, if you're somebody who just can't do the training at all, you're can't do the training at all, you're can't do the training at all, you're unwilling to or you're incapable of unwilling to or you're incapable of unwilling to or you're incapable of training unless you eat something, then obviously unless you eat something, then obviously unless you eat something, then obviously eating something makes the most sense. eating something makes the most sense. eating something makes the most sense. And what you eat prior to exercise, And what you eat prior to exercise, And what you eat prior to exercise, that's a whole other that's a whole other that's a whole other biz that people argue about and biz that people argue about and biz that people argue about and fight about whether or not you should go fight about whether or not you should go fight about whether or not you should go into it with low carbohydrates or higher into it with low carbohydrates or higher into it with low carbohydrates or higher carbo- all of that. But in general, the carbo- all of that. But in general, the carbo- all of that. But in general, the theme there is very simple, which is theme there is very simple, which is theme there is very simple, which is that you want insulin levels to be that you want insulin levels to be that you want insulin levels to be pretty low if your goal is body fat pretty low if your goal is body fat pretty low if your goal is body fat reduction, if you want to oxidize body reduction, if you want to oxidize body reduction, if you want to oxidize body fat. So, fasting in some cases, fat fat. So, fasting in some cases, fat fat. So, fasting in some cases, fat fasting in other cases where you're just fasting in other cases where you're just fasting in other cases where you're just ingesting fats, fat and protein in some ingesting fats, fat and protein in some ingesting fats, fat and protein in some cases, or for some people it will be cases, or for some people it will be cases, or for some people it will be eating carbohydrates. I'm not here to eating carbohydrates. I'm not here to eating carbohydrates. I'm not here to dictate a particular nutrition regimen. dictate a particular nutrition regimen. dictate a particular nutrition regimen. That's just how the hormone balance of That's just how the hormone balance of That's just how the hormone balance of these things and fat oxidation works. these things and fat oxidation works. these things and fat oxidation works. Now, one thing that's very interesting Now, one thing that's very interesting Now, one thing that's very interesting and cannot be overlooked is this issue and cannot be overlooked is this issue and cannot be overlooked is this issue of how much energy you burn during and of how much energy you burn during and of how much energy you burn during and after the activity. And some of you after the activity. And some of you after the activity. And some of you probably already know about this, but probably already know about this, but probably already know about this, but the whole business of the whole business of the whole business of calories in versus calories out and calories in versus calories out and calories in versus calories out and people counting their the number of people counting their the number of people counting their the number of calories they burn during their aerobic calories they burn during their aerobic calories they burn during their aerobic session or during their whatever session or during their whatever session or during their whatever session is only one half of the equation and it is only one half of the equation and it is only one half of the equation and it really eclipses the more important really eclipses the more important really eclipses the more important issue, which is issue, which is issue, which is how much of an increase in metabolism how much of an increase in metabolism how much of an increase in metabolism does a given exercise create after the does a given exercise create after the does a given exercise create after the exercise? And we could talk for hours about this, And we could talk for hours about this, And we could talk for hours about this, but the simple way to view this is that but the simple way to view this is that but the simple way to view this is that high-intensity training, anaerobic high-intensity training, anaerobic high-intensity training, anaerobic training, of weight training, sprints, training, of weight training, sprints, training, of weight training, sprints, um burpees, any kind of thing. I don't I um burpees, any kind of thing. I don't I um burpees, any kind of thing. I don't I don't know. These days I see I hear don't know. These days I see I hear don't know. These days I see I hear you're not supposed to do burpees, that you're not supposed to do burpees, that you're not supposed to do burpees, that people think burpees are dangerous. So, people think burpees are dangerous. So, people think burpees are dangerous. So, I'm not suggesting any particular I'm not suggesting any particular I'm not suggesting any particular movements here. You have to decide movements here. You have to decide movements here. You have to decide what's right for you. what's right for you. what's right for you. Um I do burpees. I don't I don't seem to be I do burpees. I don't I don't seem to be I do burpees. I don't I don't seem to be injured from them, but I hear that injured from them, but I hear that injured from them, but I hear that they're terrible for some people. So, they're terrible for some people. So, they're terrible for some people. So, anyway, push-ups, sit-ups, whatever it anyway, push-ups, sit-ups, whatever it anyway, push-ups, sit-ups, whatever it happens to be. That anaerobic exercise happens to be. That anaerobic exercise happens to be. That anaerobic exercise that's of higher intensity or sprints that's of higher intensity or sprints that's of higher intensity or sprints taps into glycogen stores during the taps into glycogen stores during the taps into glycogen stores during the movement and will burn more energy per movement and will burn more energy per movement and will burn more energy per unit time than moderate intensity. High unit time than moderate intensity. High unit time than moderate intensity. High intensity burns more than moderate intensity burns more than moderate intensity burns more than moderate intensity. That's straightforward. intensity. That's straightforward. intensity. That's straightforward. What's interesting What's interesting What's interesting is that all the studies that I was able is that all the studies that I was able is that all the studies that I was able to find on what happens after that type to find on what happens after that type to find on what happens after that type of exercise showed that the percentage of exercise showed that the percentage of exercise showed that the percentage of fat that you burn after of fat that you burn after of fat that you burn after high-intensity exercise is actually high-intensity exercise is actually high-intensity exercise is actually greater. In other words, you burn a lot greater. In other words, you burn a lot greater. In other words, you burn a lot of glycogen during the high-intensity of glycogen during the high-intensity of glycogen during the high-intensity exercise, and then after the exercise, and then after the exercise, and then after the exercise, the post-exercise oxygen consumption as the post-exercise oxygen consumption as the post-exercise oxygen consumption as it sometimes called, it sometimes called, it sometimes called, goes up. We know this, after you train goes up. We know this, after you train goes up. We know this, after you train intensely that post-exercise oxygen intensely that post-exercise oxygen intensely that post-exercise oxygen consumption goes up, sometimes for up to consumption goes up, sometimes for up to consumption goes up, sometimes for up to 24 hours. 24 hours. 24 hours. And it is during that period of time And it is during that period of time And it is during that period of time that you oxidize more fat, that you oxidize more fat, that you oxidize more fat, not glycogen. Now, what's interesting is not glycogen. Now, what's interesting is not glycogen. Now, what's interesting is that the reverse is also true. For that the reverse is also true. For that the reverse is also true. For people that do long bouts of low or people that do long bouts of low or people that do long bouts of low or moderate intensity exercise, so moderate intensity exercise, so moderate intensity exercise, so typically this would be things like typically this would be things like typically this would be things like running, swimming, biking, etc. So, 60, running, swimming, biking, etc. So, 60, running, swimming, biking, etc. So, 60, 90 minutes, 2 hours, maybe even people 90 minutes, 2 hours, maybe even people 90 minutes, 2 hours, maybe even people that are training for marathons or half that are training for marathons or half that are training for marathons or half marathons, when they stop training, marathons, when they stop training, marathons, when they stop training, they burn more glycogen, more they burn more glycogen, more they burn more glycogen, more carbohydrate, even though they were burning more body even though they were burning more body even though they were burning more body fat per unit time during the low fat per unit time during the low fat per unit time during the low intensity exercise. So, there's this intensity exercise. So, there's this intensity exercise. So, there's this kind of inversion, high intensity burns kind of inversion, high intensity burns kind of inversion, high intensity burns more glycogen during the activity, more glycogen during the activity, more glycogen during the activity, more body fat afterwards. body fat afterwards. body fat afterwards. Moderate to low intensity burns more, Moderate to low intensity burns more, Moderate to low intensity burns more, percentage-wise, more percentage-wise, more percentage-wise, more body fat is oxidized than glycogen body fat is oxidized than glycogen body fat is oxidized than glycogen during the move during the actual during the move during the actual during the move during the actual exercise, afterward it's more glycogen. exercise, afterward it's more glycogen. exercise, afterward it's more glycogen. So, I don't want this to get too So, I don't want this to get too So, I don't want this to get too complicated. The point is, you should complicated. The point is, you should complicated. The point is, you should pick exercise that you like, pick exercise that you like, pick exercise that you like, that you're going to do regularly, but that you're going to do regularly, but that you're going to do regularly, but it does seem that the high intensity it does seem that the high intensity it does seem that the high intensity exercise followed by moderate intensity exercise followed by moderate intensity exercise followed by moderate intensity exercise is going to be optimal for fat burning is going to be optimal for fat burning is going to be optimal for fat burning overall, because when you look at the overall, because when you look at the overall, because when you look at the percentage of body fat burned, and you percentage of body fat burned, and you percentage of body fat burned, and you look at the overall increase in basal look at the overall increase in basal look at the overall increase in basal metabolic rate, moderate and high metabolic rate, moderate and high metabolic rate, moderate and high intensity training intensity training intensity training followed by low intensity training, or followed by low intensity training, or followed by low intensity training, or even just followed by going back into even just followed by going back into even just followed by going back into life, is going to be the best way to life, is going to be the best way to life, is going to be the best way to continue to burn body fat because the continue to burn body fat because the continue to burn body fat because the ways that it increases basal metabolic ways that it increases basal metabolic ways that it increases basal metabolic rate. Uh, rate. Uh, rate. Uh, this could be distilled into a simple this could be distilled into a simple this could be distilled into a simple protocol whereby three or four times a protocol whereby three or four times a protocol whereby three or four times a week you do high intensity training week you do high intensity training week you do high intensity training followed by either nothing or followed by either nothing or followed by either nothing or followed by low intensity training, especially if low intensity training, especially if low intensity training, especially if you're able to do that fasted. you're able to do that fasted. you're able to do that fasted. And I should just mention that none of And I should just mention that none of And I should just mention that none of this stuff about fasted is about this stuff about fasted is about this stuff about fasted is about performance. If you want to perform performance. If you want to perform performance. If you want to perform really well, you want to your this is really well, you want to your this is really well, you want to your this is for reasons of performance, and you want to reasons of performance, and you want to reasons of performance, and you want to you know, it's for a sport or a you know, it's for a sport or a you know, it's for a sport or a competition, it's not for body fat competition, it's not for body fat competition, it's not for body fat purposes, well then all this kind of purposes, well then all this kind of purposes, well then all this kind of falls away and is modified by what's falls away and is modified by what's falls away and is modified by what's ideal to eat for performance. But what ideal to eat for performance. But what ideal to eat for performance. But what we're talking about today is how to we're talking about today is how to we're talking about today is how to optimize body fat uh body fat loss. optimize body fat uh body fat loss. optimize body fat uh body fat loss. So, train moderately to intensely to very train moderately to intensely to very train moderately to intensely to very high intensity, and then high intensity, and then high intensity, and then moderate to low intensity. moderate to low intensity. moderate to low intensity. Or train moderate to high intensity, and Or train moderate to high intensity, and Or train moderate to high intensity, and then go about life. And in fact, I have then go about life. And in fact, I have then go about life. And in fact, I have a friend who a friend who a friend who um uses this strategy. He likes the um uses this strategy. He likes the um uses this strategy. He likes the train intensely and not that often train intensely and not that often train intensely and not that often protocol, cuz he's a very busy person. protocol, cuz he's a very busy person. protocol, cuz he's a very busy person. So, he'll train for 20 to 30 minutes So, he'll train for 20 to 30 minutes So, he'll train for 20 to 30 minutes intensely with weights or just body intensely with weights or just body intensely with weights or just body weight movement, doing a lot of he does weight movement, doing a lot of he does weight movement, doing a lot of he does burpees and push-ups and sit-ups and burpees and push-ups and sit-ups and burpees and push-ups and sit-ups and pull-ups and just kind of moving in kind pull-ups and just kind of moving in kind pull-ups and just kind of moving in kind of circuit type training. But where he's of circuit type training. But where he's of circuit type training. But where he's breathing really hard, the goal he breathing really hard, the goal he breathing really hard, the goal he always says is I want to breathe hard always says is I want to breathe hard always says is I want to breathe hard for 30 minutes every day, and then for 30 minutes every day, and then for 30 minutes every day, and then afterwards he hydrates and drinks afterwards he hydrates and drinks afterwards he hydrates and drinks coffee, and moves into his day, and he's coffee, and moves into his day, and he's coffee, and moves into his day, and he's walking around and taking calls and walking around and taking calls and walking around and taking calls and carrying around his children and doing carrying around his children and doing carrying around his children and doing all these kinds of things that keep him all these kinds of things that keep him all these kinds of things that keep him really busy, which is kind of like low really busy, which is kind of like low really busy, which is kind of like low intensity work. So, I think you get the intensity work. So, I think you get the intensity work. So, I think you get the principle now. But you should all be principle now. But you should all be principle now. But you should all be asking yourselves as scientists of asking yourselves as scientists of asking yourselves as scientists of yourselves, why would it be that certain patterns of why would it be that certain patterns of why would it be that certain patterns of exercise would lead to more or less fat exercise would lead to more or less fat exercise would lead to more or less fat loss? I mean, it can't just be about the loss? I mean, it can't just be about the loss? I mean, it can't just be about the energy burned. We already established energy burned. We already established energy burned. We already established that. And again, it has to do with the that. And again, it has to do with the that. And again, it has to do with the neurons. It has to do with how we engage neurons. It has to do with how we engage neurons. It has to do with how we engage the nervous system. So, while the nervous system. So, while the nervous system. So, while non-exercise activity-induced non-exercise activity-induced non-exercise activity-induced thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting, and thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting, and thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting, and cold can induce thermogenesis by cold can induce thermogenesis by cold can induce thermogenesis by engaging shiver type movement or engaging shiver type movement or engaging shiver type movement or low-level movements, big movements that low-level movements, big movements that low-level movements, big movements that are of very high intensity, meaning they are of very high intensity, meaning they are of very high intensity, meaning they require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of adrenaline, epinephrine from our adrenaline, epinephrine from our adrenaline, epinephrine from our neurons, and signal particular types and neurons, and signal particular types and neurons, and signal particular types and amounts of fat thermogenesis, amounts of fat thermogenesis, amounts of fat thermogenesis, fat oxidation. fat oxidation. fat oxidation. Whereas low-level intensity exercise, Whereas low-level intensity exercise, Whereas low-level intensity exercise, low or moderate intensity exercise, you low or moderate intensity exercise, you low or moderate intensity exercise, you know, walking, running, biking, it where know, walking, running, biking, it where know, walking, running, biking, it where you can do that easily, there's not very you can do that easily, there's not very you can do that easily, there's not very much adrenaline release. So, much adrenaline release. So, much adrenaline release. So, adrenaline and aka epinephrine is really adrenaline and aka epinephrine is really adrenaline and aka epinephrine is really the final common path by which movement the final common path by which movement the final common path by which movement of any kind, whether or not it's of any kind, whether or not it's of any kind, whether or not it's low-level shiver or whether or not it's low-level shiver or whether or not it's low-level shiver or whether or not it's lifting a barbell, sprinting up a hill, lifting a barbell, sprinting up a hill, lifting a barbell, sprinting up a hill, or doing a long bike ride, adrenaline is or doing a long bike ride, adrenaline is or doing a long bike ride, adrenaline is the effector the effector the effector of fat loss. It's the trigger and it's of fat loss. It's the trigger and it's of fat loss. It's the trigger and it's the effector. So, now I want to turn our the effector. So, now I want to turn our the effector. So, now I want to turn our attention to compounds that increase attention to compounds that increase attention to compounds that increase epinephrine and adrenaline, as well as epinephrine and adrenaline, as well as epinephrine and adrenaline, as well as compounds that work outside the compounds that work outside the compounds that work outside the adrenaline-epinephrine pathway to adrenaline-epinephrine pathway to adrenaline-epinephrine pathway to increase the rates of fat loss. increase the rates of fat loss. increase the rates of fat loss. I almost always save compounds and I almost always save compounds and I almost always save compounds and supplements and things of that sort supplements and things of that sort supplements and things of that sort to the end because I do believe that to the end because I do believe that to the end because I do believe that people should look first towards people should look first towards people should look first towards behavioral tools and an understanding of behavioral tools and an understanding of behavioral tools and an understanding of the science before they look toward a the science before they look toward a the science before they look toward a uh supplement or a particular thing that uh supplement or a particular thing that uh supplement or a particular thing that they can extract from diet. they can extract from diet. they can extract from diet. This is mainly to try and shift people This is mainly to try and shift people This is mainly to try and shift people away from the kind of magic pill away from the kind of magic pill away from the kind of magic pill phenomenon or the idea that there is phenomenon or the idea that there is phenomenon or the idea that there is a magic pill because there really isn't a magic pill because there really isn't a magic pill because there really isn't and frankly there never will be. But, and frankly there never will be. But, and frankly there never will be. But, there are some compounds that can there are some compounds that can there are some compounds that can greatly increase fat oxidation and greatly increase fat oxidation and greatly increase fat oxidation and mobilization. And understanding which mobilization. And understanding which mobilization. And understanding which compounds increase oxidation or compounds increase oxidation or compounds increase oxidation or mobilization can be very useful if your goal is to can be very useful if your goal is to can be very useful if your goal is to accelerate fat loss. accelerate fat loss. accelerate fat loss. There are things that people can ingest There are things that people can ingest There are things that people can ingest that will allow them to oxidize more that will allow them to oxidize more that will allow them to oxidize more fat. And that occurs mainly by increasing the And that occurs mainly by increasing the And that occurs mainly by increasing the amount of epinephrine that is released amount of epinephrine that is released amount of epinephrine that is released from neurons that innervate fat tissue. from neurons that innervate fat tissue. from neurons that innervate fat tissue. One of the more common ones is one that One of the more common ones is one that One of the more common ones is one that you may already be using, which is you may already be using, which is you may already be using, which is caffeine. It's well established that caffeine can It's well established that caffeine can It's well established that caffeine can enhance performance enhance performance enhance performance if you're caffeine adapted. I talked if you're caffeine adapted. I talked if you're caffeine adapted. I talked about this in an earlier episode, so I about this in an earlier episode, so I about this in an earlier episode, so I want to make sure I'm very clear about want to make sure I'm very clear about want to make sure I'm very clear about this. If you are not used to drinking this. If you are not used to drinking this. If you are not used to drinking caffeine and you suddenly decide I'm caffeine and you suddenly decide I'm caffeine and you suddenly decide I'm going to drink a big cup of coffee going to drink a big cup of coffee going to drink a big cup of coffee before training, you will vasoconstrict before training, you will vasoconstrict before training, you will vasoconstrict and you will limit performance. So, and you will limit performance. So, and you will limit performance. So, that's performance. If you're caffeine that's performance. If you're caffeine that's performance. If you're caffeine adapted, however, adapted, however, adapted, however, there's this kind of interesting there's this kind of interesting there's this kind of interesting phenomenon where ingestion of caffeine phenomenon where ingestion of caffeine phenomenon where ingestion of caffeine serves more as a performance enhancer serves more as a performance enhancer serves more as a performance enhancer both by increasing alertness, but also both by increasing alertness, but also both by increasing alertness, but also by way of dilating vasculature, of by way of dilating vasculature, of by way of dilating vasculature, of allowing more blood flow. allowing more blood flow. allowing more blood flow. Now, caffeine for Now, caffeine for Now, caffeine for burning more fat, for oxidizing and burning more fat, for oxidizing and burning more fat, for oxidizing and mobilizing more fat is an interesting mobilizing more fat is an interesting mobilizing more fat is an interesting one. It can be effective at dosages up to 400 It can be effective at dosages up to 400 It can be effective at dosages up to 400 mg. You have to be careful if you're mg. You have to be careful if you're mg. You have to be careful if you're caffeine sensitive. Some people have caffeine sensitive. Some people have caffeine sensitive. Some people have just the littlest bit of caffeine and just the littlest bit of caffeine and just the littlest bit of caffeine and their mind goes crazy and they're very their mind goes crazy and they're very their mind goes crazy and they're very uncomfortable. It can have uncomfortable. It can have uncomfortable. It can have cardiovascular effects for some people cardiovascular effects for some people cardiovascular effects for some people with hypertension, etc. So, please check with hypertension, etc. So, please check with hypertension, etc. So, please check with your doctor. But, 400 mg is uh with your doctor. But, 400 mg is uh with your doctor. But, 400 mg is uh roughly a cup and a half of coffee or roughly a cup and a half of coffee or roughly a cup and a half of coffee or two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a lot more caffeine in coffee. So, if you lot more caffeine in coffee. So, if you lot more caffeine in coffee. So, if you go to uh typical go to uh typical go to uh typical um cafe and you were to get their um cafe and you were to get their um cafe and you were to get their um medium size, that would have close to a medium size, that would have close to a medium size, that would have close to a gram of caffeine, which is why if you're gram of caffeine, which is why if you're gram of caffeine, which is why if you're a regular caffeine consumer and you don't regular caffeine consumer and you don't regular caffeine consumer and you don't get that gram of caffeine in your coffee get that gram of caffeine in your coffee get that gram of caffeine in your coffee each day, you will get a headache. It each day, you will get a headache. It each day, you will get a headache. It can cause constriction and dilation of can cause constriction and dilation of can cause constriction and dilation of blood vessels in ways that's blood vessels in ways that's blood vessels in ways that's complicated, but you'll get a headache. complicated, but you'll get a headache. complicated, but you'll get a headache. Some people Some people Some people like the way they feel drinking 100 to like the way they feel drinking 100 to like the way they feel drinking 100 to 200, 300, maybe and 400 mg of caffeine 200, 300, maybe and 400 mg of caffeine 200, 300, maybe and 400 mg of caffeine before training. And indeed, that will before training. And indeed, that will before training. And indeed, that will lead to increased fat oxidation. lead to increased fat oxidation. lead to increased fat oxidation. It will do that because you will release It will do that because you will release It will do that because you will release more epinephrine and adrenaline. more epinephrine and adrenaline. more epinephrine and adrenaline. So, let's just place this in the context So, let's just place this in the context So, let's just place this in the context of what we said previously. Let's say of what we said previously. Let's say of what we said previously. Let's say you normally do zone two cardio. So, you normally do zone two cardio. So, you normally do zone two cardio. So, you're going out for a moderately you're going out for a moderately you're going out for a moderately intense run for 30 to 60 minutes or so. intense run for 30 to 60 minutes or so. intense run for 30 to 60 minutes or so. I think the current recommendation I think the current recommendation I think the current recommendation guidelines in the states are that um guidelines in the states are that um guidelines in the states are that um people engage in 30 minutes of moderate people engage in 30 minutes of moderate people engage in 30 minutes of moderate intensity exercise 5 days a week intensity exercise 5 days a week intensity exercise 5 days a week for So, that's 150 minutes. for So, that's 150 minutes. for So, that's 150 minutes. Um if their goal is to improve or Um if their goal is to improve or Um if their goal is to improve or maintain health of the cardiovascular maintain health of the cardiovascular maintain health of the cardiovascular system. 80% of people in the United States fail 80% of people in the United States fail 80% of people in the United States fail to do that or anything close to it. to do that or anything close to it. to do that or anything close to it. They're way We are way below threshold They're way We are way below threshold They're way We are way below threshold for what the government has recommended. for what the government has recommended. for what the government has recommended. In this case, the government In this case, the government In this case, the government recommendations, I think, are pretty recommendations, I think, are pretty recommendations, I think, are pretty good. That's um one could always do good. That's um one could always do good. That's um one could always do better, of course, but 80% of people better, of course, but 80% of people better, of course, but 80% of people aren't even doing that. aren't even doing that. aren't even doing that. However, just using the logic and the just using the logic and the just using the logic and the understanding of how epinephrine understanding of how epinephrine understanding of how epinephrine adrenaline is affecting this fat adrenaline is affecting this fat adrenaline is affecting this fat oxidation process, if you were to go out oxidation process, if you were to go out oxidation process, if you were to go out for 15 minutes and you drank caffeine for 15 minutes and you drank caffeine for 15 minutes and you drank caffeine before you went, yes, you'll probably before you went, yes, you'll probably before you went, yes, you'll probably oxidize more fat per unit time. Can you oxidize more fat per unit time. Can you oxidize more fat per unit time. Can you compensate for the exercise you're not compensate for the exercise you're not compensate for the exercise you're not doing just by drinking caffeine? doing just by drinking caffeine? doing just by drinking caffeine? Well, probably if you were just talking Well, probably if you were just talking Well, probably if you were just talking about fat loss, if that caffeine makes about fat loss, if that caffeine makes about fat loss, if that caffeine makes you fidget a lot, right? The amount of you fidget a lot, right? The amount of you fidget a lot, right? The amount of calories that you burn in a 30-minute calories that you burn in a 30-minute calories that you burn in a 30-minute run, unless the run is very intense and run, unless the run is very intense and run, unless the run is very intense and you're wearing a weight vest and it's up you're wearing a weight vest and it's up you're wearing a weight vest and it's up a hill, it's not that great, right? I a hill, it's not that great, right? I a hill, it's not that great, right? I mean, you probably get, you know, in mean, you probably get, you know, in mean, you probably get, you know, in somewhere into the 400-500 calories somewhere into the 400-500 calories somewhere into the 400-500 calories burned area. But, I said earlier, and there are area. But, I said earlier, and there are area. But, I said earlier, and there are a lot of data now to support that a lot of data now to support that a lot of data now to support that fidgeting for a day can burn anywhere fidgeting for a day can burn anywhere fidgeting for a day can burn anywhere from 800 to 2,500 calories a day. So, from 800 to 2,500 calories a day. So, from 800 to 2,500 calories a day. So, you might say, "Well, fidgeting's better you might say, "Well, fidgeting's better you might say, "Well, fidgeting's better than running." Ah, but it doesn't than running." Ah, but it doesn't than running." Ah, but it doesn't trigger the activation and the um trigger the activation and the um trigger the activation and the um positive health effects of the positive health effects of the positive health effects of the cardiovascular system. So, fidgeting cardiovascular system. So, fidgeting cardiovascular system. So, fidgeting alone can be great, but you need alone can be great, but you need alone can be great, but you need exercise for other reasons. exercise for other reasons. exercise for other reasons. Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat that you burn in any duration of that you burn in any duration of that you burn in any duration of exercise, and it can shift the exercise, and it can shift the exercise, and it can shift the percentage of fat that you oxidize percentage of fat that you oxidize percentage of fat that you oxidize compared to glycogen. compared to glycogen. compared to glycogen. Unless you take that caffeine and it Unless you take that caffeine and it Unless you take that caffeine and it ramps you up so much that you're ramps you up so much that you're ramps you up so much that you're training really, really intensely. The training really, really intensely. The training really, really intensely. The bottom line is, if you like caffeine and bottom line is, if you like caffeine and bottom line is, if you like caffeine and you can use it safely, you can use it safely, you can use it safely, ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 mg of caffeine prior to exercise, mg of caffeine prior to exercise, mg of caffeine prior to exercise, somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes before exercise, before exercise, before exercise, can be beneficial if we're talking about can be beneficial if we're talking about can be beneficial if we're talking about fat oxidation, burning more body fat. fat oxidation, burning more body fat. fat oxidation, burning more body fat. So, that's caffeine. There are a number So, that's caffeine. There are a number So, that's caffeine. There are a number of other things that have existed over of other things that have existed over of other things that have existed over the years that are in this pathway, the years that are in this pathway, the years that are in this pathway, things like things like things like um ephedrine, which is now illegal in um ephedrine, which is now illegal in um ephedrine, which is now illegal in most states. I think maybe in all states most states. I think maybe in all states most states. I think maybe in all states because people were dropping dead from because people were dropping dead from because people were dropping dead from taking ephedrine because they were taking ephedrine because they were taking ephedrine because they were heating up too much. It's interesting, heating up too much. It's interesting, heating up too much. It's interesting, there it wasn't direct effects on the there it wasn't direct effects on the there it wasn't direct effects on the heart causing heart attack, it could heart causing heart attack, it could heart causing heart attack, it could trigger by way of trigger by way of trigger by way of adrenergic receptors, if you'd like to adrenergic receptors, if you'd like to adrenergic receptors, if you'd like to know, increases in body temperature and heat. increases in body temperature and heat. increases in body temperature and heat. Now, there those drugs turned out to be Now, there those drugs turned out to be Now, there those drugs turned out to be dangerous because people were dangerous because people were dangerous because people were overheating and dying. There's also the overheating and dying. There's also the overheating and dying. There's also the big fen-phen craze, there was a drug big fen-phen craze, there was a drug big fen-phen craze, there was a drug that was released, um fenfluramine, that was released, um fenfluramine, that was released, um fenfluramine, which actually was quite effective as an which actually was quite effective as an which actually was quite effective as an anti-obesity drug, a treatment for anti-obesity drug, a treatment for anti-obesity drug, a treatment for obesity. That had to be outlawed as well. It was That had to be outlawed as well. It was That had to be outlawed as well. It was it was it was it was FDA approval was removed because again FDA approval was removed because again FDA approval was removed because again people were dying because of people were dying because of people were dying because of cardiovascular effects. I don't know if cardiovascular effects. I don't know if cardiovascular effects. I don't know if people were overheating on it as well. people were overheating on it as well. people were overheating on it as well. So, what is the solution? If caffeine is So, what is the solution? If caffeine is So, what is the solution? If caffeine is the kind of the entry point for most the kind of the entry point for most the kind of the entry point for most people of using compounds to increase people of using compounds to increase people of using compounds to increase the rate or percentage of fat loss in the rate or percentage of fat loss in the rate or percentage of fat loss in exercise and even at rest, what are some exercise and even at rest, what are some exercise and even at rest, what are some of the other things that are useful of the other things that are useful of the other things that are useful and interesting? Well, in terms of tools and interesting? Well, in terms of tools and interesting? Well, in terms of tools that are actionable and have reasonable that are actionable and have reasonable that are actionable and have reasonable safety margins, safety margins, safety margins, I've talked before about uh something I've talked before about uh something I've talked before about uh something called GLP-1. called GLP-1. called GLP-1. This is something that uh can be This is something that uh can be This is something that uh can be triggered by the ingestion of yerba triggered by the ingestion of yerba triggered by the ingestion of yerba mate, which is a tea, and I guess mate, which is a tea, and I guess mate, which is a tea, and I guess because um I'm Argentine, they grew up because um I'm Argentine, they grew up because um I'm Argentine, they grew up drinking mate. I think I was drinking mate. I think I was drinking mate. I think I was drinking mate from the time I was about 3 or 4 mate from the time I was about 3 or 4 mate from the time I was about 3 or 4 years old. I don't suggest that for years old. I don't suggest that for years old. I don't suggest that for kids. I don't think kids should be kids. I don't think kids should be kids. I don't think kids should be ingesting caffeine. ingesting caffeine. ingesting caffeine. Um but anyway, I did it. Um but anyway, I did it. Um but anyway, I did it. Um and I still ingest mate. Mate increases and I still ingest mate. Mate increases and I still ingest mate. Mate increases GLP-1. GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. So, GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. So, GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. So, let's just quickly return to our let's just quickly return to our let's just quickly return to our biochemistry. As you recall, fat is biochemistry. As you recall, fat is biochemistry. As you recall, fat is mobilized from body fat stores mobilized from body fat stores mobilized from body fat stores and then it's burned up. It's oxidized and then it's burned up. It's oxidized and then it's burned up. It's oxidized in cells. It actually needs to be in cells. It actually needs to be in cells. It actually needs to be converted into ATP. converted into ATP. converted into ATP. And those fatty acids uh And those fatty acids uh And those fatty acids uh are essentially converted into ATP in are essentially converted into ATP in are essentially converted into ATP in the mitochondria of the cell. the mitochondria of the cell. the mitochondria of the cell. High insulin prevents that from High insulin prevents that from High insulin prevents that from happening and glucagon happening and glucagon happening and glucagon facilitates that process. facilitates that process. facilitates that process. Glucagon facilitates that process Glucagon facilitates that process Glucagon facilitates that process through increases in GLP-1. through increases in GLP-1. through increases in GLP-1. The short takeaway is The short takeaway is The short takeaway is mate increases GLP-1 and yes, increases the increases GLP-1 and yes, increases the increases GLP-1 and yes, increases the percentage of fat that you'll burn. It percentage of fat that you'll burn. It percentage of fat that you'll burn. It increases fat burning. And that is increases fat burning. And that is increases fat burning. And that is especially true, it turns out from the especially true, it turns out from the especially true, it turns out from the scientific literature, if you ingest scientific literature, if you ingest scientific literature, if you ingest mate prior to exercise of any kind. So, mate prior to exercise of any kind. So, mate prior to exercise of any kind. So, if you want to burn more fat if you want to burn more fat if you want to burn more fat drinking mate before exercise is good. drinking mate before exercise is good. drinking mate before exercise is good. Drinking it at rest, when you're not Drinking it at rest, when you're not Drinking it at rest, when you're not exercising will also help shift your metabolism will also help shift your metabolism will also help shift your metabolism toward enhanced burning of fat by toward enhanced burning of fat by toward enhanced burning of fat by increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a whole category of pharmaceuticals that's whole category of pharmaceuticals that's whole category of pharmaceuticals that's being developed right now that are in being developed right now that are in being developed right now that are in late-stage trials or are in use for the late-stage trials or are in use for the late-stage trials or are in use for the treatment of diabetes which treatment of diabetes which treatment of diabetes which capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. They go by various names and there are They go by various names and there are They go by various names and there are people on the internet who are selling people on the internet who are selling people on the internet who are selling these things. They are prescription these things. They are prescription these things. They are prescription drugs and I want to emphasize that they drugs and I want to emphasize that they drugs and I want to emphasize that they are prescription drugs and you obviously are prescription drugs and you obviously are prescription drugs and you obviously wouldn't want to use any of these with wouldn't want to use any of these with wouldn't want to use any of these with without a prescription and a without a prescription and a without a prescription and a requirement. They does seem that they requirement. They does seem that they requirement. They does seem that they are effective for the treatment of are effective for the treatment of are effective for the treatment of certain kinds of diabetes and lead to certain kinds of diabetes and lead to certain kinds of diabetes and lead to fairly significant fairly significant fairly significant weight loss and reduction in appetite. weight loss and reduction in appetite. weight loss and reduction in appetite. So, this is kind of the modern version So, this is kind of the modern version So, this is kind of the modern version of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 metabolism are drugs such as sematic metabolism are drugs such as sematic metabolism are drugs such as sematic I can never pronounce this. Can't seem I can never pronounce this. Can't seem I can never pronounce this. Can't seem to pronounce many things it seems. to pronounce many things it seems. to pronounce many things it seems. Semaglutide is the way I would Semaglutide is the way I would Semaglutide is the way I would pronounce it s e m g l u t i d e pronounce it s e m g l u t i d e pronounce it s e m g l u t i d e um semaglutide but that's not the way you semaglutide but that's not the way you semaglutide but that's not the way you pronounce it but semataglyde is the way pronounce it but semataglyde is the way pronounce it but semataglyde is the way that it's been described on the that it's been described on the that it's been described on the internet. In any case, this compound increases In any case, this compound increases In any case, this compound increases GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 analog in GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 analog in GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 analog in some cases and they go by various types some cases and they go by various types some cases and they go by various types of trade names. of trade names. of trade names. So, the GLP-1 pathway is interesting. So, the GLP-1 pathway is interesting. So, the GLP-1 pathway is interesting. Most people including myself are not Most people including myself are not Most people including myself are not interested in taking a prescription drug interested in taking a prescription drug interested in taking a prescription drug to increase GLP-1. I do it through the to increase GLP-1. I do it through the to increase GLP-1. I do it through the ingestion of mate. I just get the mate ingestion of mate. I just get the mate ingestion of mate. I just get the mate leaves, pour water over it and drink it. leaves, pour water over it and drink it. leaves, pour water over it and drink it. What's kind of interesting that's not What's kind of interesting that's not What's kind of interesting that's not often discussed is that you can increase often discussed is that you can increase often discussed is that you can increase the amount of GLP-1 the amount of GLP-1 the amount of GLP-1 by you can essentially reuse the tea. by you can essentially reuse the tea. by you can essentially reuse the tea. The the first time you drink it it's The the first time you drink it it's The the first time you drink it it's going to be very intense and in going to be very intense and in going to be very intense and in fact some people find that fact some people find that fact some people find that mate it almost tastes like burnt that mate it almost tastes like burnt that mate it almost tastes like burnt leaves. It's too intense. You don't want leaves. It's too intense. You don't want leaves. It's too intense. You don't want the water to be too hot. But, I learned the water to be too hot. But, I learned the water to be too hot. But, I learned this trick from a friend. You can reuse this trick from a friend. You can reuse this trick from a friend. You can reuse the leaves over and over again probably the leaves over and over again probably the leaves over and over again probably for about a day before they go bad and for about a day before they go bad and for about a day before they go bad and in doing that you start to extract more in doing that you start to extract more in doing that you start to extract more and more of the compounds from the mate and more of the compounds from the mate and more of the compounds from the mate leaf that increase GLP-1. So, it's kind leaf that increase GLP-1. So, it's kind leaf that increase GLP-1. So, it's kind of cool you can kind of get increased of cool you can kind of get increased of cool you can kind of get increased effect. So, what I'll typically do is effect. So, what I'll typically do is effect. So, what I'll typically do is make a make a make a about 16 to 30 oz and just sip it about 16 to 30 oz and just sip it about 16 to 30 oz and just sip it throughout the day and I do like it throughout the day and I do like it throughout the day and I do like it before I train. Some people who don't before I train. Some people who don't before I train. Some people who don't like mate like mate like mate might prefer something like guayusa might prefer something like guayusa might prefer something like guayusa which is spelled g u a y u s a which is spelled g u a y u s a which is spelled g u a y u s a g u a y u s a guayusa which is from g u a y u s a guayusa which is from g u a y u s a guayusa which is from Ecuador, despite the USA ending to it. Ecuador, despite the USA ending to it. Ecuador, despite the USA ending to it. It's from Ecuador and it's a It's a It's from Ecuador and it's a It's a It's from Ecuador and it's a It's a sweeter tasting tea. It doesn't have any tasting tea. It doesn't have any tasting tea. It doesn't have any sweetener in it, but the leaf of the sweetener in it, but the leaf of the sweetener in it, but the leaf of the Guayusa plant is sweeter than the mate Guayusa plant is sweeter than the mate Guayusa plant is sweeter than the mate plant. I sometimes will mix the two and plant. I sometimes will mix the two and plant. I sometimes will mix the two and then make the tea with that. Um the then make the tea with that. Um the then make the tea with that. Um the There's no mate or Guayusa sponsor of There's no mate or Guayusa sponsor of There's no mate or Guayusa sponsor of the podcast. These are just tools to the podcast. These are just tools to the podcast. These are just tools to increase GLP-1 and fat oxidation. increase GLP-1 and fat oxidation. increase GLP-1 and fat oxidation. And again, the And again, the And again, the semaglutide um is the prescription semaglutide um is the prescription semaglutide um is the prescription version where of the that's kind of the version where of the that's kind of the version where of the that's kind of the heavy artillery GLP-1 stimulant and the heavy artillery GLP-1 stimulant and the heavy artillery GLP-1 stimulant and again should be only explored with a again should be only explored with a again should be only explored with a prescription. So, those are the prescription. So, those are the prescription. So, those are the compounds that compounds that compounds that really increase fat oxidation that really increase fat oxidation that really increase fat oxidation directly. There are going to be a number directly. There are going to be a number directly. There are going to be a number of things that impact insulin and of things that impact insulin and of things that impact insulin and glucagon that are going to shift the body that are going to shift the body that are going to shift the body toward more fat burning. We talked about toward more fat burning. We talked about toward more fat burning. We talked about a lot of these during the episode on a lot of these during the episode on a lot of these during the episode on hormones. We talked about it We did a hormones. We talked about it We did a hormones. We talked about it We did a whole episode on hormones and whole episode on hormones and whole episode on hormones and metabolism. And so, for instance, metabolism. And so, for instance, metabolism. And so, for instance, berberine, which comes from a plant, or berberine, which comes from a plant, or berberine, which comes from a plant, or metformin are compounds that are now in metformin are compounds that are now in metformin are compounds that are now in um kind of growing use for reducing blood kind of growing use for reducing blood kind of growing use for reducing blood glucose. They are very potent at glucose. They are very potent at glucose. They are very potent at reducing blood glucose, which will reducing blood glucose, which will reducing blood glucose, which will reduce insulin because the job of the reduce insulin because the job of the reduce insulin because the job of the hormone insulin is to essentially manage hormone insulin is to essentially manage hormone insulin is to essentially manage glucose in the bloodstream. So, there glucose in the bloodstream. So, there glucose in the bloodstream. So, there are a huge gallery of compounds that are a huge gallery of compounds that are a huge gallery of compounds that will reduce insulin and thereby can will reduce insulin and thereby can will reduce insulin and thereby can increase fat oxidation. And that's increase fat oxidation. And that's increase fat oxidation. And that's because, as I mentioned before, fat because, as I mentioned before, fat because, as I mentioned before, fat oxidation, this conversion of fatty oxidation, this conversion of fatty oxidation, this conversion of fatty acids into ATP in the mitochondria, is acids into ATP in the mitochondria, is acids into ATP in the mitochondria, is inhibited by insulin. So, if you keep inhibited by insulin. So, if you keep inhibited by insulin. So, if you keep insulin low, you're going to increase insulin low, you're going to increase insulin low, you're going to increase that process. that process. that process. Which brings us full circle back to the Which brings us full circle back to the Which brings us full circle back to the issue of diet and nutrition. issue of diet and nutrition. issue of diet and nutrition. There is There is There is really solid evidence really solid evidence really solid evidence from the Gardner lab at Stanford and from other Gardner lab at Stanford and from other Gardner lab at Stanford and from other labs showing that when you look at labs showing that when you look at labs showing that when you look at different diets, you look at low-fat different diets, you look at low-fat different diets, you look at low-fat diets, high-fat diets, keto diets, high-fat diets, keto diets, high-fat diets, keto diets, intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting, provided people stick to their provided people stick to their provided people stick to their particular diet, it doesn't really particular diet, it doesn't really particular diet, it doesn't really matter which diet you follow. You can still get which diet you follow. You can still get which diet you follow. You can still get a caloric deficit and you get weight a caloric deficit and you get weight a caloric deficit and you get weight loss. Adherence, however, is always an issue. Adherence, however, is always an issue. Adherence, however, is always an issue. And so, what I always say is And so, what I always say is And so, what I always say is that you want to use the eating plan that you want to use the eating plan that you want to use the eating plan that is obviously beneficial to your that is obviously beneficial to your that is obviously beneficial to your health, but the one that allows you to health, but the one that allows you to health, but the one that allows you to adhere to whatever it is that the adhere to whatever it is that the adhere to whatever it is that the particular nutrition protocol is, right? particular nutrition protocol is, right? particular nutrition protocol is, right? If you can't stick with something, then If you can't stick with something, then If you can't stick with something, then it's not very worthwhile. But, from the it's not very worthwhile. But, from the it's not very worthwhile. But, from the purely scientific standpoint, there's purely scientific standpoint, there's purely scientific standpoint, there's also an advantage to keeping insulin also an advantage to keeping insulin also an advantage to keeping insulin low. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked before my preferred way of eating is to before my preferred way of eating is to before my preferred way of eating is to go lower no carbohydrate throughout the go lower no carbohydrate throughout the go lower no carbohydrate throughout the day for alertness, to get that day for alertness, to get that day for alertness, to get that adrenaline release and the focus that adrenaline release and the focus that adrenaline release and the focus that goes with it, etc., and the ability and goes with it, etc., and the ability and goes with it, etc., and the ability and to think and move and do all the things to think and move and do all the things to think and move and do all the things I need to do during the day, and then I need to do during the day, and then I need to do during the day, and then I eat carbohydrates at night cuz it eat carbohydrates at night cuz it eat carbohydrates at night cuz it facilitates the transition to sleep. facilitates the transition to sleep. facilitates the transition to sleep. That's what works for me. That's what works for me. That's what works for me. But, when insulin is low, you do place your when insulin is low, you do place your when insulin is low, you do place your system in a position to oxidize more fat. And in a position to oxidize more fat. And in a position to oxidize more fat. And so, that's why I think a lot of people so, that's why I think a lot of people so, that's why I think a lot of people do see benefit from lower carbohydrate do see benefit from lower carbohydrate do see benefit from lower carbohydrate or moderate carbohydrate diets because or moderate carbohydrate diets because or moderate carbohydrate diets because when insulin is low, you're in a when insulin is low, you're in a when insulin is low, you're in a position to oxidize more fat, position to oxidize more fat, position to oxidize more fat, both from exercise and at rest. And I both from exercise and at rest. And I both from exercise and at rest. And I should mention should mention should mention because I often mention and it's because I often mention and it's because I often mention and it's appropriate to mention that if you're appropriate to mention that if you're appropriate to mention that if you're interested in looking at the effects of interested in looking at the effects of interested in looking at the effects of caffeine, of mate, guayusa, things of that sort, of mate, guayusa, things of that sort, of mate, guayusa, things of that sort, GLP-1, you want to learn more about GLP-1, you want to learn more about GLP-1, you want to learn more about those, you can go to this wonderful those, you can go to this wonderful those, you can go to this wonderful website, which is website, which is website, which is free, examine.com. free, examine.com. free, examine.com. You can put in yerba mate, it will You can put in yerba mate, it will You can put in yerba mate, it will describe the three studies that describe the three studies that describe the three studies that show increased fat oxidation both during show increased fat oxidation both during show increased fat oxidation both during um and at rest, and it as a consequence not and at rest, and it as a consequence not and at rest, and it as a consequence not surprisingly an increase in metabolic surprisingly an increase in metabolic surprisingly an increase in metabolic rate. One thing that's interesting about rate. One thing that's interesting about rate. One thing that's interesting about mate is it causes a slight decrease in mate is it causes a slight decrease in mate is it causes a slight decrease in heart rate for reasons that still escape heart rate for reasons that still escape heart rate for reasons that still escape me. There's a single study showing that There's a single study showing that There's a single study showing that heart rate is slightly reduced, which is heart rate is slightly reduced, which is heart rate is slightly reduced, which is kind of nice because if when I drink too kind of nice because if when I drink too kind of nice because if when I drink too much caffeine my heart rate goes up, much caffeine my heart rate goes up, much caffeine my heart rate goes up, maybe that would increase my fidgeting maybe that would increase my fidgeting maybe that would increase my fidgeting and my fat burning, but I don't like the and my fat burning, but I don't like the and my fat burning, but I don't like the feeling of having my basal heart rate feeling of having my basal heart rate feeling of having my basal heart rate being up too high. I like my heart rate being up too high. I like my heart rate being up too high. I like my heart rate elevate during exercise, but not when elevate during exercise, but not when elevate during exercise, but not when I'm just kind of resting or working in I'm just kind of resting or working in I'm just kind of resting or working in throughout the day. And for some reason throughout the day. And for some reason throughout the day. And for some reason that I don't understand there's an that I don't understand there's an that I don't understand there's an effect of mate of increasing fat effect of mate of increasing fat effect of mate of increasing fat oxidation, but reducing heart rate just oxidation, but reducing heart rate just oxidation, but reducing heart rate just slightly. So that's interesting and it slightly. So that's interesting and it slightly. So that's interesting and it probably lends itself to my probably lends itself to my probably lends itself to my your explains the subjective experience your explains the subjective experience your explains the subjective experience that I've had of that mate is kind of a that I've had of that mate is kind of a that I've had of that mate is kind of a nice even mellow nice even mellow nice even mellow stimulant. It's not this, you know, stimulant. It's not this, you know, stimulant. It's not this, you know, really supercharged stimulant like really supercharged stimulant like really supercharged stimulant like caffeine from coffee or other sources. caffeine from coffee or other sources. caffeine from coffee or other sources. Although if you drink too much mate you Although if you drink too much mate you Although if you drink too much mate you will also make you jittery. will also make you jittery. will also make you jittery. And there's one more compound that I And there's one more compound that I And there's one more compound that I think we should discuss in terms of think we should discuss in terms of think we should discuss in terms of increasing fat loss and that's carnitine increasing fat loss and that's carnitine increasing fat loss and that's carnitine or acetyl-L-carnitine. They lie in the or acetyl-L-carnitine. They lie in the or acetyl-L-carnitine. They lie in the same pathway. same pathway. same pathway. We can return to We can return to We can return to our basic knowledge now of fat our basic knowledge now of fat our basic knowledge now of fat mobilization and oxidation. mobilization and oxidation. mobilization and oxidation. After fat is mobilized After fat is mobilized After fat is mobilized and makes it into cells and needs to be and makes it into cells and needs to be and makes it into cells and needs to be oxidized, so the literally the burning oxidized, so the literally the burning oxidized, so the literally the burning of fat and conversion of it into energy of fat and conversion of it into energy of fat and conversion of it into energy that is accomplished is accomplished is accomplished and is facilitated by the presence of and is facilitated by the presence of and is facilitated by the presence of glucagon being elevated. GLP being elevated. GLP being elevated. GLP increases that process and insulin being increases that process and insulin being increases that process and insulin being low. And we talked about some ways to manage And we talked about some ways to manage And we talked about some ways to manage insulin both in this episode and in previous both in this episode and in previous both in this episode and in previous episode. L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine in particular and acetyl-L-carnitine in particular and acetyl-L-carnitine in particular facilitates fat oxidation. It helps facilitates fat oxidation. It helps facilitates fat oxidation. It helps convert fatty acids into ATP. And convert fatty acids into ATP. And convert fatty acids into ATP. And indeed, supplementing L-carnitine can indeed, supplementing L-carnitine can indeed, supplementing L-carnitine can increase fat loss. That's been shown. increase fat loss. That's been shown. increase fat loss. That's been shown. At what dosages? Well, people ingest At what dosages? Well, people ingest At what dosages? Well, people ingest anywhere from 500 mg to 2 g per day in anywhere from 500 mg to 2 g per day in anywhere from 500 mg to 2 g per day in divided doses typically. Some people who divided doses typically. Some people who divided doses typically. Some people who are really extreme are really extreme are really extreme are taking injectable L-carnitine. I've taking injectable L-carnitine. I've taking injectable L-carnitine. I've certainly not tried that. certainly not tried that. certainly not tried that. I confess I have used it in pill form I confess I have used it in pill form I confess I have used it in pill form from time to time, but from time to time, but from time to time, but in part because of the fat oxidation in part because of the fat oxidation in part because of the fat oxidation effects, but also because of the other effects, but also because of the other effects, but also because of the other effects that it tends to have. So, in effects that it tends to have. So, in effects that it tends to have. So, in exploring the effects that exploring the effects that exploring the effects that acetyl-L-carnitine has, it has a huge acetyl-L-carnitine has, it has a huge acetyl-L-carnitine has, it has a huge variety of effects on cellular variety of effects on cellular variety of effects on cellular metabolism. It can reduce ammonia in the metabolism. It can reduce ammonia in the metabolism. It can reduce ammonia in the blood. That is actually a quite strong blood. That is actually a quite strong blood. That is actually a quite strong effect. It can reduce things like effect. It can reduce things like effect. It can reduce things like C-reactive protein, which is you want to C-reactive protein, which is you want to C-reactive protein, which is you want to see C-reactive protein levels to be see C-reactive protein levels to be see C-reactive protein levels to be managed. You do not want them too high. managed. You do not want them too high. managed. You do not want them too high. Can slightly reduce blood glucose. Can slightly reduce blood glucose. Can slightly reduce blood glucose. It can slightly increase HDL-C, the good It can slightly increase HDL-C, the good It can slightly increase HDL-C, the good form of the blood lipid, and slightly form of the blood lipid, and slightly form of the blood lipid, and slightly reduce overall cholesterol. And as I reduce overall cholesterol. And as I reduce overall cholesterol. And as I mentioned, it can slightly modify the mentioned, it can slightly modify the mentioned, it can slightly modify the pathway involving glucagon such that you pathway involving glucagon such that you pathway involving glucagon such that you get a considerable effect, not a huge get a considerable effect, not a huge get a considerable effect, not a huge effect, on fat oxidation. So, it can effect, on fat oxidation. So, it can effect, on fat oxidation. So, it can improve fat oxidation rates. improve fat oxidation rates. improve fat oxidation rates. It has a number of other effects, some It has a number of other effects, some It has a number of other effects, some of which I talked about during the month of which I talked about during the month of which I talked about during the month on hormones. And um on hormones. And um on hormones. And um that sort of thing. It has strong that sort of thing. It has strong that sort of thing. It has strong effects on rates of pregnancy and sperm effects on rates of pregnancy and sperm effects on rates of pregnancy and sperm quality. So, clearly carnitine is doing quality. So, clearly carnitine is doing quality. So, clearly carnitine is doing lots of different things in lots of lots of different things in lots of lots of different things in lots of different cells. It's impacting sperm different cells. It's impacting sperm different cells. It's impacting sperm motility. There are a motility. There are a motility. There are a large number of studies supporting that. large number of studies supporting that. large number of studies supporting that. Slight reductions in blood pressure, and Slight reductions in blood pressure, and Slight reductions in blood pressure, and has these interesting effects on has these interesting effects on has these interesting effects on reducing fatigue during exercise, reducing fatigue during exercise, reducing fatigue during exercise, reducing inflammatory markers like reducing inflammatory markers like reducing inflammatory markers like interleukin-6. So, it has a number of interleukin-6. So, it has a number of interleukin-6. So, it has a number of effects that on the whole are {quote} effects that on the whole are {quote} effects that on the whole are {quote} and {unquote} positive or at least in and {unquote} positive or at least in and {unquote} positive or at least in the direction of things that you may the direction of things that you may the direction of things that you may want and I should emphasize may. You want and I should emphasize may. You want and I should emphasize may. You certainly don't need acetyl-L-carnitine certainly don't need acetyl-L-carnitine certainly don't need acetyl-L-carnitine in order to in order to in order to lose fat, but now that you understand lose fat, but now that you understand lose fat, but now that you understand the cellular process by which fat is the cellular process by which fat is the cellular process by which fat is mobilized and oxidized, it should make mobilized and oxidized, it should make mobilized and oxidized, it should make sense that if L-carnitine is important sense that if L-carnitine is important sense that if L-carnitine is important for converting fatty acids into energy, for converting fatty acids into energy, for converting fatty acids into energy, then supplementing L-carnitine then supplementing L-carnitine then supplementing L-carnitine makes sense. makes sense. makes sense. Acetyl-L-carnitine is the type of Acetyl-L-carnitine is the type of Acetyl-L-carnitine is the type of L-carnitine or the form of L-carnitine, L-carnitine or the form of L-carnitine, L-carnitine or the form of L-carnitine, I should say, that is transported and I should say, that is transported and I should say, that is transported and utilized most easily by the body. And so utilized most easily by the body. And so utilized most easily by the body. And so that's why sometimes we distinguish that's why sometimes we distinguish that's why sometimes we distinguish between L-carnitine and between L-carnitine and between L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine. So once again, we've covered an enormous So once again, we've covered an enormous So once again, we've covered an enormous amount of material. amount of material. amount of material. We've talked about the science of fat We've talked about the science of fat We've talked about the science of fat loss and in particular, we've explored loss and in particular, we've explored loss and in particular, we've explored this topic from the perspective of the this topic from the perspective of the this topic from the perspective of the nervous system, how neurons and in nervous system, how neurons and in nervous system, how neurons and in particular the release of things like particular the release of things like particular the release of things like adrenaline, epinephrine adrenaline, epinephrine adrenaline, epinephrine can facilitate fat mobilization and can facilitate fat mobilization and can facilitate fat mobilization and oxidation. We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this non-exercise type movement that can greatly increase type movement that can greatly increase type movement that can greatly increase caloric burn caloric burn caloric burn and why that is. We talked about shiver, and why that is. We talked about shiver, and why that is. We talked about shiver, another form of non-exercise another form of non-exercise another form of non-exercise movement that can really increase both movement that can really increase both movement that can really increase both caloric expenditure due to the shiver, caloric expenditure due to the shiver, caloric expenditure due to the shiver, due to the movement, as well as increase due to the movement, as well as increase due to the movement, as well as increase thermogenesis, the heating up of the thermogenesis, the heating up of the thermogenesis, the heating up of the body through things like brown fat and body through things like brown fat and body through things like brown fat and even the conversion of white fat to even the conversion of white fat to even the conversion of white fat to brown fat, which is a good thing if you brown fat, which is a good thing if you brown fat, which is a good thing if you want to oxidize fat. want to oxidize fat. want to oxidize fat. We talked about cold as a particular We talked about cold as a particular We talked about cold as a particular stimulus to induce shiver and how to use stimulus to induce shiver and how to use stimulus to induce shiver and how to use getting into and out of cold as a way to getting into and out of cold as a way to getting into and out of cold as a way to stimulate shiver and avoid cold stimulate shiver and avoid cold stimulate shiver and avoid cold adaptation so that you continue to adaptation so that you continue to adaptation so that you continue to oxidize and burn fat if that's your oxidize and burn fat if that's your oxidize and burn fat if that's your goal. If you want to check out the goal. If you want to check out the goal. If you want to check out the protocols for that, they're at the protocols for that, they're at the protocols for that, they're at the coldaplung.com and in weeks to come we're going to be and in weeks to come we're going to be and in weeks to come we're going to be adding more protocols to that website, adding more protocols to that website, adding more protocols to that website, not just for fat loss, but for things not just for fat loss, but for things not just for fat loss, but for things like resilience, reducing inflammation, like resilience, reducing inflammation, like resilience, reducing inflammation, etc. So, be sure to check those out. etc. So, be sure to check those out. etc. So, be sure to check those out. Again, those are totally cost-free. Again, those are totally cost-free. Again, those are totally cost-free. Talked about exercise. Talked about exercise. Talked about exercise. How rather than thinking about How rather than thinking about How rather than thinking about cardiovascular or weight training cardiovascular or weight training cardiovascular or weight training exercise, that we should perhaps look exercise, that we should perhaps look exercise, that we should perhaps look through the lens of this adrenaline through the lens of this adrenaline through the lens of this adrenaline system and how it interacts with fat system and how it interacts with fat system and how it interacts with fat stores. And think about low, medium, or high And think about low, medium, or high And think about low, medium, or high intensity exercise. Whether or not we intensity exercise. Whether or not we intensity exercise. Whether or not we show up to that fasted or not. Turns out show up to that fasted or not. Turns out show up to that fasted or not. Turns out showing up to that fasted can be useful showing up to that fasted can be useful showing up to that fasted can be useful if you start with high intensity if you start with high intensity if you start with high intensity movements and then move into lower movements and then move into lower movements and then move into lower intensity type exercise. If you're going intensity type exercise. If you're going intensity type exercise. If you're going to go long duration, it probably doesn't to go long duration, it probably doesn't to go long duration, it probably doesn't matter unless you're exercising longer matter unless you're exercising longer matter unless you're exercising longer than 90 minutes, whether or not you eat than 90 minutes, whether or not you eat than 90 minutes, whether or not you eat or not. or not. or not. We talked about caffeine as a stimulant We talked about caffeine as a stimulant We talked about caffeine as a stimulant and a stimulus for epinephrine and a stimulus for epinephrine and a stimulus for epinephrine and adrenaline release. adrenaline release. adrenaline release. As a way to access more fat metabolism. As a way to access more fat metabolism. As a way to access more fat metabolism. And we talked about compounds that come And we talked about compounds that come And we talked about compounds that come from things like yerba mate and guayusa from things like yerba mate and guayusa from things like yerba mate and guayusa tea, this GLP-1 pathway that can trigger tea, this GLP-1 pathway that can trigger tea, this GLP-1 pathway that can trigger increased fat oxidation. So much so that increased fat oxidation. So much so that increased fat oxidation. So much so that the pharmaceutical companies are now the pharmaceutical companies are now the pharmaceutical companies are now developing compounds specifically to developing compounds specifically to developing compounds specifically to increase GLP-1 for treatment of diabetes increase GLP-1 for treatment of diabetes increase GLP-1 for treatment of diabetes and obesity. But you can leverage the and obesity. But you can leverage the and obesity. But you can leverage the GLP-1 pathway through the ingestion of GLP-1 pathway through the ingestion of GLP-1 pathway through the ingestion of things like mate or guayusa if that's of things like mate or guayusa if that's of things like mate or guayusa if that's of interest to you. interest to you. interest to you. And then we talked about L-carnitine and And then we talked about L-carnitine and And then we talked about L-carnitine and how L-carnitine itself is critical for how L-carnitine itself is critical for how L-carnitine itself is critical for the fat oxidation within individual the fat oxidation within individual the fat oxidation within individual cells, the conversion of fatty acids to cells, the conversion of fatty acids to cells, the conversion of fatty acids to energy, and why having your insulin low energy, and why having your insulin low energy, and why having your insulin low and things like L-carnitine and glucagon and things like L-carnitine and glucagon and things like L-carnitine and glucagon levels high or sufficient at least to levels high or sufficient at least to levels high or sufficient at least to can facilitate the burning of fat, fat can facilitate the burning of fat, fat can facilitate the burning of fat, fat oxidation. So, we covered a lot of oxidation. So, we covered a lot of oxidation. So, we covered a lot of material. That's a lot of protocols, I material. That's a lot of protocols, I material. That's a lot of protocols, I realize and that didn't uh the little realize and that didn't uh the little realize and that didn't uh the little list I just gave right there didn't even list I just gave right there didn't even list I just gave right there didn't even begin to get into all the details and begin to get into all the details and begin to get into all the details and corners that we discussed. corners that we discussed. corners that we discussed. I hope you found this conversation I hope you found this conversation I hope you found this conversation interesting both for sake of understanding fat loss both for sake of understanding fat loss both for sake of understanding fat loss and how to lose fat more quickly and to and how to lose fat more quickly and to and how to lose fat more quickly and to lose more of it if that's your goal lose more of it if that's your goal lose more of it if that's your goal as well as simply to understand the as well as simply to understand the as well as simply to understand the biology of fat metabolism from a biology of fat metabolism from a biology of fat metabolism from a different perspective, from the different perspective, from the different perspective, from the perspective of the nervous system. If perspective of the nervous system. If perspective of the nervous system. If you're enjoying this podcast and you're enjoying this podcast and you're enjoying this podcast and you're benefiting from the information that benefiting from the information that benefiting from the information that you're learning, please subscribe on you're learning, please subscribe on you're learning, please subscribe on YouTube. That really helps us a lot. YouTube. That really helps us a lot. YouTube. That really helps us a lot. There's also a notifications button that There's also a notifications button that There's also a notifications button that you can hit that will notify you anytime you can hit that will notify you anytime you can hit that will notify you anytime we release new content. We release we release new content. We release we release new content. We release new episodes every Monday, but sometimes new episodes every Monday, but sometimes new episodes every Monday, but sometimes we release additional material in we release additional material in we release additional material in between. So, please do subscribe on between. So, please do subscribe on between. So, please do subscribe on YouTube as well if you could subscribe YouTube as well if you could subscribe YouTube as well if you could subscribe on Apple and or Spotify on Apple and or Spotify on Apple and or Spotify that's terrific and really helps us and that's terrific and really helps us and that's terrific and really helps us and at Apple you can give us a five-star at Apple you can give us a five-star at Apple you can give us a five-star review if you think we deserve a review if you think we deserve a review if you think we deserve a five-star review as well as you have the five-star review as well as you have the five-star review as well as you have the opportunity to give us feedback opportunity to give us feedback opportunity to give us feedback at Apple. at Apple. at Apple. The comment section on YouTube is the The comment section on YouTube is the The comment section on YouTube is the place to give us feedback whether or not place to give us feedback whether or not place to give us feedback whether or not you like an episode, whether or not you like an episode, whether or not you like an episode, whether or not you don't like an episode, aspects that you don't like an episode, aspects that you don't like an episode, aspects that you particularly liked particularly liked particularly liked suggestions for future content. We do suggestions for future content. We do suggestions for future content. We do read, I do read through all the read, I do read through all the read, I do read through all the comments. It takes me some time, I comments. It takes me some time, I comments. It takes me some time, I sometimes fall a little bit behind sometimes fall a little bit behind sometimes fall a little bit behind depending on other duties, but I read depending on other duties, but I read depending on other duties, but I read all the comments and I do take them into all the comments and I do take them into all the comments and I do take them into account when developing this material account when developing this material account when developing this material and the structure of the material. So, and the structure of the material. So, and the structure of the material. So, please do provide feedback in the please do provide feedback in the please do provide feedback in the comment section, we really appreciate comment section, we really appreciate comment section, we really appreciate it. Other ways to support the podcast it. Other ways to support the podcast it. Other ways to support the podcast are to check out the sponsors that we are to check out the sponsors that we are to check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the mentioned at the beginning of the mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's a terrific way to podcast. That's a terrific way to podcast. That's a terrific way to support us. As well, we have a Patreon, support us. As well, we have a Patreon, support us. As well, we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman and at Patreon that will allow you to and at Patreon that will allow you to and at Patreon that will allow you to support the podcast at any level that support the podcast at any level that support the podcast at any level that you like. you like. you like. I've mentioned supplements during the I've mentioned supplements during the I've mentioned supplements during the podcast. If you're interested in taking podcast. If you're interested in taking podcast. If you're interested in taking supplements you might want to check out Thorne, t h you might want to check out Thorne, t h you might want to check out Thorne, t h o r n e. We've partnered with Thorne o r n e. We've partnered with Thorne o r n e. We've partnered with Thorne because they have the highest levels of because they have the highest levels of because they have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of stringency in terms of the quality of stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients they use and the amounts the ingredients they use and the amounts the ingredients they use and the amounts of the ingredients that they use. of the ingredients that they use. of the ingredients that they use. If you want to see the supplements that If you want to see the supplements that If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne t h o r n I take, you can go to thorne t h o r n I take, you can go to thorne t h o r n e.com/theletteru/huberman and you can get 20% off any of the and you can get 20% off any of the and you can get 20% off any of the supplements that are there as well as supplements that are there as well as supplements that are there as well as any of the supplements that Thorne any of the supplements that Thorne any of the supplements that Thorne makes. That's Thorne t h o r n e makes. That's Thorne t h o r n e makes. That's Thorne t h o r n e .com/u, the letter u, /huberman to get 20% off the letter u, /huberman to get 20% off the letter u, /huberman to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne any of the supplements that Thorne any of the supplements that Thorne makes. And last but not least, I want to makes. And last but not least, I want to makes. And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention thank you for your time and attention thank you for your time and attention today and thank you for your interest in today and thank you for your interest in today and thank you for your interest in science.