Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring you zero cost to effort to bring you zero cost to effort to bring you zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science-related tools. science-related tools. science-related tools. Along those lines, I'd like to thank the Along those lines, I'd like to thank the Along those lines, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. mineral, probiotic drink. mineral, probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since I've been taking Athletic Greens since I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of the podcast. a sponsor of the podcast. a sponsor of the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic The reason I started taking Athletic The reason I started taking Athletic Greens is because I found it rather Greens is because I found it rather Greens is because I found it rather dizzying to know which vitamins and dizzying to know which vitamins and dizzying to know which vitamins and minerals to take, and Athletic Greens minerals to take, and Athletic Greens minerals to take, and Athletic Greens covers all my bases for vitamins and covers all my bases for vitamins and covers all my bases for vitamins and minerals. It also includes probiotics, minerals. It also includes probiotics, minerals. It also includes probiotics, and there are now a lot of data and there are now a lot of data and there are now a lot of data supporting the fact that probiotics are supporting the fact that probiotics are supporting the fact that probiotics are important for the gut-brain axis, for important for the gut-brain axis, for important for the gut-brain axis, for immunity, for metabolic health, immunity, for metabolic health, immunity, for metabolic health, endocrine health, many, many things. endocrine health, many, many things. endocrine health, many, many things. So, I take Athletic Greens once, So, I take Athletic Greens once, So, I take Athletic Greens once, sometimes twice a day. I mix it with sometimes twice a day. I mix it with sometimes twice a day. I mix it with water and a little bit of lemon juice, water and a little bit of lemon juice, water and a little bit of lemon juice, and to me it tastes delicious. and to me it tastes delicious. and to me it tastes delicious. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to you can go to you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and if you do that, they'll also give and if you do that, they'll also give and if you do that, they'll also give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. There are a lot of data now showing that There are a lot of data now showing that There are a lot of data now showing that vitamin D3 is important for immune vitamin D3 is important for immune vitamin D3 is important for immune function and a number of other important function and a number of other important function and a number of other important biological processes. biological processes. biological processes. In addition, if you go to In addition, if you go to In addition, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get five free travel packs. you'll get five free travel packs. you'll get five free travel packs. Travel packs make it easy to mix up Travel packs make it easy to mix up Travel packs make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens when you're in the car, Athletic Greens when you're in the car, Athletic Greens when you're in the car, on the plane, or generally on the road. on the plane, or generally on the road. on the plane, or generally on the road. So, that's athleticgreens.com to get So, that's athleticgreens.com to get So, that's athleticgreens.com to get Athletic Greens, the year supply of Athletic Greens, the year supply of Athletic Greens, the year supply of vitamin D3 and K2, and the five free vitamin D3 and K2, and the five free vitamin D3 and K2, and the five free travel packs. travel packs. travel packs. Our second sponsor of today's podcast is Our second sponsor of today's podcast is Our second sponsor of today's podcast is Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that makes meditation easy. that makes meditation easy. that makes meditation easy. I've been meditating on and off since I I've been meditating on and off since I I've been meditating on and off since I was 16 years old. I'm 45 now, so that's was 16 years old. I'm 45 now, so that's was 16 years old. I'm 45 now, so that's about 30 years of on and off meditation, about 30 years of on and off meditation, about 30 years of on and off meditation, and I confess most of that time it was and I confess most of that time it was and I confess most of that time it was off, meaning I find it really hard to off, meaning I find it really hard to off, meaning I find it really hard to stick to a meditation practice. stick to a meditation practice. stick to a meditation practice. A few years ago I discovered Headspace A few years ago I discovered Headspace A few years ago I discovered Headspace while flying on JetBlue flights cuz at while flying on JetBlue flights cuz at while flying on JetBlue flights cuz at that time they were offering Headspace that time they were offering Headspace that time they were offering Headspace as something you could watch instead of as something you could watch instead of as something you could watch instead of TV or movies, and it made me feel great. TV or movies, and it made me feel great. TV or movies, and it made me feel great. I'd find that I'd arrive where I was I'd find that I'd arrive where I was I'd find that I'd arrive where I was going more rested, more relaxed, and I going more rested, more relaxed, and I going more rested, more relaxed, and I got the Headspace app and I started got the Headspace app and I started got the Headspace app and I started using it daily, and I've continued to using it daily, and I've continued to using it daily, and I've continued to use it daily. use it daily. use it daily. Headspace has a large number of Headspace has a large number of Headspace has a large number of meditations, all supported by science. meditations, all supported by science. meditations, all supported by science. There's also now just a tremendous There's also now just a tremendous There's also now just a tremendous amount of science supporting a amount of science supporting a amount of science supporting a meditation practice for all sorts of meditation practice for all sorts of meditation practice for all sorts of things, like improved sleep, reduced things, like improved sleep, reduced things, like improved sleep, reduced impulsivity, improved cognition. impulsivity, improved cognition. impulsivity, improved cognition. There're just a myriad of positive There're just a myriad of positive There're just a myriad of positive effects of meditation. The hardest thing effects of meditation. The hardest thing effects of meditation. The hardest thing is doing it, and Headspace makes that is doing it, and Headspace makes that is doing it, and Headspace makes that easy. If you want to try the Headspace easy. If you want to try the Headspace easy. If you want to try the Headspace app and all the meditations they have, app and all the meditations they have, app and all the meditations they have, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer and you'll get 1 month completely free and you'll get 1 month completely free and you'll get 1 month completely free of all the meditations they've have. of all the meditations they've have. of all the meditations they've have. That's headspace.com/specialoffer That's headspace.com/specialoffer That's headspace.com/specialoffer to get 1 month free of Headspace. The to get 1 month free of Headspace. The to get 1 month free of Headspace. The third sponsor of today's podcast is third sponsor of today's podcast is third sponsor of today's podcast is Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a low-carb, Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a low-carb, Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a low-carb, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. As I've mentioned a few times before on As I've mentioned a few times before on As I've mentioned a few times before on this podcast, the way I eat throughout this podcast, the way I eat throughout this podcast, the way I eat throughout the day has everything to do with when I the day has everything to do with when I the day has everything to do with when I want to be alert and when I want to be want to be alert and when I want to be want to be alert and when I want to be sleepy. So, in the first part of the day sleepy. So, in the first part of the day sleepy. So, in the first part of the day I fast because that enhances alertness. I fast because that enhances alertness. I fast because that enhances alertness. Then I eat keto, so my lunch and my Then I eat keto, so my lunch and my Then I eat keto, so my lunch and my afternoon meals are ketogenic. And then afternoon meals are ketogenic. And then afternoon meals are ketogenic. And then in the evening I eat starches and in the evening I eat starches and in the evening I eat starches and vegetables because those aid the vegetables because those aid the vegetables because those aid the transition to sleep. So, for me Magic transition to sleep. So, for me Magic transition to sleep. So, for me Magic Spoon as a keto cereal is a great snack. Spoon as a keto cereal is a great snack. Spoon as a keto cereal is a great snack. It's really tasty. I don't actually mix It's really tasty. I don't actually mix It's really tasty. I don't actually mix mine with milk. I just eat it directly. mine with milk. I just eat it directly. mine with milk. I just eat it directly. They have a bunch of different flavors. They have a bunch of different flavors. They have a bunch of different flavors. I like the frosted flavor mostly because I like the frosted flavor mostly because I like the frosted flavor mostly because it tastes like donuts and I have a it tastes like donuts and I have a it tastes like donuts and I have a pastry affliction and I love pastries. pastry affliction and I love pastries. pastry affliction and I love pastries. So, Magic Spoon allows me to remain on So, Magic Spoon allows me to remain on So, Magic Spoon allows me to remain on keto during the day. It's healthy, it keto during the day. It's healthy, it keto during the day. It's healthy, it tastes great. I really enjoy it. So, if tastes great. I really enjoy it. So, if tastes great. I really enjoy it. So, if you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman to magicspoon.com/huberman to magicspoon.com/huberman for a variety pack of different flavors. for a variety pack of different flavors. for a variety pack of different flavors. And if you put Huberman at checkout, And if you put Huberman at checkout, And if you put Huberman at checkout, you'll get $5 off the variety pack. you'll get $5 off the variety pack. you'll get $5 off the variety pack. That's magicspoon.com/huberman That's magicspoon.com/huberman That's magicspoon.com/huberman to try a variety pack of different to try a variety pack of different to try a variety pack of different flavors of Magic Spoon keto grain-free flavors of Magic Spoon keto grain-free flavors of Magic Spoon keto grain-free low-carb cereal. Put Huberman at low-carb cereal. Put Huberman at low-carb cereal. Put Huberman at checkout, you get $5 off. checkout, you get $5 off. checkout, you get $5 off. A quick note before we begin today's A quick note before we begin today's A quick note before we begin today's discussion about the neuroscience of discussion about the neuroscience of discussion about the neuroscience of motivation. I'm pleased to announce that we have now I'm pleased to announce that we have now I'm pleased to announce that we have now captioned episodes 1 and 2 in Spanish. captioned episodes 1 and 2 in Spanish. captioned episodes 1 and 2 in Spanish. And soon, all the episodes of the And soon, all the episodes of the And soon, all the episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast will be captioned Huberman Lab podcast will be captioned Huberman Lab podcast will be captioned on YouTube in Spanish. on YouTube in Spanish. on YouTube in Spanish. We've used some of the revenue from the We've used some of the revenue from the We've used some of the revenue from the podcast to hire expert captioners, so it podcast to hire expert captioners, so it podcast to hire expert captioners, so it should be accurate. You might catch a should be accurate. You might catch a should be accurate. You might catch a mistake here or there, or dialect mistake here or there, or dialect mistake here or there, or dialect difference from time to time, but by our read and from time to time, but by our read and from time to time, but by our read and by our experts' reads, by our experts' reads, by our experts' reads, it's all accurate. So, we're very it's all accurate. So, we're very it's all accurate. So, we're very pleased that people who speak Spanish pleased that people who speak Spanish pleased that people who speak Spanish and digest information best in Spanish and digest information best in Spanish and digest information best in Spanish can now digest the information here on can now digest the information here on can now digest the information here on the podcast. Thanks to everyone for the podcast. Thanks to everyone for the podcast. Thanks to everyone for supporting the podcast, which allows us supporting the podcast, which allows us supporting the podcast, which allows us to broaden our reach in these ways. And to broaden our reach in these ways. And to broaden our reach in these ways. And we do hope to expand to other languages we do hope to expand to other languages we do hope to expand to other languages in the very near future. This month, in the very near future. This month, in the very near future. This month, we're talking all about the neuroscience we're talking all about the neuroscience we're talking all about the neuroscience of emotions. And today, we're going to of emotions. And today, we're going to of emotions. And today, we're going to talk about an extremely important topic talk about an extremely important topic talk about an extremely important topic that's central to our daily life, and that's central to our daily life, and that's central to our daily life, and that's motivation. We're going to talk that's motivation. We're going to talk that's motivation. We're going to talk about pleasure and reward. What about pleasure and reward. What about pleasure and reward. What underlies our sense of pleasure or underlies our sense of pleasure or underlies our sense of pleasure or reward? We're going to talk about addictions. We're going to talk about addictions. We're going to talk about addictions. You can't have a discussion about You can't have a discussion about You can't have a discussion about pleasure and reward without having a pleasure and reward without having a pleasure and reward without having a discussion about addictions and the discussion about addictions and the discussion about addictions and the addictive properties of certain addictive properties of certain addictive properties of certain substances, as well as how to break free substances, as well as how to break free substances, as well as how to break free of addiction. of addiction. of addiction. As well, we're going to talk about the As well, we're going to talk about the As well, we're going to talk about the neurochemistry of drive and mindset. So, neurochemistry of drive and mindset. So, neurochemistry of drive and mindset. So, all these themes are woven together in all these themes are woven together in all these themes are woven together in the context of emotions. Each one of the context of emotions. Each one of the context of emotions. Each one of them, of course, could also be its own them, of course, could also be its own them, of course, could also be its own entire month of the podcast, and in entire month of the podcast, and in entire month of the podcast, and in fact, we are going to have an entire fact, we are going to have an entire fact, we are going to have an entire month devoted to addiction. And I have a month devoted to addiction. And I have a month devoted to addiction. And I have a very special guest that's going to be very special guest that's going to be very special guest that's going to be joining us to talk about the science and joining us to talk about the science and joining us to talk about the science and clinical practices that we know are clinical practices that we know are clinical practices that we know are important for understanding and treating important for understanding and treating important for understanding and treating addiction. But for now, let's just talk about the But for now, let's just talk about the But for now, let's just talk about the neuroscience of motivation and reward, neuroscience of motivation and reward, neuroscience of motivation and reward, of pleasure and pain, because those are of pleasure and pain, because those are of pleasure and pain, because those are central to what we think of as emotions, central to what we think of as emotions, central to what we think of as emotions, whether or not we feel good, whether or whether or not we feel good, whether or whether or not we feel good, whether or not we feel we're on track in life, not we feel we're on track in life, not we feel we're on track in life, whether or not we feel we're falling whether or not we feel we're falling whether or not we feel we're falling behind. So, motivation is fundamental to our So, motivation is fundamental to our So, motivation is fundamental to our daily life. It's what allows us to get daily life. It's what allows us to get daily life. It's what allows us to get out of bed in the morning. It's what out of bed in the morning. It's what out of bed in the morning. It's what allows us to pursue long-term goals or allows us to pursue long-term goals or allows us to pursue long-term goals or short-term goals. short-term goals. short-term goals. Motivation and the chemistry of Motivation and the chemistry of Motivation and the chemistry of motivation is tightly wound in with the motivation is tightly wound in with the motivation is tightly wound in with the neurochemistry of movement. In fact, the same single of movement. In fact, the same single of movement. In fact, the same single molecule, dopamine, is responsible for molecule, dopamine, is responsible for molecule, dopamine, is responsible for our sense of motivation and for our sense of motivation and for our sense of motivation and for movement. Even though nerves controlling movement. Even though nerves controlling movement. Even though nerves controlling muscles, so again, these are nerves in muscles, so again, these are nerves in muscles, so again, these are nerves in the spinal cord or brain that move our the spinal cord or brain that move our the spinal cord or brain that move our limbs, the effector chemical there, the one the effector chemical there, the one the effector chemical there, the one that actually causes the muscles to that actually causes the muscles to that actually causes the muscles to twitch, to contract, is acetylcholine. twitch, to contract, is acetylcholine. twitch, to contract, is acetylcholine. In the brain, acetylcholine's In the brain, acetylcholine's In the brain, acetylcholine's responsible for focus. However, whether responsible for focus. However, whether responsible for focus. However, whether or not we move, whether or not we want or not we move, whether or not we want or not we move, whether or not we want to move, whether or not we have the to move, whether or not we have the to move, whether or not we have the desire to overcome desire to overcome desire to overcome barriers of you know, they could be barriers of you know, they could be barriers of you know, they could be social barriers or financial barriers or social barriers or financial barriers or social barriers or financial barriers or time constraints, that depends on this time constraints, that depends on this time constraints, that depends on this molecule we call dopamine. It's a molecule we call dopamine. It's a molecule we call dopamine. It's a fascinating molecule, and it lies at the fascinating molecule, and it lies at the fascinating molecule, and it lies at the center of so many great things in life, center of so many great things in life, center of so many great things in life, and it lies at the center of so many and it lies at the center of so many and it lies at the center of so many terrible aspects of life, namely terrible aspects of life, namely terrible aspects of life, namely addiction and certain forms of mental addiction and certain forms of mental addiction and certain forms of mental disease. So, if ever there was a double-edged So, if ever there was a double-edged So, if ever there was a double-edged blade in the world of neuroscience, it's blade in the world of neuroscience, it's blade in the world of neuroscience, it's dopamine. So, let's talk about what dopamine. So, let's talk about what dopamine. So, let's talk about what dopamine is, and as always, we are going dopamine is, and as always, we are going dopamine is, and as always, we are going to talk about actionable tools. Today, to talk about actionable tools. Today, to talk about actionable tools. Today, we're definitely going to talk about we're definitely going to talk about we're definitely going to talk about some things related to supplementation, some things related to supplementation, some things related to supplementation, although you might be surprised to learn although you might be surprised to learn although you might be surprised to learn that it's not all just about increasing that it's not all just about increasing that it's not all just about increasing dopamine. In particular, in some dopamine. In particular, in some dopamine. In particular, in some cases, that's the wrong thing to do. cases, that's the wrong thing to do. cases, that's the wrong thing to do. Sometimes it's appropriate, sometimes Sometimes it's appropriate, sometimes Sometimes it's appropriate, sometimes it's not. it's not. it's not. More so, we're going to talk about tools More so, we're going to talk about tools More so, we're going to talk about tools related to what's called dopamine related to what's called dopamine related to what's called dopamine scheduling. How the way that you're scheduling. How the way that you're scheduling. How the way that you're leading your life and the way that leading your life and the way that leading your life and the way that you're conceptualizing your goals can you're conceptualizing your goals can you're conceptualizing your goals can actually predict whether or not you're actually predict whether or not you're actually predict whether or not you're going to continue to pursue those goals, going to continue to pursue those goals, going to continue to pursue those goals, and therefore whether or not you will and therefore whether or not you will and therefore whether or not you will succeed in achieving those goals, as succeed in achieving those goals, as succeed in achieving those goals, as well as whether or not you will quit. well as whether or not you will quit. well as whether or not you will quit. There's a fundamental relationship There's a fundamental relationship There's a fundamental relationship between dopamine released in your brain between dopamine released in your brain between dopamine released in your brain and your desire to exert effort. And you and your desire to exert effort. And you and your desire to exert effort. And you can actually control the schedule of can actually control the schedule of can actually control the schedule of dopamine release, but it requires the dopamine release, but it requires the dopamine release, but it requires the appropriate knowledge. This is one of appropriate knowledge. This is one of appropriate knowledge. This is one of those cases where understanding the way those cases where understanding the way those cases where understanding the way the dopamine system works will allow you the dopamine system works will allow you the dopamine system works will allow you to leverage it to your benefit. And if to leverage it to your benefit. And if to leverage it to your benefit. And if you don't understand the way the you don't understand the way the you don't understand the way the dopamine works, there's a good chance dopamine works, there's a good chance dopamine works, there's a good chance that it's going to pull you out into the that it's going to pull you out into the that it's going to pull you out into the current of life, meaning the rest of the current of life, meaning the rest of the current of life, meaning the rest of the world is going to control your dopamine world is going to control your dopamine world is going to control your dopamine schedules. So, I'm excited to tell you schedules. So, I'm excited to tell you schedules. So, I'm excited to tell you about today's information. You're going about today's information. You're going about today's information. You're going to learn some basic science, you're to learn some basic science, you're to learn some basic science, you're going to learn a lot of tools, and these going to learn a lot of tools, and these going to learn a lot of tools, and these tools, I believe, are applicable whether tools, I believe, are applicable whether tools, I believe, are applicable whether or not you're 5 years old, 8 years old, or not you're 5 years old, 8 years old, or not you're 5 years old, 8 years old, 80 years old, or anything in between. 80 years old, or anything in between. 80 years old, or anything in between. So, let's talk about dopamine. Let's get So, let's talk about dopamine. Let's get So, let's talk about dopamine. Let's get a few basic facts on the table. a few basic facts on the table. a few basic facts on the table. Dopamine was discovered in the late Dopamine was discovered in the late Dopamine was discovered in the late 1950s, and it was discovered as the 1950s, and it was discovered as the 1950s, and it was discovered as the precursor, meaning the thing from which precursor, meaning the thing from which precursor, meaning the thing from which epinephrine or adrenaline is made. Now, epinephrine or adrenaline is made. Now, epinephrine or adrenaline is made. Now, that's fundamentally important because that's fundamentally important because that's fundamentally important because this molecule we call dopamine, nowadays this molecule we call dopamine, nowadays this molecule we call dopamine, nowadays we think of as the molecule of reward we think of as the molecule of reward we think of as the molecule of reward and pleasure, but actually, it is the and pleasure, but actually, it is the and pleasure, but actually, it is the substrate from which adrenaline is made. substrate from which adrenaline is made. substrate from which adrenaline is made. And in the brain, it's the substrate And in the brain, it's the substrate And in the brain, it's the substrate from which epinephrine is made. from which epinephrine is made. from which epinephrine is made. Epinephrine is the same thing as Epinephrine is the same thing as Epinephrine is the same thing as adrenaline, except in the brain we call adrenaline, except in the brain we call adrenaline, except in the brain we call it epinephrine. it epinephrine. it epinephrine. Epinephrine, as you may recall from Epinephrine, as you may recall from Epinephrine, as you may recall from previous podcasts, or if you haven't, no previous podcasts, or if you haven't, no previous podcasts, or if you haven't, no problem. Epinephrine problem. Epinephrine problem. Epinephrine allows us to get into action. It allows us to get into action. It allows us to get into action. It stimulates changes in the blood vessels, stimulates changes in the blood vessels, stimulates changes in the blood vessels, in the heart, in the organs and tissues in the heart, in the organs and tissues in the heart, in the organs and tissues of the body that bias us for movement. of the body that bias us for movement. of the body that bias us for movement. And if you'd like to learn more about And if you'd like to learn more about And if you'd like to learn more about epinephrine, you can check out our epinephrine, you can check out our epinephrine, you can check out our episode on mastering stress. We talk a episode on mastering stress. We talk a episode on mastering stress. We talk a lot about it there. lot about it there. lot about it there. Dopamine was initially thought to be Dopamine was initially thought to be Dopamine was initially thought to be just the building block for epinephrine, just the building block for epinephrine, just the building block for epinephrine, and it is indeed the chemical building and it is indeed the chemical building and it is indeed the chemical building block from which epinephrine is made. block from which epinephrine is made. block from which epinephrine is made. However, dopamine does a lot of things However, dopamine does a lot of things However, dopamine does a lot of things on its own. It's not always converted to on its own. It's not always converted to on its own. It's not always converted to epinephrine. Dopamine is released from several sites Dopamine is released from several sites Dopamine is released from several sites in the brain and body, but perhaps the in the brain and body, but perhaps the in the brain and body, but perhaps the most important one for today's most important one for today's most important one for today's discussion about motivation and reward discussion about motivation and reward discussion about motivation and reward is something that's sometimes just is something that's sometimes just is something that's sometimes just called the reward pathway. For the called the reward pathway. For the called the reward pathway. For the aficionados, it's sometimes called the aficionados, it's sometimes called the aficionados, it's sometimes called the mesolimbic reward pathway, mesolimbic reward pathway, mesolimbic reward pathway, but it's fundamentally important to your but it's fundamentally important to your but it's fundamentally important to your desire to engage in action, and it's desire to engage in action, and it's desire to engage in action, and it's fundamentally important for people fundamentally important for people fundamentally important for people getting addicted to substances or getting addicted to substances or getting addicted to substances or behaviors. So, how does this work? Well, behaviors. So, how does this work? Well, behaviors. So, how does this work? Well, you've got a structure in the deep part you've got a structure in the deep part you've got a structure in the deep part of your brain called the VTA. It stands of your brain called the VTA. It stands of your brain called the VTA. It stands for ventral tegmental area. As always, for ventral tegmental area. As always, for ventral tegmental area. As always, you don't have to remember these names, you don't have to remember these names, you don't have to remember these names, but if you want to, I offer them to you but if you want to, I offer them to you but if you want to, I offer them to you for further Googling, research, reading, for further Googling, research, reading, for further Googling, research, reading, etc. The VTA, or ventral tegmental area, The VTA, or ventral tegmental area, The VTA, or ventral tegmental area, contains neurons that send what we call contains neurons that send what we call contains neurons that send what we call axons, or wires, that spit out dopamine axons, or wires, that spit out dopamine axons, or wires, that spit out dopamine at a different structure called the at a different structure called the at a different structure called the nucleus accumbens. And those two nucleus accumbens. And those two nucleus accumbens. And those two structures, VTA and nucleus accumbens, structures, VTA and nucleus accumbens, structures, VTA and nucleus accumbens, form really the core machinery of the reward really the core machinery of the reward really the core machinery of the reward pathway, and the pathway that controls pathway, and the pathway that controls pathway, and the pathway that controls your motivation for anything. You can your motivation for anything. You can your motivation for anything. You can think of them like an accelerator. They think of them like an accelerator. They think of them like an accelerator. They bias you for action. However, within the bias you for action. However, within the bias you for action. However, within the reward pathway, there's also a brake. reward pathway, there's also a brake. reward pathway, there's also a brake. The brake, or restriction on that The brake, or restriction on that The brake, or restriction on that dopamine, which controls when it's dopamine, which controls when it's dopamine, which controls when it's released and how much it's released, is released and how much it's released, is released and how much it's released, is the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is the neural real estate right cortex is the neural real estate right cortex is the neural real estate right behind your forehead. It's discussed for behind your forehead. It's discussed for behind your forehead. It's discussed for so many aspects of neuroscience. You so many aspects of neuroscience. You so many aspects of neuroscience. You hear about it for decision-making, hear about it for decision-making, hear about it for decision-making, executive function, for planning, etc. executive function, for planning, etc. executive function, for planning, etc. And indeed, it's responsible for a lot And indeed, it's responsible for a lot And indeed, it's responsible for a lot of those. It's this really unique real of those. It's this really unique real of those. It's this really unique real estate that we were all endowed with as estate that we were all endowed with as estate that we were all endowed with as humans. Other animals don't have much of humans. Other animals don't have much of humans. Other animals don't have much of it. We have a lot of it. And that it. We have a lot of it. And that it. We have a lot of it. And that prefrontal cortex acts as a brake on the prefrontal cortex acts as a brake on the prefrontal cortex acts as a brake on the dopamine system. Without that brake, you dopamine system. Without that brake, you dopamine system. Without that brake, you would be purely a pleasure-seeking would be purely a pleasure-seeking would be purely a pleasure-seeking animal. You would be purely animal. You would be purely animal. You would be purely pleasure-seeking. You would have no pleasure-seeking. You would have no pleasure-seeking. You would have no basis for regulating basis for regulating basis for regulating your behavior in terms of trying to get your behavior in terms of trying to get your behavior in terms of trying to get things that make you feel good. And that things that make you feel good. And that things that make you feel good. And that brings us brings us brings us to the important feature of motivation, to the important feature of motivation, to the important feature of motivation, which is that motivation is a two-part which is that motivation is a two-part which is that motivation is a two-part process, which is about balancing process, which is about balancing process, which is about balancing pleasure and pain. Okay? Most people pleasure and pain. Okay? Most people pleasure and pain. Okay? Most people think about motivation and reward and think about motivation and reward and think about motivation and reward and dopamine as just trying to achieve dopamine as just trying to achieve dopamine as just trying to achieve pleasure. And indeed, dopamine is pleasure. And indeed, dopamine is pleasure. And indeed, dopamine is released in the brain from the VTA at released in the brain from the VTA at released in the brain from the VTA at the nucleus accumbens the nucleus accumbens the nucleus accumbens when we experience things that we like. when we experience things that we like. when we experience things that we like. So, here's the way to conceptualize So, here's the way to conceptualize So, here's the way to conceptualize this. And if you can internalize this in this. And if you can internalize this in this. And if you can internalize this in your mind, it will really help you as your mind, it will really help you as your mind, it will really help you as you move through your day trying to you move through your day trying to you move through your day trying to understand why you might be motivated or understand why you might be motivated or understand why you might be motivated or not motivated for certain things. So, not motivated for certain things. So, not motivated for certain things. So, when you're just sitting around not when you're just sitting around not when you're just sitting around not doing much of anything, maybe you wake doing much of anything, maybe you wake doing much of anything, maybe you wake up in bed in the morning, you're up in bed in the morning, you're up in bed in the morning, you're thinking about getting up getting up or thinking about getting up getting up or thinking about getting up getting up or not, this reward pathway is releasing this reward pathway is releasing this reward pathway is releasing dopamine at a rate of about three or four times at a rate of about three or four times at a rate of about three or four times per second. It's kind of firing at a low per second. It's kind of firing at a low per second. It's kind of firing at a low level. When I say firing, I mean level. When I say firing, I mean level. When I say firing, I mean electrical activity in the neurons. So, electrical activity in the neurons. So, electrical activity in the neurons. So, when you're just around, you feel okay, when you're just around, you feel okay, when you're just around, you feel okay, not depressed, not highly motivated, not depressed, not highly motivated, not depressed, not highly motivated, not excited, maybe three or four times a excited, maybe three or four times a excited, maybe three or four times a second. If suddenly you get excited about If suddenly you get excited about If suddenly you get excited about something, you anticipate something, you anticipate something, you anticipate something, not receiving a reward, but you get not receiving a reward, but you get not receiving a reward, but you get excited in an anticipatory way, excited in an anticipatory way, excited in an anticipatory way, then the rate of firing, the rate of then the rate of firing, the rate of then the rate of firing, the rate of activity in this reward pathway, activity in this reward pathway, activity in this reward pathway, suddenly increases to like 30 or 40 suddenly increases to like 30 or 40 suddenly increases to like 30 or 40 times. And it has the effect of creating times. And it has the effect of creating times. And it has the effect of creating a sense of action or desire to move in a sense of action or desire to move in a sense of action or desire to move in the direction of the thing that you're the direction of the thing that you're the direction of the thing that you're craving. In fact, it's fair to say that craving. In fact, it's fair to say that craving. In fact, it's fair to say that dopamine is responsible for wanting and dopamine is responsible for wanting and dopamine is responsible for wanting and for craving. And that's distinctly for craving. And that's distinctly for craving. And that's distinctly different from the way that you hear it different from the way that you hear it different from the way that you hear it talked about normally, which is that talked about normally, which is that talked about normally, which is that it's involved in pleasure. So, yes, it's involved in pleasure. So, yes, it's involved in pleasure. So, yes, dopamine is released in response to sex. dopamine is released in response to sex. dopamine is released in response to sex. It's released in response to food. It's released in response to food. It's released in response to food. It's released in response to a lot of things, released in response to a lot of things, released in response to a lot of things, but it's mostly released in anticipation but it's mostly released in anticipation but it's mostly released in anticipation and craving for a particular thing. It and craving for a particular thing. It and craving for a particular thing. It has the effect of narrowing our focus has the effect of narrowing our focus has the effect of narrowing our focus for the thing that we crave. for the thing that we crave. for the thing that we crave. And that thing could be as simple as a And that thing could be as simple as a And that thing could be as simple as a cup of coffee. It could be as cup of coffee. It could be as cup of coffee. It could be as important as a big board meeting. It important as a big board meeting. It important as a big board meeting. It could be a big final exam. It could be could be a big final exam. It could be could be a big final exam. It could be the person that we're excited to meet or the person that we're excited to meet or the person that we're excited to meet or see. Dopamine doesn't care about what see. Dopamine doesn't care about what see. Dopamine doesn't care about what you're craving. It just releases at a you're craving. It just releases at a you're craving. It just releases at a particular rate. particular rate. particular rate. In fact, if we just take a step back and In fact, if we just take a step back and In fact, if we just take a step back and we look at the scientific data on we look at the scientific data on we look at the scientific data on how much the dopamine firing increases how much the dopamine firing increases how much the dopamine firing increases in response to different things, you get in response to different things, you get in response to different things, you get a pretty interesting window into how a pretty interesting window into how a pretty interesting window into how your brain works and why you might be your brain works and why you might be your brain works and why you might be motivated or not motivated. Let's say motivated or not motivated. Let's say motivated or not motivated. Let's say you're hungry. you're hungry. you're hungry. Or you're looking forward to a cup of Or you're looking forward to a cup of Or you're looking forward to a cup of coffee. Or you're going to see your partner. Or you're going to see your partner. Or you're going to see your partner. Well, your dopamine neurons are firing Well, your dopamine neurons are firing Well, your dopamine neurons are firing at a low rate until you start thinking at a low rate until you start thinking at a low rate until you start thinking about the thing that you want or the about the thing that you want or the about the thing that you want or the thing that you're looking forward to. thing that you're looking forward to. thing that you're looking forward to. Let's say you're craving chocolate or a Let's say you're craving chocolate or a Let's say you're craving chocolate or a good meal. Steak, if you like steak. Or good meal. Steak, if you like steak. Or good meal. Steak, if you like steak. Or a nice plate of pasta, if you like a nice plate of pasta, if you like a nice plate of pasta, if you like pasta. When you eat that food, the pasta. When you eat that food, the pasta. When you eat that food, the amount of dopamine that's released in amount of dopamine that's released in amount of dopamine that's released in this reward pathway goes up about 50% this reward pathway goes up about 50% this reward pathway goes up about 50% above baseline. The neurons there go above baseline. The neurons there go above baseline. The neurons there go from firing, you know, three or four from firing, you know, three or four from firing, you know, three or four times per second to, you know, six or 10 times per second to, you know, six or 10 times per second to, you know, six or 10 times per second. It really depends, and times per second. It really depends, and times per second. It really depends, and these aren't exact numbers, but if we these aren't exact numbers, but if we these aren't exact numbers, but if we were to measure the amount of dopamine were to measure the amount of dopamine were to measure the amount of dopamine that's released, it goes up about 50%. that's released, it goes up about 50%. that's released, it goes up about 50%. All right. All right. All right. Sex, which is fundamental to our Sex, which is fundamental to our Sex, which is fundamental to our species' continuation and reproduction, species' continuation and reproduction, species' continuation and reproduction, although it doesn't have to be for although it doesn't have to be for although it doesn't have to be for conceiving children. conceiving children. conceiving children. Sex does release dopamine, and it Sex does release dopamine, and it Sex does release dopamine, and it increases dopamine levels about 100%. increases dopamine levels about 100%. increases dopamine levels about 100%. So, basically doubles them. So, basically doubles them. So, basically doubles them. Nicotine of the sort that's in cigarettes, or of the sort that's in cigarettes, or of the sort that's in cigarettes, or some people are taking nicotine in some people are taking nicotine in some people are taking nicotine in supplemental form, increases the amount supplemental form, increases the amount supplemental form, increases the amount of dopamine about 150% above baseline. of dopamine about 150% above baseline. of dopamine about 150% above baseline. It also does some other things that It also does some other things that It also does some other things that we're going to talk about, but we're going to talk about, but we're going to talk about, but nicotine does that, and it's kind of nicotine does that, and it's kind of nicotine does that, and it's kind of interesting that nicotine would increase interesting that nicotine would increase interesting that nicotine would increase the amount of dopamine in your brain the amount of dopamine in your brain the amount of dopamine in your brain very quickly, very quickly, very quickly, within seconds. within seconds. within seconds. That's 150 times over baseline, as That's 150 times over baseline, as That's 150 times over baseline, as opposed to sex, which is 100% above, or opposed to sex, which is 100% above, or opposed to sex, which is 100% above, or food, which is 50%. food, which is 50%. food, which is 50%. Cocaine and amphetamine increase the Cocaine and amphetamine increase the Cocaine and amphetamine increase the amount of dopamine that's released a amount of dopamine that's released a amount of dopamine that's released a thousandfold within about 10 seconds of thousandfold within about 10 seconds of thousandfold within about 10 seconds of consuming the drug. consuming the drug. consuming the drug. However, just thinking about food, about However, just thinking about food, about However, just thinking about food, about sex, about nicotine, if you like nicotine, or about nicotine, if you like nicotine, or about nicotine, if you like nicotine, or cocaine or amphetamine, can increase the cocaine or amphetamine, can increase the cocaine or amphetamine, can increase the amount of dopamine that's released to amount of dopamine that's released to amount of dopamine that's released to the same degree as actually consuming the same degree as actually consuming the same degree as actually consuming the drug. Now, it depends. In some the drug. Now, it depends. In some the drug. Now, it depends. In some cases, for instance, the cocaine user, cases, for instance, the cocaine user, cases, for instance, the cocaine user, the addict that wants cocaine, can't the addict that wants cocaine, can't the addict that wants cocaine, can't just think about cocaine and increase just think about cocaine and increase just think about cocaine and increase the amount of that's released about a the amount of that's released about a the amount of that's released about a thousandfold. It's actually much lower, thousandfold. It's actually much lower, thousandfold. It's actually much lower, but it's just enough to put them on the but it's just enough to put them on the but it's just enough to put them on the motivation track for it to crave that motivation track for it to crave that motivation track for it to crave that particular thing. Now, there are reasons particular thing. Now, there are reasons particular thing. Now, there are reasons why you would have brain circuitry like why you would have brain circuitry like why you would have brain circuitry like this. I mean, brain circuitry like this this. I mean, brain circuitry like this this. I mean, brain circuitry like this didn't evolve to get you addicted. Brain didn't evolve to get you addicted. Brain didn't evolve to get you addicted. Brain circuitry like this circuitry like this circuitry like this evolved in order to motivate behaviors toward in order to motivate behaviors toward in order to motivate behaviors toward particular goals. Water, when you're particular goals. Water, when you're particular goals. Water, when you're thirsty. Sex, in order to reproduce. And thirsty. Sex, in order to reproduce. And thirsty. Sex, in order to reproduce. And we're going to talk about the we're going to talk about the we're going to talk about the relationship between estrogen and relationship between estrogen and relationship between estrogen and testosterone in the dopamine system, testosterone in the dopamine system, testosterone in the dopamine system, because those hormones actually bias because those hormones actually bias because those hormones actually bias dopamine to be released. dopamine to be released. dopamine to be released. These things and these brain areas and These things and these brain areas and These things and these brain areas and neurons were part of the evolutionary neurons were part of the evolutionary neurons were part of the evolutionary history that led to the continuation of history that led to the continuation of history that led to the continuation of our species. our species. our species. Things like cocaine and amphetamine are Things like cocaine and amphetamine are Things like cocaine and amphetamine are disastrous for most people because they disastrous for most people because they disastrous for most people because they release so much dopamine and they create release so much dopamine and they create release so much dopamine and they create these closed loops where people then these closed loops where people then these closed loops where people then only crave the particular thing, cocaine only crave the particular thing, cocaine only crave the particular thing, cocaine and amphetamine, that leads to those and amphetamine, that leads to those and amphetamine, that leads to those massive amounts of dopamine release. massive amounts of dopamine release. massive amounts of dopamine release. Most things don't release that Most things don't release that Most things don't release that level of dopamine. Now nowadays, there's level of dopamine. Now nowadays, there's level of dopamine. Now nowadays, there's a ton of interest in social media and in a ton of interest in social media and in a ton of interest in social media and in video games. And it there have been some video games. And it there have been some video games. And it there have been some measurements of the amount of dopamine measurements of the amount of dopamine measurements of the amount of dopamine released. Video games, especially video released. Video games, especially video released. Video games, especially video games that have a very high update games that have a very high update games that have a very high update speed, where there's novel territory all speed, where there's novel territory all speed, where there's novel territory all the time, novelty is a big stimulus of the time, novelty is a big stimulus of the time, novelty is a big stimulus of dopamine, those can release dopamine dopamine, those can release dopamine dopamine, those can release dopamine somewhere between nicotine and cocaine. somewhere between nicotine and cocaine. somewhere between nicotine and cocaine. So very high levels of dopamine release. So very high levels of dopamine release. So very high levels of dopamine release. Social media is an interesting one Social media is an interesting one Social media is an interesting one because the amount of dopamine that's because the amount of dopamine that's because the amount of dopamine that's released in response to logging on to released in response to logging on to released in response to logging on to social media initially could be quite social media initially could be quite social media initially could be quite high, but it seems like likely that high, but it seems like likely that high, but it seems like likely that there's a taper in the amount of there's a taper in the amount of there's a taper in the amount of dopamine, but and yet people still get dopamine, but and yet people still get dopamine, but and yet people still get addicted. So why? Why is it that we can addicted. So why? Why is it that we can addicted. So why? Why is it that we can get addicted to things that fail to get addicted to things that fail to get addicted to things that fail to get to elicit the same massive amount of to elicit the same massive amount of to elicit the same massive amount of pleasure that they initially did? pleasure that they initially did? pleasure that they initially did? Being addicted to something isn't just Being addicted to something isn't just Being addicted to something isn't just about the fact that it feels so good about the fact that it feels so good about the fact that it feels so good that you want to do it over and over that you want to do it over and over that you want to do it over and over again, and that's because of this again, and that's because of this again, and that's because of this pleasure-pain balance that underlies motivation. So balance that underlies motivation. So balance that underlies motivation. So let's look a little bit closer at the let's look a little bit closer at the let's look a little bit closer at the pleasure-pain balance because therein pleasure-pain balance because therein pleasure-pain balance because therein lies the tools for you to be able to lies the tools for you to be able to lies the tools for you to be able to control motivation toward healthy things control motivation toward healthy things control motivation toward healthy things and avoid motivated behaviors towards and avoid motivated behaviors towards and avoid motivated behaviors towards things that are destructive for you. things that are destructive for you. things that are destructive for you. There are a lot of reasons why people There are a lot of reasons why people There are a lot of reasons why people try novel behaviors, whether or not try novel behaviors, whether or not try novel behaviors, whether or not those are drugs or whether or not those are drugs or whether or not those are drugs or whether or not those are adventure thrill-seeking things or are adventure thrill-seeking things or are adventure thrill-seeking things or they seek out new partners they seek out new partners they seek out new partners or, you know, they take a new class. As or, you know, they take a new class. As or, you know, they take a new class. As you'll notice, I'm not placing any you'll notice, I'm not placing any you'll notice, I'm not placing any judgment or value on these different judgment or value on these different judgment or value on these different behaviors. Although I think it's fair to behaviors. Although I think it's fair to behaviors. Although I think it's fair to point out that for most people point out that for most people point out that for most people addictive drugs like cocaine and addictive drugs like cocaine and addictive drugs like cocaine and amphetamine are very destructive. amphetamine are very destructive. amphetamine are very destructive. Actually, we know that about 15 to 20% Actually, we know that about 15 to 20% Actually, we know that about 15 to 20% of people have a genetic bias towards of people have a genetic bias towards of people have a genetic bias towards addiction. That addiction. That addiction. That you know, you sometimes hear that the you know, you sometimes hear that the you know, you sometimes hear that the first time that you use a drug, you can first time that you use a drug, you can first time that you use a drug, you can become addicted to it. That's actually become addicted to it. That's actually become addicted to it. That's actually not been shown to be true for most not been shown to be true for most not been shown to be true for most things and most people, but for some things and most people, but for some things and most people, but for some people that actually is true. And we'll people that actually is true. And we'll people that actually is true. And we'll talk a little bit later about why talk a little bit later about why talk a little bit later about why certain people are heavily biased toward certain people are heavily biased toward certain people are heavily biased toward becoming addicts on the first use of a becoming addicts on the first use of a becoming addicts on the first use of a particular drug. It's actually very particular drug. It's actually very particular drug. It's actually very interesting. It has everything to do interesting. It has everything to do interesting. It has everything to do with whether or not they were formally with whether or not they were formally with whether or not they were formally addicted to something else. addicted to something else. addicted to something else. But in any case, the way that addiction But in any case, the way that addiction But in any case, the way that addiction works and the way that motivation works and the way that motivation works and the way that motivation works generally in the non-addictive setting generally in the non-addictive setting generally in the non-addictive setting is that when you anticipate something, a is that when you anticipate something, a is that when you anticipate something, a little bit of dopamine is released. And little bit of dopamine is released. And little bit of dopamine is released. And then when you reach that thing, you then when you reach that thing, you then when you reach that thing, you engage in that thing, engage in that thing, engage in that thing, the amount of dopamine goes up even the amount of dopamine goes up even the amount of dopamine goes up even further. But as you repeatedly pursue a further. But as you repeatedly pursue a further. But as you repeatedly pursue a behavior and you repeatedly engage with behavior and you repeatedly engage with behavior and you repeatedly engage with a particular thing, let's say you love a particular thing, let's say you love a particular thing, let's say you love running or you love chocolate. As you running or you love chocolate. As you running or you love chocolate. As you eat a piece of chocolate, believe it or eat a piece of chocolate, believe it or eat a piece of chocolate, believe it or not, it tastes good. And then there's a not, it tastes good. And then there's a not, it tastes good. And then there's a shift away from activation of dopamine shift away from activation of dopamine shift away from activation of dopamine and there are other chemicals that are and there are other chemicals that are and there are other chemicals that are released that trigger a low-level sense released that trigger a low-level sense released that trigger a low-level sense of pain. Now, you might not feel it as of pain. Now, you might not feel it as of pain. Now, you might not feel it as physical pain, but the craving that you physical pain, but the craving that you physical pain, but the craving that you feel is both one part dopamine and one feel is both one part dopamine and one feel is both one part dopamine and one part the mirror image of dopamine, which part the mirror image of dopamine, which part the mirror image of dopamine, which is the pain or the craving for yet is the pain or the craving for yet is the pain or the craving for yet another piece of chocolate. And this is another piece of chocolate. And this is another piece of chocolate. And this is a very important and subtle feature of a very important and subtle feature of a very important and subtle feature of the dopamine system that's not often the dopamine system that's not often the dopamine system that's not often discussed. People always talk about just discussed. People always talk about just discussed. People always talk about just as pleasure. You love social media, so as pleasure. You love social media, so as pleasure. You love social media, so it gives you dopamine and so you engage it gives you dopamine and so you engage it gives you dopamine and so you engage in that. You like chocolate, it releases in that. You like chocolate, it releases in that. You like chocolate, it releases dopamine, so you do that. But for every dopamine, so you do that. But for every dopamine, so you do that. But for every bit of dopamine that's released, there's bit of dopamine that's released, there's bit of dopamine that's released, there's another circuit in the brain that another circuit in the brain that another circuit in the brain that creates you can think of it as kind of creates you can think of it as kind of creates you can think of it as kind of like a downward deflection in pleasure. like a downward deflection in pleasure. like a downward deflection in pleasure. So, you engage in something you really So, you engage in something you really So, you engage in something you really want and there's an increase in want and there's an increase in want and there's an increase in pleasure. And then there's a pleasure. And then there's a pleasure. And then there's a without you doing anything, there's a mirror you doing anything, there's a mirror you doing anything, there's a mirror image of that, which is a downward image of that, which is a downward image of that, which is a downward deflection in pleasure, which we're deflection in pleasure, which we're deflection in pleasure, which we're calling pain. So, for every bit of calling pain. So, for every bit of calling pain. So, for every bit of pleasure, there is a mirror image pleasure, there is a mirror image pleasure, there is a mirror image experience of pain, and they overlap in experience of pain, and they overlap in experience of pain, and they overlap in time very closely, so it's sometimes time very closely, so it's sometimes time very closely, so it's sometimes hard to sense this. But, try it. The hard to sense this. But, try it. The hard to sense this. But, try it. The next time you eat something really next time you eat something really next time you eat something really delicious, you'll take a bite, it tastes delicious, you'll take a bite, it tastes delicious, you'll take a bite, it tastes delicious, and part of the experience is delicious, and part of the experience is delicious, and part of the experience is to want more of that thing. This is true to want more of that thing. This is true to want more of that thing. This is true for any pleasurable experience. for any pleasurable experience. for any pleasurable experience. Now, the diabolical part about dopamine Now, the diabolical part about dopamine Now, the diabolical part about dopamine is that because it didn't evolve in is that because it didn't evolve in is that because it didn't evolve in order to get you to indulge in more and order to get you to indulge in more and order to get you to indulge in more and more and more of something, what happens more and more of something, what happens more and more of something, what happens is that is that is that initially, you experience an increase initially, you experience an increase initially, you experience an increase in pleasure, and you also experience in pleasure, and you also experience in pleasure, and you also experience this increase in pain shortly after or this increase in pain shortly after or this increase in pain shortly after or woven in with the pleasure, woven in with the pleasure, woven in with the pleasure, that makes you want more of that thing. that makes you want more of that thing. that makes you want more of that thing. But, with each subsequent time that you But, with each subsequent time that you But, with each subsequent time that you encounter that thing, that you pursue encounter that thing, that you pursue encounter that thing, that you pursue the chocolate, that you the chocolate, that you the chocolate, that you pursue the lover, each time, the you pursue the lover, each time, the you pursue the lover, each time, the experience of dopamine release and experience of dopamine release and experience of dopamine release and pleasure is diminished a little bit. pleasure is diminished a little bit. pleasure is diminished a little bit. And the diabolical thing is that the And the diabolical thing is that the And the diabolical thing is that the pain response is increased a little bit. pain response is increased a little bit. pain response is increased a little bit. And this is best observed in the context And this is best observed in the context And this is best observed in the context of drug-seeking behavior. The first time of drug-seeking behavior. The first time of drug-seeking behavior. The first time someone decides to take cocaine or someone decides to take cocaine or someone decides to take cocaine or amphetamine, they may do it out of boredom, they may they may do it out of boredom, they may they may do it out of boredom, they may do it out of peer pressure, they may do it out of peer pressure, they may do it out of peer pressure, they may do it to relieve some internal sense, maybe it to relieve some internal sense, maybe it to relieve some internal sense, maybe they're bored or they're just excited, they're bored or they're just excited, they're bored or they're just excited, maybe they're high in novel- maybe they're high in novel- maybe they're high in novel- novelty-seeking. There are a lot of novelty-seeking. There are a lot of novelty-seeking. There are a lot of reasons why people might try a drug, far reasons why people might try a drug, far reasons why people might try a drug, far too many for us to, you know, to get too many for us to, you know, to get too many for us to, you know, to get into or parse here. into or parse here. into or parse here. Maybe they don't even want to do it, but Maybe they don't even want to do it, but Maybe they don't even want to do it, but someone encourages them. They will someone encourages them. They will someone encourages them. They will experience a huge dopamine release, and experience a huge dopamine release, and experience a huge dopamine release, and they will feel likely very good. they will feel likely very good. they will feel likely very good. However, the next time they take it, it However, the next time they take it, it However, the next time they take it, it won't feel quite as good, and it won't feel quite as good, and it won't feel quite as good, and it won't feel even as good the third time or the feel even as good the third time or the feel even as good the third time or the next time. next time. next time. But, the amount of pain, the amount of the amount of pain, the amount of the amount of pain, the amount of craving that they experience for the craving that they experience for the craving that they experience for the drug will increase over time. So, much drug will increase over time. So, much drug will increase over time. So, much of our pursuit of pleasure is simply to of our pursuit of pleasure is simply to of our pursuit of pleasure is simply to reduce the pain of craving. So, the next reduce the pain of craving. So, the next reduce the pain of craving. So, the next time you experience something you really time you experience something you really time you experience something you really like, I don't want to take you out of like, I don't want to take you out of like, I don't want to take you out of that experience, but it's really that experience, but it's really that experience, but it's really important that you notice this. important that you notice this. important that you notice this. That if there's something you really That if there's something you really That if there's something you really enjoy, part of that enjoyment is about enjoy, part of that enjoyment is about enjoy, part of that enjoyment is about the anticipation and wanting of more of the anticipation and wanting of more of the anticipation and wanting of more of that thing. that thing. that thing. And that's the pain system in action. And that's the pain system in action. And that's the pain system in action. And so, we can distinguish between And so, we can distinguish between And so, we can distinguish between dopamine, which is really about dopamine, which is really about dopamine, which is really about pleasure, and dopamine, which is really pleasure, and dopamine, which is really pleasure, and dopamine, which is really about motivation to pursue more in order about motivation to pursue more in order about motivation to pursue more in order to relieve or exclude future pain. Let to relieve or exclude future pain. Let to relieve or exclude future pain. Let me repeat that. Dopamine isn't as much me repeat that. Dopamine isn't as much me repeat that. Dopamine isn't as much about pleasure as much as it is about pleasure as much as it is about pleasure as much as it is about motivation and desire to pursue more in motivation and desire to pursue more in motivation and desire to pursue more in order to reduce the amount of pain. order to reduce the amount of pain. order to reduce the amount of pain. And we are now talking about pain as a And we are now talking about pain as a And we are now talking about pain as a psychological pain and a craving, psychological pain and a craving, psychological pain and a craving, although people that miss a lover very although people that miss a lover very although people that miss a lover very badly or that really crave a food very badly or that really crave a food very badly or that really crave a food very badly or that are or that are or that are addicted to a drug and can't access it addicted to a drug and can't access it addicted to a drug and can't access it will experience that as a physical will experience that as a physical will experience that as a physical craving and a mental craving. The body craving and a mental craving. The body craving and a mental craving. The body and brain are linked in this way. It's and brain are linked in this way. It's and brain are linked in this way. It's almost they'll describe it as painful. almost they'll describe it as painful. almost they'll describe it as painful. They yearn for it. And I think the word They yearn for it. And I think the word They yearn for it. And I think the word yearning is one that's very valuable in yearning is one that's very valuable in yearning is one that's very valuable in this context because yearning seems to this context because yearning seems to this context because yearning seems to include a whole body experience more include a whole body experience more include a whole body experience more than just wanting, which could just be than just wanting, which could just be than just wanting, which could just be up in the mind. up in the mind. up in the mind. So, your desire for something is So, your desire for something is So, your desire for something is proportional to how proportional to how proportional to how pleasurable it is to indulge in that pleasurable it is to indulge in that pleasurable it is to indulge in that thing, but also how much pain you thing, but also how much pain you thing, but also how much pain you experience when you don't have it. And experience when you don't have it. And experience when you don't have it. And you can now start to let your mind you can now start to let your mind you can now start to let your mind wander into all sorts of examples of wander into all sorts of examples of wander into all sorts of examples of addictions or things that you happen to addictions or things that you happen to addictions or things that you happen to like. Um I'll use the example that I like. Um I'll use the example that I like. Um I'll use the example that I sometimes use on here, which is my love sometimes use on here, which is my love sometimes use on here, which is my love of croissants, although several of you of croissants, although several of you of croissants, although several of you pointed out these are called quason, but pointed out these are called quason, but pointed out these are called quason, but then it sounds like I'm trying to speak then it sounds like I'm trying to speak then it sounds like I'm trying to speak French, and I always tried to do that French, and I always tried to do that French, and I always tried to do that when I was a kid, and I went to a when I was a kid, and I went to a when I was a kid, and I went to a bilingual school, and it failed then, bilingual school, and it failed then, bilingual school, and it failed then, and it's going to fail now. So, I'm and it's going to fail now. So, I'm and it's going to fail now. So, I'm going to call them croissants. Um going to call them croissants. Um going to call them croissants. Um they're delicious. I love them. A really they're delicious. I love them. A really they're delicious. I love them. A really good one makes me want to eat six. It's good one makes me want to eat six. It's good one makes me want to eat six. It's true. I have pretty good impulse true. I have pretty good impulse true. I have pretty good impulse control, I think, but it makes me want control, I think, but it makes me want control, I think, but it makes me want to eat six. I taste it and it tastes so to eat six. I taste it and it tastes so to eat six. I taste it and it tastes so delicious and unless I really delicious and unless I really delicious and unless I really force myself to experience the taste of force myself to experience the taste of force myself to experience the taste of it in my mouth and how flaky I'm getting it in my mouth and how flaky I'm getting it in my mouth and how flaky I'm getting hungry for it right now and delicious hungry for it right now and delicious hungry for it right now and delicious the croissant is, mostly the taste of the croissant is, mostly the taste of the croissant is, mostly the taste of that croissant makes me want to eat more that croissant makes me want to eat more that croissant makes me want to eat more croissants. Now, eventually blood sugar croissants. Now, eventually blood sugar croissants. Now, eventually blood sugar goes up, satiety is reached, etc. What goes up, satiety is reached, etc. What goes up, satiety is reached, etc. What happens then? What is satisfaction and happens then? What is satisfaction and happens then? What is satisfaction and satiety about? Well, that's a separate satiety about? Well, that's a separate satiety about? Well, that's a separate neuromodulator. That's about the neuromodulator. That's about the neuromodulator. That's about the neuromodulator serotonin. It's about neuromodulator serotonin. It's about neuromodulator serotonin. It's about oxytocin. It's about a hormone system oxytocin. It's about a hormone system oxytocin. It's about a hormone system that involves something called that involves something called that involves something called prolactin. So, we're going to talk about prolactin. So, we're going to talk about prolactin. So, we're going to talk about all of those in the book The all of those in the book The all of those in the book The Molecule of More, wonderful book. Molecule of More, wonderful book. Molecule of More, wonderful book. Uh those were described as the here and now those were described as the here and now those were described as the here and now molecules, the ones that allow you to molecules, the ones that allow you to molecules, the ones that allow you to experience your sensations and pleasure experience your sensations and pleasure experience your sensations and pleasure in the present and for which the brain in the present and for which the brain in the present and for which the brain stops projecting into the future. So, stops projecting into the future. So, stops projecting into the future. So, now let's talk about craving and now let's talk about craving and now let's talk about craving and these so-called here and now molecules these so-called here and now molecules these so-called here and now molecules and how those engage in a kind of and how those engage in a kind of and how those engage in a kind of push-pull balance that will allow you to push-pull balance that will allow you to push-pull balance that will allow you to not just feel more motivated, but also not just feel more motivated, but also not just feel more motivated, but also to enjoy the things in life that you are to enjoy the things in life that you are to enjoy the things in life that you are pursuing to a much greater degree. pursuing to a much greater degree. pursuing to a much greater degree. We have neurons in an area of our brain We have neurons in an area of our brain We have neurons in an area of our brain called the raphe, r a p h e. The raphe called the raphe, r a p h e. The raphe called the raphe, r a p h e. The raphe releases serotonin at different places releases serotonin at different places releases serotonin at different places in the brain. Serotonin is the molecule in the brain. Serotonin is the molecule in the brain. Serotonin is the molecule of bliss and contentment for what you of bliss and contentment for what you of bliss and contentment for what you already have. already have. already have. I've talked before about exteroception. I've talked before about exteroception. I've talked before about exteroception. Exteroception is a focus on the outside Exteroception is a focus on the outside Exteroception is a focus on the outside world, everything beyond the confines of world, everything beyond the confines of world, everything beyond the confines of your skin. your skin. your skin. I've also talked about interoception, a I've also talked about interoception, a I've also talked about interoception, a focus on things that are happening focus on things that are happening focus on things that are happening internally, within the confines of your internally, within the confines of your internally, within the confines of your skin. Dopamine and serotonin and serotonin and serotonin can be thought of as related to can be thought of as related to can be thought of as related to exteroception. Dopamine makes us focused exteroception. Dopamine makes us focused exteroception. Dopamine makes us focused on things outside us that are beyond on things outside us that are beyond on things outside us that are beyond what we call our personal space, where what we call our personal space, where what we call our personal space, where we actually have to move and take action we actually have to move and take action we actually have to move and take action in order to achieve things. And in order to achieve things. And in order to achieve things. And serotonin in general has to do with the serotonin in general has to do with the serotonin in general has to do with the things that are in our immediate here things that are in our immediate here things that are in our immediate here and now. Hence the description of these and now. Hence the description of these and now. Hence the description of these as the here and now molecules. as the here and now molecules. as the here and now molecules. So, it's interesting to point out that So, it's interesting to point out that So, it's interesting to point out that the body and the brain can the body and the brain can the body and the brain can direct its attention towards things direct its attention towards things direct its attention towards things outside us or inside us or split our outside us or inside us or split our outside us or inside us or split our attention between those. I talked about attention between those. I talked about attention between those. I talked about this in a previous podcast, but if you this in a previous podcast, but if you this in a previous podcast, but if you didn't see it, no problem. didn't see it, no problem. didn't see it, no problem. Just understand that dopamine biases us Just understand that dopamine biases us Just understand that dopamine biases us toward thinking about what we don't toward thinking about what we don't toward thinking about what we don't have, whereas serotonin and some of the have, whereas serotonin and some of the have, whereas serotonin and some of the related molecules, like the related molecules, like the related molecules, like the endocannabinoids, if you picked up on the word if you picked up on the word if you picked up on the word cannabinoid, yes, it's like cannabis cannabinoid, yes, it's like cannabis cannabinoid, yes, it's like cannabis because cannabis because cannabis because cannabis attaches to endocannabinoid receptors, attaches to endocannabinoid receptors, attaches to endocannabinoid receptors, and the endocannabinoids are receptors and the endocannabinoids are receptors and the endocannabinoids are receptors that and chemicals that the cannabinoids that and chemicals that the cannabinoids that and chemicals that the cannabinoids that you naturally make that are that you naturally make that are that you naturally make that are involved in things like forgetting. involved in things like forgetting. involved in things like forgetting. It's not a coincidence that pot smokers It's not a coincidence that pot smokers It's not a coincidence that pot smokers don't have the most terrific memory. You don't have the most terrific memory. You don't have the most terrific memory. You may know a few that have great memories, may know a few that have great memories, may know a few that have great memories, but chances are they would have even but chances are they would have even but chances are they would have even better memories if they weren't pot better memories if they weren't pot better memories if they weren't pot smokers. But you make these molecules that bind But you make these molecules that bind But you make these molecules that bind to these receptors that make you feel to these receptors that make you feel to these receptors that make you feel kind of blissed out and content in the kind of blissed out and content in the kind of blissed out and content in the present. Those are receptors that exist present. Those are receptors that exist present. Those are receptors that exist in us not for sake of in us not for sake of in us not for sake of consuming THC or marijuana, but for sake consuming THC or marijuana, but for sake consuming THC or marijuana, but for sake of binding of our natural endogenous of binding of our natural endogenous of binding of our natural endogenous cannabinoids. So, you got these two cannabinoids. So, you got these two cannabinoids. So, you got these two systems. They're kind of like a systems. They're kind of like a systems. They're kind of like a push-pull. And if you were to say do the you know, And if you were to say do the you know, And if you were to say do the you know, in the book Wherever You Go, There You in the book Wherever You Go, There You in the book Wherever You Go, There You Are, Jon Kabat-Zinn talks about this Are, Jon Kabat-Zinn talks about this Are, Jon Kabat-Zinn talks about this meditation practice that's different meditation practice that's different meditation practice that's different than most meditation practices where you than most meditation practices where you than most meditation practices where you eat one almond and you focus all of your eat one almond and you focus all of your eat one almond and you focus all of your attention on the almond, the taste of attention on the almond, the taste of attention on the almond, the taste of the almond, the texture of the almond. the almond, the texture of the almond. the almond, the texture of the almond. That's really a mindfulness practice That's really a mindfulness practice That's really a mindfulness practice that's geared towards trying to take a that's geared towards trying to take a that's geared towards trying to take a behavior, which is normally about behavior, which is normally about behavior, which is normally about pursuit, normally feeding is we were pursuit, normally feeding is we were pursuit, normally feeding is we were going engage in feeding because of going engage in feeding because of going engage in feeding because of dopamine, we pursue more of a food dopamine, we pursue more of a food dopamine, we pursue more of a food because of that pleasure-pain because of that pleasure-pain because of that pleasure-pain relationship I talked about before. The relationship I talked about before. The relationship I talked about before. The focus on the one almond or the or focus on the one almond or the or focus on the one almond or the or becoming very present in any behavior becoming very present in any behavior becoming very present in any behavior that normally would be a kind of that normally would be a kind of that normally would be a kind of exteroceptive pursuit behavior and bring exteroceptive pursuit behavior and bring exteroceptive pursuit behavior and bring it into the here and now, that's a it into the here and now, that's a it into the here and now, that's a mental trick or a mental task that the trick or a mental task that the trick or a mental task that the mindfulness community has really mindfulness community has really mindfulness community has really embraced in order to try and create embraced in order to try and create embraced in order to try and create increased pleasure for what you already increased pleasure for what you already increased pleasure for what you already have. It's really trying to accomplish a have. It's really trying to accomplish a have. It's really trying to accomplish a shift from dopamine being released to shift from dopamine being released to shift from dopamine being released to serotonin and the cannabinoid system serotonin and the cannabinoid system serotonin and the cannabinoid system being involved in that behavior. So, if being involved in that behavior. So, if being involved in that behavior. So, if you're interested in mindfulness, which you're interested in mindfulness, which you're interested in mindfulness, which is something I've talked about before in is something I've talked about before in is something I've talked about before in this podcast and I sort of made some this podcast and I sort of made some this podcast and I sort of made some off-the-cuff jokes about the opposite of off-the-cuff jokes about the opposite of off-the-cuff jokes about the opposite of mindfulness being mindlessness. mindfulness being mindlessness. mindfulness being mindlessness. Mindfulness is a vast space that is a Mindfulness is a vast space that is a Mindfulness is a vast space that is a mindful practice that a lot of people mindful practice that a lot of people mindful practice that a lot of people have engaged in and indeed it can give have engaged in and indeed it can give have engaged in and indeed it can give you deeper appreciation for things that you deeper appreciation for things that you deeper appreciation for things that you already have. Dopamine has the you already have. Dopamine has the you already have. Dopamine has the quality of making people kind of rapidly quality of making people kind of rapidly quality of making people kind of rapidly in pursuit of things. Look at people who in pursuit of things. Look at people who in pursuit of things. Look at people who are high on cocaine or amphetamine and are high on cocaine or amphetamine and are high on cocaine or amphetamine and they are almost entirely exteroceptive. they are almost entirely exteroceptive. they are almost entirely exteroceptive. Drugs like marijuana, Drugs like marijuana, Drugs like marijuana, the opioids, the opioids, the opioids, anything that um really hits the anything that um really hits the anything that um really hits the serotonin system hard tend to make serotonin system hard tend to make serotonin system hard tend to make people rather lethargic and content to people rather lethargic and content to people rather lethargic and content to stay exactly where they are. They don't stay exactly where they are. They don't stay exactly where they are. They don't want to pursue much at all. Uh want to pursue much at all. Uh want to pursue much at all. Uh occasionally when people uh occasionally when people uh occasionally when people uh smoke marijuana or consume THC, their smoke marijuana or consume THC, their smoke marijuana or consume THC, their appetite goes way up and they really appetite goes way up and they really appetite goes way up and they really want to consume food. That's because of want to consume food. That's because of want to consume food. That's because of its effects on insulin and its effects its effects on insulin and its effects its effects on insulin and its effects on blood sugar, which is a slightly on blood sugar, which is a slightly on blood sugar, which is a slightly separate matter. But since some of you separate matter. But since some of you separate matter. But since some of you uh probably your minds might have gone uh probably your minds might have gone uh probably your minds might have gone uh to your to those either experiences uh to your to those either experiences uh to your to those either experiences or reports of what pot does, um that's or reports of what pot does, um that's or reports of what pot does, um that's why it does that. why it does that. why it does that. So, you've got these molecules like So, you've got these molecules like So, you've got these molecules like dopamine that make you focused on the dopamine that make you focused on the dopamine that make you focused on the things you want and the things you crave things you want and the things you crave things you want and the things you crave and then you've got the molecules that and then you've got the molecules that and then you've got the molecules that make you content with what you have. So, make you content with what you have. So, make you content with what you have. So, the most important thing the most important thing the most important thing perhaps in creating a healthy emotional perhaps in creating a healthy emotional perhaps in creating a healthy emotional landscape is to have a balance between landscape is to have a balance between landscape is to have a balance between these two neuromodulator systems. People these two neuromodulator systems. People these two neuromodulator systems. People that are always in anticipation and that are always in anticipation and that are always in anticipation and desire and seeking, desire and seeking, desire and seeking, that's wonderful for pursuing goals. that's wonderful for pursuing goals. that's wonderful for pursuing goals. However, it's terrible for enjoying However, it's terrible for enjoying However, it's terrible for enjoying life. And actually, those people are life. And actually, those people are life. And actually, those people are actually quite difficult to be around. actually quite difficult to be around. actually quite difficult to be around. There's a certain, almost um sociopathic There's a certain, almost um sociopathic There's a certain, almost um sociopathic element to people who are what they call element to people who are what they call element to people who are what they call hyper dopaminergic, people who are hyper dopaminergic, people who are hyper dopaminergic, people who are always on the dopaminergic scale. always on the dopaminergic scale. always on the dopaminergic scale. To the point where they are always To the point where they are always To the point where they are always pursuing goals. In fact, those people pursuing goals. In fact, those people pursuing goals. In fact, those people are known to be um at least in the are known to be um at least in the are known to be um at least in the psychological spectrum, they can be very psychological spectrum, they can be very psychological spectrum, they can be very manipulative. You know, dopamine and the manipulative. You know, dopamine and the manipulative. You know, dopamine and the pursuit of something doesn't necessarily pursuit of something doesn't necessarily pursuit of something doesn't necessarily have to be high energy and intense from have to be high energy and intense from have to be high energy and intense from the outside when you observe it from the outside when you observe it from the outside when you observe it from the outside. In fact, um there are people outside. In fact, um there are people outside. In fact, um there are people who will manipulate in order to get what who will manipulate in order to get what who will manipulate in order to get what they want. This has been shown, who have they want. This has been shown, who have they want. This has been shown, who have high levels of dopamine release in their high levels of dopamine release in their high levels of dopamine release in their brain, but they've learned that a kind brain, but they've learned that a kind brain, but they've learned that a kind of passive manipulation is the best way of passive manipulation is the best way of passive manipulation is the best way to maneuver through a particular to maneuver through a particular to maneuver through a particular environment. I don't want to focus too environment. I don't want to focus too environment. I don't want to focus too much on um sociopathy because those are much on um sociopathy because those are much on um sociopathy because those are kind of extreme examples. kind of extreme examples. kind of extreme examples. But, it just goes to show that people But, it just goes to show that people But, it just goes to show that people who identify a goal and realize the who identify a goal and realize the who identify a goal and realize the series of steps that they need to take series of steps that they need to take series of steps that they need to take in order to achieve that goal can either in order to achieve that goal can either in order to achieve that goal can either do it through ethical means or do it through ethical means or do it through ethical means or non-ethical means. They can do it non-ethical means. They can do it non-ethical means. They can do it through active pursuit, being the kind through active pursuit, being the kind through active pursuit, being the kind of type A person that's always declaring of type A person that's always declaring of type A person that's always declaring their goals and going after it, posting their goals and going after it, posting their goals and going after it, posting it on Instagram, telling everybody about it on Instagram, telling everybody about it on Instagram, telling everybody about it, trying to recruit others. There's it, trying to recruit others. There's it, trying to recruit others. There's that phenotype. that phenotype. that phenotype. There's that kind of signature of There's that kind of signature of There's that kind of signature of dopamine. And then there are the people dopamine. And then there are the people dopamine. And then there are the people that want to get what they want and that want to get what they want and that want to get what they want and they're doing it by always serving other they're doing it by always serving other they're doing it by always serving other people, by always taking care of people, by always taking care of people, by always taking care of everybody else's needs, by always trying everybody else's needs, by always trying everybody else's needs, by always trying to accomplish their goals, but through a to accomplish their goals, but through a to accomplish their goals, but through a mode that at least from the outside mode that at least from the outside mode that at least from the outside seems more passive or more about seems more passive or more about seems more passive or more about supporting others. Neither of these are supporting others. Neither of these are supporting others. Neither of these are good or bad, and that's because dopamine good or bad, and that's because dopamine good or bad, and that's because dopamine is a molecule. It doesn't care how you is a molecule. It doesn't care how you is a molecule. It doesn't care how you reach your goals. It only cares that you reach your goals. It only cares that you reach your goals. It only cares that you reach your goals because the sense the reach your goals because the sense the reach your goals because the sense the internal sensation is one, again, of internal sensation is one, again, of internal sensation is one, again, of mild pleasure, mild pleasure, mild pleasure, a little bit of pain, although more pain a little bit of pain, although more pain a little bit of pain, although more pain over time if you're not reaching those over time if you're not reaching those over time if you're not reaching those goals, and it takes you away from the goals, and it takes you away from the goals, and it takes you away from the here and now. So, at about this point in here and now. So, at about this point in here and now. So, at about this point in the podcast, I'm guessing that some of the podcast, I'm guessing that some of the podcast, I'm guessing that some of you are thinking, "Okay, great. I want you are thinking, "Okay, great. I want you are thinking, "Okay, great. I want more dopamine. I want to be more dopamine. I want to be more dopamine. I want to be more motivated. I don't want to procrastinate motivated. I don't want to procrastinate motivated. I don't want to procrastinate as much. And I want to be able to as much. And I want to be able to as much. And I want to be able to experience life. I want these here and experience life. I want these here and experience life. I want these here and now molecules to be released as well." now molecules to be released as well." now molecules to be released as well." Well, there is a way to do that, but you Well, there is a way to do that, but you Well, there is a way to do that, but you have to understand the source of have to understand the source of have to understand the source of procrastination is not one thing. procrastination is not one thing. procrastination is not one thing. There are basically two kinds of There are basically two kinds of There are basically two kinds of procrastinators, or so says the procrastinators, or so says the procrastinators, or so says the research. The first kind are people that actually The first kind are people that actually The first kind are people that actually really enjoy the really enjoy the really enjoy the stress of the impending deadline. It's stress of the impending deadline. It's stress of the impending deadline. It's the only way they can get into action. the only way they can get into action. the only way they can get into action. These are people that These are people that These are people that really like the feeling of, you know, really like the feeling of, you know, really like the feeling of, you know, something being due in an hour and how something being due in an hour and how something being due in an hour and how activated and sharp and focused that activated and sharp and focused that activated and sharp and focused that makes them feel. makes them feel. makes them feel. Those people Those people Those people are people that are tapping into the are people that are tapping into the are people that are tapping into the epinephrine system, the stress system, epinephrine system, the stress system, epinephrine system, the stress system, and for which the stress really tightens and for which the stress really tightens and for which the stress really tightens their ability to see. It creates that their ability to see. It creates that their ability to see. It creates that soda straw view of the world. It creates soda straw view of the world. It creates soda straw view of the world. It creates an action element in the body that makes an action element in the body that makes an action element in the body that makes them feel like they want to move. It them feel like they want to move. It them feel like they want to move. It really eliminates all the distract really eliminates all the distract really eliminates all the distract distractions for them. So, they're distractions for them. So, they're distractions for them. So, they're actually leveraging stress, internal actually leveraging stress, internal actually leveraging stress, internal stress, in order to achieve a state that they in order to achieve a state that they in order to achieve a state that they can't seem to otherwise achieve. can't seem to otherwise achieve. can't seem to otherwise achieve. I won't tell you what to do in order to I won't tell you what to do in order to I won't tell you what to do in order to overcome all kinds of procrastination, overcome all kinds of procrastination, overcome all kinds of procrastination, but from a logical perspective, it makes but from a logical perspective, it makes but from a logical perspective, it makes sense therefore sense therefore sense therefore for those kinds of people to think about for those kinds of people to think about for those kinds of people to think about other ways that they can get their other ways that they can get their other ways that they can get their system into activation. I've talked system into activation. I've talked system into activation. I've talked about this in previous podcasts, but a about this in previous podcasts, but a about this in previous podcasts, but a couple of those tools might be the what couple of those tools might be the what couple of those tools might be the what we've called superoxygenation breathing, we've called superoxygenation breathing, we've called superoxygenation breathing, which I admit is not always which I admit is not always which I admit is not always superoxygenating. So, this would be um superoxygenating. So, this would be um superoxygenating. So, this would be um if you want didn't want to consume if you want didn't want to consume if you want didn't want to consume anything, this could be 25 or 30 anything, this could be 25 or 30 anything, this could be 25 or 30 cycles of in deep inhales and exhales. cycles of in deep inhales and exhales. cycles of in deep inhales and exhales. It's likely to create some anxiety and It's likely to create some anxiety and It's likely to create some anxiety and uh low-level stress. If you're someone uh low-level stress. If you're someone uh low-level stress. If you're someone who's prone to panic attacks, I wouldn't who's prone to panic attacks, I wouldn't who's prone to panic attacks, I wouldn't recommend this. But, it's pretty recommend this. But, it's pretty recommend this. But, it's pretty straightforward. It will deploy straightforward. It will deploy straightforward. It will deploy adrenaline into your system, and you adrenaline into your system, and you adrenaline into your system, and you will find that your visual field is focused, find that your visual field is focused, find that your visual field is focused, and you will be able to work and focus and you will be able to work and focus and you will be able to work and focus better than if you just kind of waited better than if you just kind of waited better than if you just kind of waited around for some wave of motivation to around for some wave of motivation to around for some wave of motivation to wash over you. wash over you. wash over you. Normally, you're waiting for that Normally, you're waiting for that Normally, you're waiting for that deadline to come into sight and then deadline to come into sight and then deadline to come into sight and then that's what the stimulus is. But, you that's what the stimulus is. But, you that's what the stimulus is. But, you can self-direct adrenaline release can self-direct adrenaline release can self-direct adrenaline release without ingesting anything. You can also without ingesting anything. You can also without ingesting anything. You can also ingest coffee, caffeine, or you know, ingest coffee, caffeine, or you know, ingest coffee, caffeine, or you know, mate or something like that, which is mate or something like that, which is mate or something like that, which is what I uh prefer very often to coffee, what I uh prefer very often to coffee, what I uh prefer very often to coffee, which has caffeine. Caffeine does which has caffeine. Caffeine does which has caffeine. Caffeine does release dopamine at low levels. release dopamine at low levels. release dopamine at low levels. How much it releases dopamine isn't How much it releases dopamine isn't How much it releases dopamine isn't clear. It seems to increase firing in clear. It seems to increase firing in clear. It seems to increase firing in these neurons in the nucleus accumbens these neurons in the nucleus accumbens these neurons in the nucleus accumbens by about 30%, which is a pretty low by about 30%, which is a pretty low by about 30%, which is a pretty low level, but it can create agitation. So, level, but it can create agitation. So, level, but it can create agitation. So, for caffeine-sensitive people, for caffeine-sensitive people, for caffeine-sensitive people, that could be a problem. that could be a problem. that could be a problem. I've talked before about things like I've talked before about things like I've talked before about things like L-tyrosine, the precursor to dopamine, L-tyrosine, the precursor to dopamine, L-tyrosine, the precursor to dopamine, or Mucuna pruriens. I talked about that or Mucuna pruriens. I talked about that or Mucuna pruriens. I talked about that in the last episode, but if you didn't in the last episode, but if you didn't in the last episode, but if you didn't see that, just to remind you, L-tyrosine see that, just to remind you, L-tyrosine see that, just to remind you, L-tyrosine is present in red meats, it's in certain is present in red meats, it's in certain is present in red meats, it's in certain nuts, and L-tyrosine is the precursor to nuts, and L-tyrosine is the precursor to nuts, and L-tyrosine is the precursor to dopamine. You can supplement L-tyrosine if you You can supplement L-tyrosine if you You can supplement L-tyrosine if you like. You will get a big inflection in like. You will get a big inflection in like. You will get a big inflection in dopamine, but there is a crash dopamine, but there is a crash dopamine, but there is a crash associated with it. However, it will associated with it. However, it will associated with it. However, it will increase motivation in the short term. increase motivation in the short term. increase motivation in the short term. Not suggesting anyone do this. I want to Not suggesting anyone do this. I want to Not suggesting anyone do this. I want to be very clear, say what I always say, be very clear, say what I always say, be very clear, say what I always say, I'm not a doctor, I don't prescribe I'm not a doctor, I don't prescribe I'm not a doctor, I don't prescribe anything, I'm a professor, I profess anything, I'm a professor, I profess anything, I'm a professor, I profess things. You have to know whether or not things. You have to know whether or not things. You have to know whether or not these things are appropriate for your these things are appropriate for your these things are appropriate for your mental and physical health or not, so mental and physical health or not, so mental and physical health or not, so you need to consult a doctor. For you need to consult a doctor. For you need to consult a doctor. For instance, people who suffer from instance, people who suffer from instance, people who suffer from schizotypal or schizophrenia or mania schizotypal or schizophrenia or mania schizotypal or schizophrenia or mania should probably not be taking should probably not be taking should probably not be taking supplements that increase their dopamine supplements that increase their dopamine supplements that increase their dopamine levels. Now, if you can't increase your level of if you can't increase your level of if you can't increase your level of focus and your level of alertness and focus and your level of alertness and focus and your level of alertness and your level of motivation using your level of motivation using your level of motivation using breathing, well, then there might be breathing, well, then there might be breathing, well, then there might be something else at play. There are other something else at play. There are other something else at play. There are other procrastinators for which they simply procrastinators for which they simply procrastinators for which they simply are not releasing enough dopamine. are not releasing enough dopamine. are not releasing enough dopamine. They're not making enough dopamine. And They're not making enough dopamine. And They're not making enough dopamine. And for those people, there are a variety of for those people, there are a variety of for those people, there are a variety of things that can increase dopamine. I do things that can increase dopamine. I do things that can increase dopamine. I do suggest you talk to a psychiatrist or suggest you talk to a psychiatrist or suggest you talk to a psychiatrist or doctor. I've talked about Mucuna doctor. I've talked about Mucuna doctor. I've talked about Mucuna pruriens, which is 99.9% pruriens, which is 99.9% pruriens, which is 99.9% L-dopa, the precursor to dopamine. So, L-dopa, the precursor to dopamine. So, L-dopa, the precursor to dopamine. So, there are people that do much better there are people that do much better there are people that do much better when they take things that increase when they take things that increase when they take things that increase their dopamine levels. their dopamine levels. their dopamine levels. There are antidepressants like There are antidepressants like There are antidepressants like Wellbutrin, bupropion, which increase is the other bupropion, which increase is the other bupropion, which increase is the other name for it, which increase dopamine and name for it, which increase dopamine and name for it, which increase dopamine and epinephrine. It can increase risk of epinephrine. It can increase risk of epinephrine. It can increase risk of epileptic attacks if you're epileptic. epileptic attacks if you're epileptic. epileptic attacks if you're epileptic. So, again, you have to talk to your So, again, you have to talk to your So, again, you have to talk to your doctor, but they will increase dopamine doctor, but they will increase dopamine doctor, but they will increase dopamine and motivation and focus. and motivation and focus. and motivation and focus. However, if you think back to our However, if you think back to our However, if you think back to our earlier discussion about dopamine, earlier discussion about dopamine, earlier discussion about dopamine, if it's very high, dopamine, if it's very high, dopamine, if it's very high, creates a sense of pleasure and the creates a sense of pleasure and the creates a sense of pleasure and the desire for more. So, you can also become desire for more. So, you can also become desire for more. So, you can also become a person for which a person for which a person for which enough is never enough. The only thing enough is never enough. The only thing enough is never enough. The only thing that dopamine really wants is more of that dopamine really wants is more of that dopamine really wants is more of the thing that releases dopamine. And the thing that releases dopamine. And the thing that releases dopamine. And so, big inflections in dopamine, whether so, big inflections in dopamine, whether so, big inflections in dopamine, whether or not they come from cocaine or whether or not they come from cocaine or whether or not they come from cocaine or whether or not they come from a supplementation, or not they come from a supplementation, or not they come from a supplementation, caffeine, exercise, study regime, will caffeine, exercise, study regime, will caffeine, exercise, study regime, will just make you want more of something. just make you want more of something. just make you want more of something. And we've all heard before of growth And we've all heard before of growth And we've all heard before of growth mindset, this incredible discovery of my mindset, this incredible discovery of my mindset, this incredible discovery of my colleague Carol Dweck, or some of these colleague Carol Dweck, or some of these colleague Carol Dweck, or some of these positive mindsets that the psychology positive mindsets that the psychology positive mindsets that the psychology community has put forth as really good community has put forth as really good community has put forth as really good for pursuit of goals and pursuit of um for pursuit of goals and pursuit of um for pursuit of goals and pursuit of um things that require long bouts of things that require long bouts of things that require long bouts of effort. Well, it's wonderful if you can effort. Well, it's wonderful if you can effort. Well, it's wonderful if you can learn to attach dopamine to that process learn to attach dopamine to that process learn to attach dopamine to that process psychologically, but if you're starting psychologically, but if you're starting psychologically, but if you're starting to augment the amount of dopamine, to augment the amount of dopamine, to augment the amount of dopamine, increase the amount of dopamine through increase the amount of dopamine through increase the amount of dopamine through things like supplementation and things like supplementation and things like supplementation and prescription drugs, prescription drugs, prescription drugs, what's going to happen is you're not what's going to happen is you're not what's going to happen is you're not only going to need to pursue more and only going to need to pursue more and only going to need to pursue more and more of the sorts of things that are more of the sorts of things that are more of the sorts of things that are that are associated with the dopamine. that are associated with the dopamine. that are associated with the dopamine. So, more doing more studying, more So, more doing more studying, more So, more doing more studying, more sport, more pursuit, higher mountains, sport, more pursuit, higher mountains, sport, more pursuit, higher mountains, more money, more whatever, but we know more money, more whatever, but we know more money, more whatever, but we know that over time the mirror image of that, that over time the mirror image of that, that over time the mirror image of that, the pain of lack of accomplishment, will the pain of lack of accomplishment, will the pain of lack of accomplishment, will also increase. This is the pleasure-pain also increase. This is the pleasure-pain also increase. This is the pleasure-pain relationship that we talked about relationship that we talked about relationship that we talked about earlier. So, I In a few moments, I'm earlier. So, I In a few moments, I'm earlier. So, I In a few moments, I'm going to talk about how to think about going to talk about how to think about going to talk about how to think about healthy dopamine schedules, but I just healthy dopamine schedules, but I just healthy dopamine schedules, but I just want to take a step back for a second want to take a step back for a second want to take a step back for a second and talk a little bit about the flip and talk a little bit about the flip and talk a little bit about the flip side of dopamine. What happens after the side of dopamine. What happens after the side of dopamine. What happens after the so-called dopamine crash? What so-called dopamine crash? What so-called dopamine crash? What mechanisms are installed in us? Because, mechanisms are installed in us? Because, mechanisms are installed in us? Because, believe it or not, there are mechanisms believe it or not, there are mechanisms believe it or not, there are mechanisms that are installed in all of us that are installed in all of us that are installed in all of us that really put the complete and total break really put the complete and total break really put the complete and total break on dopamine, why they're there, and what on dopamine, why they're there, and what on dopamine, why they're there, and what they do. Because you've experienced they do. Because you've experienced they do. Because you've experienced these before, and they're actually ways these before, and they're actually ways these before, and they're actually ways that you can navigate them, these that you can navigate them, these that you can navigate them, these dopamine crashes or these intentional dopamine crashes or these intentional dopamine crashes or these intentional dopamine suppression mechanisms, in dopamine suppression mechanisms, in dopamine suppression mechanisms, in order to leverage healthier dopamine order to leverage healthier dopamine order to leverage healthier dopamine schedules and to feel more motivated. schedules and to feel more motivated. schedules and to feel more motivated. Perhaps one of the most fundamental Perhaps one of the most fundamental Perhaps one of the most fundamental mechanisms in all humans mechanisms in all humans mechanisms in all humans is the neural circuitry designed for is the neural circuitry designed for is the neural circuitry designed for seeking out mates and for reproduction. seeking out mates and for reproduction. seeking out mates and for reproduction. And that's because the continuation of And that's because the continuation of And that's because the continuation of any one species is the primary driver any one species is the primary driver any one species is the primary driver for any species. That's just the for any species. That's just the for any species. That's just the reality. Now, I'm removing all context reality. Now, I'm removing all context reality. Now, I'm removing all context here. So, whatever I say, of course, here. So, whatever I say, of course, here. So, whatever I say, of course, it's in the in the you know, on a it's in the in the you know, on a it's in the in the you know, on a backdrop of you know, consensual, backdrop of you know, consensual, backdrop of you know, consensual, age-appropriate, uh species-appropriate, uh species-appropriate, uh species-appropriate, uh context-appropriate, all of that. This context-appropriate, all of that. This context-appropriate, all of that. This is not about the sociology of is not about the sociology of is not about the sociology of reproduction and sex. This is about the reproduction and sex. This is about the reproduction and sex. This is about the biology. The biology of sex in males and biology. The biology of sex in males and biology. The biology of sex in males and females, doesn't matter if it's XX females, doesn't matter if it's XX females, doesn't matter if it's XX chromosome, XY chromosome, XXY, XYY, chromosome, XY chromosome, XXY, XYY, chromosome, XY chromosome, XXY, XYY, doesn't matter. doesn't matter. doesn't matter. The reality is that dopamine is released The reality is that dopamine is released The reality is that dopamine is released on anticipation and consummation of sex on anticipation and consummation of sex on anticipation and consummation of sex and reproduction. and reproduction. and reproduction. And after orgasm, And after orgasm, And after orgasm, regardless of chromosomal background, regardless of chromosomal background, regardless of chromosomal background, there's a dramatic decrease in dopamine there's a dramatic decrease in dopamine there's a dramatic decrease in dopamine and an increase in a hormone called and an increase in a hormone called and an increase in a hormone called prolactin. Now, prolactin is associated prolactin. Now, prolactin is associated prolactin. Now, prolactin is associated with milk letdown with milk letdown with milk letdown in lactating mothers. It's also present in lactating mothers. It's also present in lactating mothers. It's also present in males. And in general, prolactin in males. And in general, prolactin in males. And in general, prolactin creates a sense of lethargy, of creates a sense of lethargy, of creates a sense of lethargy, of stillness, and lack of desire to move, stillness, and lack of desire to move, stillness, and lack of desire to move, and lack of desire to pursue more of and lack of desire to pursue more of and lack of desire to pursue more of whatever released the dopamine. whatever released the dopamine. whatever released the dopamine. Prolactin, in fact, sets the refractory Prolactin, in fact, sets the refractory Prolactin, in fact, sets the refractory period on a male's ability to mate period on a male's ability to mate period on a male's ability to mate again. Now, this is going to vary tremendously Now, this is going to vary tremendously Now, this is going to vary tremendously from individual to individual. It also from individual to individual. It also from individual to individual. It also can There are data showing that it can vary There are data showing that it can vary There are data showing that it can vary tremendously from mate pairing to mate tremendously from mate pairing to mate tremendously from mate pairing to mate pairing. The number one thing that pairing. The number one thing that pairing. The number one thing that releases dopamine is novelty. And it is releases dopamine is novelty. And it is releases dopamine is novelty. And it is true that the refractory period is true that the refractory period is true that the refractory period is shortened by the introduction of novel shortened by the introduction of novel shortened by the introduction of novel mates. This was first shown in a kind of mates. This was first shown in a kind of mates. This was first shown in a kind of classic experiment in of all things in classic experiment in of all things in classic experiment in of all things in chickens. This is called the Coolidge chickens. This is called the Coolidge chickens. This is called the Coolidge effect. And the story is the story goes, effect. And the story is the story goes, effect. And the story is the story goes, and I believe it's a true story, it's and I believe it's a true story, it's and I believe it's a true story, it's actually in all the actually in all the actually in all the neuroendocrinology textbooks, so I neuroendocrinology textbooks, so I neuroendocrinology textbooks, so I believe it's true, is that President believe it's true, is that President believe it's true, is that President Calvin Coolidge was visiting a Calvin Coolidge was visiting a Calvin Coolidge was visiting a chicken farm. They were He's being taken chicken farm. They were He's being taken chicken farm. They were He's being taken around, and the person who was hosting around, and the person who was hosting around, and the person who was hosting the visit showed them a rooster the visit showed them a rooster the visit showed them a rooster that was Coolidge and his wife were on that was Coolidge and his wife were on that was Coolidge and his wife were on the visit and said, "This rooster the visit and said, "This rooster the visit and said, "This rooster copulates thousands of times per day." copulates thousands of times per day." copulates thousands of times per day." And Mrs. Coolidge apparently kind of And Mrs. Coolidge apparently kind of And Mrs. Coolidge apparently kind of elbowed President Coolidge and said, elbowed President Coolidge and said, elbowed President Coolidge and said, "Uh, you hear that?" kind of like "Uh, you hear that?" kind of like "Uh, you hear that?" kind of like pointing out the prowess of this pointing out the prowess of this pointing out the prowess of this rooster. And Coolidge said, And Coolidge said, And Coolidge said, "Yeah, but let me ask a question. Same "Yeah, but let me ask a question. Same "Yeah, but let me ask a question. Same hen or different hens?" It turns out it hen or different hens?" It turns out it hen or different hens?" It turns out it was different hens. And the reason is was different hens. And the reason is was different hens. And the reason is the introduction of a novel mate the introduction of a novel mate the introduction of a novel mate increases dopamine levels. increases dopamine levels. increases dopamine levels. And what's interesting about this is that what's interesting about this is that what's interesting about this is that after copulation, after copulation, after copulation, prolactin goes through the roof and prolactin goes through the roof and prolactin goes through the roof and prevents further copulation. Dopamine prevents further copulation. Dopamine prevents further copulation. Dopamine crashes. But the introduction of some sort of But the introduction of some sort of But the introduction of some sort of novelty shortens this. Now, novelty shortens this. Now, novelty shortens this. Now, this is not a ploy for people to change this is not a ploy for people to change this is not a ploy for people to change mates often. The what this is a story mates often. The what this is a story mates often. The what this is a story about the dopamine and prolactin system about the dopamine and prolactin system about the dopamine and prolactin system that also exists in humans. Now, there that also exists in humans. Now, there that also exists in humans. Now, there are actually things that people in are actually things that people in are actually things that people in certain communities take in order to certain communities take in order to certain communities take in order to bypass these refractory periods. There's bypass these refractory periods. There's bypass these refractory periods. There's actually uh drugs that increase actually uh drugs that increase actually uh drugs that increase dopamine, suppress prolactin, and vice dopamine, suppress prolactin, and vice dopamine, suppress prolactin, and vice versa. There's actually another way to versa. There's actually another way to versa. There's actually another way to suppress prolactin. suppress prolactin. suppress prolactin. Vitamin B6 Vitamin B6 Vitamin B6 is a fairly potent prolactin inhibitor, is a fairly potent prolactin inhibitor, is a fairly potent prolactin inhibitor, as is zinc. And if you look out there in as is zinc. And if you look out there in as is zinc. And if you look out there in the literature, and for those of you the literature, and for those of you the literature, and for those of you that are in the wellness and kind of that are in the wellness and kind of that are in the wellness and kind of sports performance community, a lot of sports performance community, a lot of sports performance community, a lot of the so-called quote-unquote testosterone the so-called quote-unquote testosterone the so-called quote-unquote testosterone boosters are actually combinations of vitamin B6 are actually combinations of vitamin B6 are actually combinations of vitamin B6 and zinc, which inhibit prolactin and by and zinc, which inhibit prolactin and by and zinc, which inhibit prolactin and by way of inhibiting prolactin increase way of inhibiting prolactin increase way of inhibiting prolactin increase dopamine. So, they do have some some, dopamine. So, they do have some some, dopamine. So, they do have some some, you know, functional effect in that you know, functional effect in that you know, functional effect in that regard. They're not really increasing regard. They're not really increasing regard. They're not really increasing testosterone directly, they're testosterone directly, they're testosterone directly, they're suppressing prolactin levels. suppressing prolactin levels. suppressing prolactin levels. And there are clinical conditions like And there are clinical conditions like And there are clinical conditions like hyperprolactinemia, which leads to hyperprolactinemia, which leads to hyperprolactinemia, which leads to massive decreases in libido, etc. And massive decreases in libido, etc. And massive decreases in libido, etc. And there are uh prescription drugs to treat there are uh prescription drugs to treat there are uh prescription drugs to treat hyp- uh hyperprolactinemia, which of hyp- uh hyperprolactinemia, which of hyp- uh hyperprolactinemia, which of course should you should always talk to course should you should always talk to course should you should always talk to an endocrinologist about those sorts of an endocrinologist about those sorts of an endocrinologist about those sorts of prescription drugs. prescription drugs. prescription drugs. So, it's interesting that this very So, it's interesting that this very So, it's interesting that this very basic mechanism of dopamine and basic mechanism of dopamine and basic mechanism of dopamine and prolactin, this sort of motivation, no, prolactin, this sort of motivation, no, prolactin, this sort of motivation, no, no more motivation, is a system that no more motivation, is a system that no more motivation, is a system that evolved for reproduction first, but that evolved for reproduction first, but that evolved for reproduction first, but that actually takes place and you can see in actually takes place and you can see in actually takes place and you can see in elsewhere in the world. For instance, elsewhere in the world. For instance, elsewhere in the world. For instance, schizophrenia, a disease that has many different types a disease that has many different types a disease that has many different types and facets, but schizophrenia is a case and facets, but schizophrenia is a case and facets, but schizophrenia is a case of in often of hyperactivation of the of in often of hyperactivation of the of in often of hyperactivation of the dopamine system. dopamine system. dopamine system. So much so that it can make people feel So much so that it can make people feel So much so that it can make people feel kind of high, they hallucinate. I mean, kind of high, they hallucinate. I mean, kind of high, they hallucinate. I mean, we're talking very, very high or um uh we're talking very, very high or um uh we're talking very, very high or um uh dysregulated uh dopamine uh circuits in dysregulated uh dopamine uh circuits in dysregulated uh dopamine uh circuits in the brain. the brain. the brain. One of the treatments for One of the treatments for One of the treatments for schizophrenia are drugs that block schizophrenia are drugs that block schizophrenia are drugs that block dopamine receptors. And um if you have dopamine receptors. And um if you have dopamine receptors. And um if you have the It's unfortunate, you know, there the It's unfortunate, you know, there the It's unfortunate, you know, there are so many people that are out on the are so many people that are out on the are so many people that are out on the street these days who have street these days who have street these days who have schizophrenia, some of whom are taking schizophrenia, some of whom are taking schizophrenia, some of whom are taking their meds, some of who whom aren't. If their meds, some of who whom aren't. If their meds, some of who whom aren't. If you ever see somebody on the street you ever see somebody on the street you ever see somebody on the street that's doing what's It's like a lip that's doing what's It's like a lip that's doing what's It's like a lip smacking and writhing. It's actually smacking and writhing. It's actually smacking and writhing. It's actually called tardive dyskinesia. This is a called tardive dyskinesia. This is a called tardive dyskinesia. This is a movement disorder that's created by taking these disorder that's created by taking these disorder that's created by taking these anti-dopaminergic drugs. So, you can anti-dopaminergic drugs. So, you can anti-dopaminergic drugs. So, you can imagine these anti-dopaminergic drugs, imagine these anti-dopaminergic drugs, imagine these anti-dopaminergic drugs, while being very effective in while being very effective in while being very effective in suppressing hallucinations, they create suppressing hallucinations, they create suppressing hallucinations, they create these movement problems because of these movement problems because of these movement problems because of dopamine's importance for the movement dopamine's importance for the movement dopamine's importance for the movement circuitry, so-called pyramidal circuitry circuitry, so-called pyramidal circuitry circuitry, so-called pyramidal circuitry for the aficionados. In addition, you for the aficionados. In addition, you for the aficionados. In addition, you sometimes see in males that take these sometimes see in males that take these sometimes see in males that take these drugs, drugs like haloperidol and the drugs, drugs like haloperidol and the drugs, drugs like haloperidol and the and the other dopamine blockers, that and the other dopamine blockers, that and the other dopamine blockers, that they actually develop breast tissue, they actually develop breast tissue, they actually develop breast tissue, gynecomastia. So, the development of male breast So, the development of male breast So, the development of male breast tissue is because of the elevated levels tissue is because of the elevated levels tissue is because of the elevated levels of prolactin because they're suppressing of prolactin because they're suppressing of prolactin because they're suppressing their dopamine so much. Now, that's a their dopamine so much. Now, that's a their dopamine so much. Now, that's a really extreme case, but um maybe really extreme case, but um maybe really extreme case, but um maybe perhaps if you uh if you see somebody perhaps if you uh if you see somebody perhaps if you uh if you see somebody engaging these very strange kind of face engaging these very strange kind of face engaging these very strange kind of face writhing and body writhing behaviors, writhing and body writhing behaviors, writhing and body writhing behaviors, that's actually not a consequence of that's actually not a consequence of that's actually not a consequence of their mental illness. That's a their mental illness. That's a their mental illness. That's a consequence most often of the drugs that consequence most often of the drugs that consequence most often of the drugs that they're taking to treat the mental they're taking to treat the mental they're taking to treat the mental illness. Those are side effects of those illness. Those are side effects of those illness. Those are side effects of those drugs. Now, prolactin is increased drugs. Now, prolactin is increased drugs. Now, prolactin is increased anytime we have some really heightened anytime we have some really heightened anytime we have some really heightened intense experience. It's not just intense experience. It's not just intense experience. It's not just released after sex and reproduction. released after sex and reproduction. released after sex and reproduction. Prolactin is released after some major Prolactin is released after some major Prolactin is released after some major event. It's actually responsible, it's event. It's actually responsible, it's event. It's actually responsible, it's thought for some of postpartum thought for some of postpartum thought for some of postpartum depression, for different types of kind depression, for different types of kind depression, for different types of kind of the letdown, the low. I can of the letdown, the low. I can of the letdown, the low. I can distinctly remember that after finals distinctly remember that after finals distinctly remember that after finals um or after publishing a big paper, I um or after publishing a big paper, I um or after publishing a big paper, I would be very, very happy, but then I'd would be very, very happy, but then I'd would be very, very happy, but then I'd find that, "Oh, you know, like what find that, "Oh, you know, like what find that, "Oh, you know, like what next?" Or things might seem a little bit next?" Or things might seem a little bit next?" Or things might seem a little bit dimmed or dulled out for the next day or dimmed or dulled out for the next day or dimmed or dulled out for the next day or so or the following week. The time so or the following week. The time so or the following week. The time scales on these are going to vary scales on these are going to vary scales on these are going to vary because some people release a lot of because some people release a lot of because some people release a lot of dopamine for a very long time in dopamine for a very long time in dopamine for a very long time in response to something great, and other response to something great, and other response to something great, and other people have a quick inflection of dopamine and have a quick inflection of dopamine and have a quick inflection of dopamine and then they're back to feeling not so then they're back to feeling not so then they're back to feeling not so great. It really varies from person to great. It really varies from person to great. It really varies from person to person. In fact, long ago, I start as I person. In fact, long ago, I start as I person. In fact, long ago, I start as I learned about dopamine reward circuitry learned about dopamine reward circuitry learned about dopamine reward circuitry and the relationship between dopamine and the relationship between dopamine and the relationship between dopamine and prolactin, I started to leverage and prolactin, I started to leverage and prolactin, I started to leverage this. Believe it or not, after some this. Believe it or not, after some this. Believe it or not, after some major event, I would take a couple major event, I would take a couple major event, I would take a couple hundred milligrams of hundred milligrams of hundred milligrams of vitamin B6. I think for people who have vitamin B6. I think for people who have vitamin B6. I think for people who have diabetic neuropathy, you need to be diabetic neuropathy, you need to be diabetic neuropathy, you need to be careful with vitamin B6. Check with your careful with vitamin B6. Check with your careful with vitamin B6. Check with your doctor. I was told, although I haven't doctor. I was told, although I haven't doctor. I was told, although I haven't found the literature on this, that it found the literature on this, that it found the literature on this, that it can in some cases exacerbate peripheral can in some cases exacerbate peripheral can in some cases exacerbate peripheral neuropathy. But for most people, neuropathy. But for most people, neuropathy. But for most people, it's thought to be reasonably safe, but it's thought to be reasonably safe, but it's thought to be reasonably safe, but again, always check with your physician. again, always check with your physician. again, always check with your physician. But I would take some B6 to kind of But I would take some B6 to kind of But I would take some B6 to kind of offset some of that low. And I actually, offset some of that low. And I actually, offset some of that low. And I actually, I don't know if it was subjective or I don't know if it was subjective or I don't know if it was subjective or not, but it seemed to have not, but it seemed to have not, but it seemed to have somewhat of a of a positive effect. I somewhat of a of a positive effect. I somewhat of a of a positive effect. I also started just internalizing the fact also started just internalizing the fact also started just internalizing the fact that dopamine is so subjective. There that dopamine is so subjective. There that dopamine is so subjective. There are objective aspects to dopamine and are objective aspects to dopamine and are objective aspects to dopamine and how much is released, but there's also how much is released, but there's also how much is released, but there's also some subjective effects to dopamine. And some subjective effects to dopamine. And some subjective effects to dopamine. And so one of the things that you can do in so one of the things that you can do in so one of the things that you can do in order to generally just be a happier order to generally just be a happier order to generally just be a happier person, especially if you're a person in person, especially if you're a person in person, especially if you're a person in pursuit of long-term goals of any kind, pursuit of long-term goals of any kind, pursuit of long-term goals of any kind, is the longer that you can is the longer that you can is the longer that you can extend that positive phase of the extend that positive phase of the extend that positive phase of the dopamine release, and the more that you dopamine release, and the more that you dopamine release, and the more that you can blunt the pain response to that, the can blunt the pain response to that, the can blunt the pain response to that, the better. And you can actually do this better. And you can actually do this better. And you can actually do this cognitively. I used to joke with my cognitively. I used to joke with my cognitively. I used to joke with my lab that when we'd publish a paper, I lab that when we'd publish a paper, I lab that when we'd publish a paper, I would get really excited, but I wouldn't would get really excited, but I wouldn't would get really excited, but I wouldn't allow myself to get too excited. What I allow myself to get too excited. What I allow myself to get too excited. What I wanted to do instead, and what I still wanted to do instead, and what I still wanted to do instead, and what I still try to do, is try and extend the arc of try to do, is try and extend the arc of try to do, is try and extend the arc of that positive experience as long as I that positive experience as long as I that positive experience as long as I possibly can. Simply by thinking back, possibly can. Simply by thinking back, possibly can. Simply by thinking back, like, oh, that was really cool. I really like, oh, that was really cool. I really like, oh, that was really cool. I really enjoyed doing that work. I really enjoyed doing that work. I really enjoyed doing that work. I really enjoyed the discovery. I really enjoyed the discovery. I really enjoyed the discovery. I really enjoyed doing that with the people that I was doing that with the people that I was doing that with the people that I was working with at the time. What a working with at the time. What a working with at the time. What a pleasure that was. I can get this very pleasure that was. I can get this very pleasure that was. I can get this very easily from pictures of people and easily from pictures of people and easily from pictures of people and things like Costello that I really things like Costello that I really things like Costello that I really enjoyed, trips that I've taken. So you enjoyed, trips that I've taken. So you enjoyed, trips that I've taken. So you can extend pleasure without having to can extend pleasure without having to can extend pleasure without having to engage in the behavior over and over. engage in the behavior over and over. engage in the behavior over and over. That's extending the arc of that That's extending the arc of that That's extending the arc of that dopamine release. As well, it offsets dopamine release. As well, it offsets dopamine release. As well, it offsets some of the pain of not having that some of the pain of not having that some of the pain of not having that experience occur over and over and over again. Now, occur over and over and over again. Now, occur over and over and over again. Now, the high performers out there, you're the high performers out there, you're the high performers out there, you're probably familiar with this. Many people probably familiar with this. Many people probably familiar with this. Many people who have a big achievement, their first who have a big achievement, their first who have a big achievement, their first thoughts are, "Well, now what? What am I thoughts are, "Well, now what? What am I thoughts are, "Well, now what? What am I going to do next? How am I ever going to going to do next? How am I ever going to going to do next? How am I ever going to exceed that?" And indeed, many people exceed that?" And indeed, many people exceed that?" And indeed, many people who are very high on this kind of who are very high on this kind of who are very high on this kind of dopamine sensation and novelty-seeking dopamine sensation and novelty-seeking dopamine sensation and novelty-seeking scale uh are prone to addiction. They're prone uh are prone to addiction. They're prone uh are prone to addiction. They're prone to the rapid pursuit of external goals, to the rapid pursuit of external goals, to the rapid pursuit of external goals, of exteroception, to the neglect of exteroception, to the neglect of exteroception, to the neglect of these internal mechanisms that allow these internal mechanisms that allow these internal mechanisms that allow them to feel calm and happy. So, for them to feel calm and happy. So, for them to feel calm and happy. So, for people that are very driven, very people that are very driven, very people that are very driven, very motivated, adopting a practice of being able to adopting a practice of being able to adopting a practice of being able to engage in the here and now, the sort of engage in the here and now, the sort of engage in the here and now, the sort of almond type practices we talked about almond type practices we talked about almond type practices we talked about earlier, um of learning how to achieve a really um of learning how to achieve a really um of learning how to achieve a really good night's sleep on a regular basis good night's sleep on a regular basis good night's sleep on a regular basis through tools and mechanisms I talked through tools and mechanisms I talked through tools and mechanisms I talked about in previous podcasts, gives a sort about in previous podcasts, gives a sort about in previous podcasts, gives a sort of balance to the pleasure-seeking of balance to the pleasure-seeking of balance to the pleasure-seeking and offsetting of pain and the pleasure and offsetting of pain and the pleasure and offsetting of pain and the pleasure in the here and now. So, pleasure is in the here and now. So, pleasure is in the here and now. So, pleasure is really two things. It's a joy in really two things. It's a joy in really two things. It's a joy in pursuit, but it's also the joy in what you have. but it's also the joy in what you have. but it's also the joy in what you have. And there's a beautiful model of And there's a beautiful model of And there's a beautiful model of emotional development that was developed emotional development that was developed emotional development that was developed by Allan Schore, professor at UCLA and by Allan Schore, professor at UCLA and by Allan Schore, professor at UCLA and psychiatrist, that talks about some of psychiatrist, that talks about some of psychiatrist, that talks about some of the basics of good infant-parent the basics of good infant-parent the basics of good infant-parent attachment, where good parenting that attachment, where good parenting that attachment, where good parenting that leads to healthy adult relationships and leads to healthy adult relationships and leads to healthy adult relationships and emotion regulation emotion regulation emotion regulation tends to include both sides of this tends to include both sides of this tends to include both sides of this dopamine-serotonin spectrum. You talk dopamine-serotonin spectrum. You talk dopamine-serotonin spectrum. You talk about the relationship between child and about the relationship between child and about the relationship between child and parent, typically with the mother, but parent, typically with the mother, but parent, typically with the mother, but also father, where you can get the child also father, where you can get the child also father, where you can get the child really excited by kind of squealing and really excited by kind of squealing and really excited by kind of squealing and ramping them up or talking about ramping them up or talking about ramping them up or talking about something or ice cream or play, and the something or ice cream or play, and the something or ice cream or play, and the kid gets very excited. That's the kid gets very excited. That's the kid gets very excited. That's the dopaminergic system, the anticipation of dopaminergic system, the anticipation of dopaminergic system, the anticipation of something that's coming. But as well, something that's coming. But as well, something that's coming. But as well, engaging with children in a way that's engaging with children in a way that's engaging with children in a way that's really about everything that you have really about everything that you have really about everything that you have right in the here and now. The reading right in the here and now. The reading right in the here and now. The reading of the book, the kids always seem to ask of the book, the kids always seem to ask of the book, the kids always seem to ask one more time, one more. They seem to one more time, one more. They seem to one more time, one more. They seem to want more of the things that they enjoy, want more of the things that they enjoy, want more of the things that they enjoy, but really engaging with them in a way but really engaging with them in a way but really engaging with them in a way that increases their sense of pleasure that increases their sense of pleasure that increases their sense of pleasure for what's right there, as well as for what's right there, as well as for what's right there, as well as giving them a lot of things to be giving them a lot of things to be giving them a lot of things to be excited about and positive anticipation. excited about and positive anticipation. excited about and positive anticipation. Now, having worked years ago with um Now, having worked years ago with um Now, having worked years ago with um at-risk kids and also with young kids at at-risk kids and also with young kids at at-risk kids and also with young kids at summer camps and things like that, one summer camps and things like that, one summer camps and things like that, one of the things that you learn is you of the things that you learn is you of the things that you learn is you never say maybe to a kid about a reward. never say maybe to a kid about a reward. never say maybe to a kid about a reward. If you say we might have ice cream If you say we might have ice cream If you say we might have ice cream later, you are essentially saying we are later, you are essentially saying we are later, you are essentially saying we are having ice cream. They don't hear the having ice cream. They don't hear the having ice cream. They don't hear the maybe part. And it turns out adults maybe part. And it turns out adults maybe part. And it turns out adults don't either. It's really interesting. don't either. It's really interesting. don't either. It's really interesting. There's something called reward There's something called reward There's something called reward prediction error. I've talked about this prediction error. I've talked about this prediction error. I've talked about this before, but I haven't really talked before, but I haven't really talked before, but I haven't really talked about it deeply in the context of the about it deeply in the context of the about it deeply in the context of the dopamine system. dopamine system. dopamine system. Dopamine, as I've said, is involved in Dopamine, as I've said, is involved in Dopamine, as I've said, is involved in anticipation of wanting, not of having. anticipation of wanting, not of having. anticipation of wanting, not of having. It's involved in motivation toward the It's involved in motivation toward the It's involved in motivation toward the thing that you want. And it biases us thing that you want. And it biases us thing that you want. And it biases us towards action. towards action. towards action. Reward prediction error equals the Reward prediction error equals the Reward prediction error equals the actual amount of dopamine that's actual amount of dopamine that's actual amount of dopamine that's released in response to something versus released in response to something versus released in response to something versus minus the amount that's expected, okay? minus the amount that's expected, okay? minus the amount that's expected, okay? So, if you tell a kid we might have ice So, if you tell a kid we might have ice So, if you tell a kid we might have ice cream, they hear we're going to have ice cream, they hear we're going to have ice cream, they hear we're going to have ice cream, and they expect it. And if you cream, and they expect it. And if you cream, and they expect it. And if you later say, "Well, we're not going to later say, "Well, we're not going to later say, "Well, we're not going to have ice cream, and I said maybe," have ice cream, and I said maybe," have ice cream, and I said maybe," that's actually going to lead to a much that's actually going to lead to a much that's actually going to lead to a much bigger crash in dopamine. It's going to bigger crash in dopamine. It's going to bigger crash in dopamine. It's going to lead to a negative signal, a punishment lead to a negative signal, a punishment lead to a negative signal, a punishment signal. It's going to literally going to signal. It's going to literally going to signal. It's going to literally going to feel like pain. So, kids, you can feel like pain. So, kids, you can feel like pain. So, kids, you can leverage this. leverage this. leverage this. If your parents say maybe, they're If your parents say maybe, they're If your parents say maybe, they're effectively telling your dopamine system effectively telling your dopamine system effectively telling your dopamine system absolutely. Now, adults are like this, absolutely. Now, adults are like this, absolutely. Now, adults are like this, too. If we think something might happen too. If we think something might happen too. If we think something might happen and it doesn't happen, there's a big and it doesn't happen, there's a big and it doesn't happen, there's a big crash in our in our affect and our crash in our in our affect and our crash in our in our affect and our emotionality. And that's because that emotionality. And that's because that emotionality. And that's because that dopamine system goes from firing about dopamine system goes from firing about dopamine system goes from firing about three to four times per second to about three to four times per second to about three to four times per second to about 10 or 15 times per second in the 10 or 15 times per second in the 10 or 15 times per second in the possibility that something might happen. possibility that something might happen. possibility that something might happen. Possibility is deeply woven into our Possibility is deeply woven into our Possibility is deeply woven into our biology of the dopamine and motivation biology of the dopamine and motivation biology of the dopamine and motivation system as a way for us, presumably in system as a way for us, presumably in system as a way for us, presumably in ancient times, to explore novel ancient times, to explore novel ancient times, to explore novel territories and a sense that maybe territories and a sense that maybe territories and a sense that maybe there's water there, maybe there's a there's water there, maybe there's a there's water there, maybe there's a mate there, maybe there's better food mate there, maybe there's better food mate there, maybe there's better food there, maybe there's resources there. there, maybe there's resources there. there, maybe there's resources there. The maybe is an important thing that in The maybe is an important thing that in The maybe is an important thing that in language terms, maybe means maybe, but language terms, maybe means maybe, but language terms, maybe means maybe, but in neurobiological terms, maybe means in neurobiological terms, maybe means in neurobiological terms, maybe means perhaps there's going to be the surprise perhaps there's going to be the surprise perhaps there's going to be the surprise of an even bigger dopamine reward. And of an even bigger dopamine reward. And of an even bigger dopamine reward. And the one thing dopamine loves more than the one thing dopamine loves more than the one thing dopamine loves more than anything else is surprise. When we get anything else is surprise. When we get anything else is surprise. When we get something positive, we go to the something positive, we go to the something positive, we go to the mailbox, we're expecting some bills and mailbox, we're expecting some bills and mailbox, we're expecting some bills and you open it up and you get a letter from you open it up and you get a letter from you open it up and you get a letter from somebody you haven't thought about in a somebody you haven't thought about in a somebody you haven't thought about in a long time and you adore that person, long time and you adore that person, long time and you adore that person, that's a huge dopamine release. that's a huge dopamine release. that's a huge dopamine release. It actually triggers neural plasticity. It actually triggers neural plasticity. It actually triggers neural plasticity. You probably never forget that because You probably never forget that because You probably never forget that because of the way that dopamine gates of the way that dopamine gates of the way that dopamine gates plasticity. When we get a surprise of something When we get a surprise of something When we get a surprise of something that we didn't want, that we didn't want, that we didn't want, also it creates plasticity. So, the also it creates plasticity. So, the also it creates plasticity. So, the surprise, novelty, motivation and surprise, novelty, motivation and surprise, novelty, motivation and reward, they're all woven into this reward, they're all woven into this reward, they're all woven into this package that we call dopamine. And the package that we call dopamine. And the package that we call dopamine. And the cool thing is you can actually regulate cool thing is you can actually regulate cool thing is you can actually regulate this whole system in a way that will this whole system in a way that will this whole system in a way that will steer you or lean you towards more steer you or lean you towards more steer you or lean you towards more positive anticipation of things in life positive anticipation of things in life positive anticipation of things in life and less disappointment. It's simply a and less disappointment. It's simply a and less disappointment. It's simply a matter of adjusting what we call the matter of adjusting what we call the matter of adjusting what we call the dopamine schedule. Okay, a couple things dopamine schedule. Okay, a couple things dopamine schedule. Okay, a couple things before we continue. before we continue. before we continue. We're going to talk about attention We're going to talk about attention We're going to talk about attention deficit in a few minutes, but before deficit in a few minutes, but before deficit in a few minutes, but before that I want to talk about something that I want to talk about something that I want to talk about something that I've mentioned before in previous I've mentioned before in previous I've mentioned before in previous podcasts, but that you may not be aware podcasts, but that you may not be aware podcasts, but that you may not be aware of and if you're aware of, you may still of and if you're aware of, you may still of and if you're aware of, you may still be doing which is severely be doing which is severely be doing which is severely injuring your ability to release injuring your ability to release injuring your ability to release dopamine. It's creating a sense of dopamine. It's creating a sense of dopamine. It's creating a sense of disappointment in ways that are most disappointment in ways that are most disappointment in ways that are most likely hurting you mentally and likely hurting you mentally and likely hurting you mentally and physically. And that's the physically. And that's the physically. And that's the blunting of dopamine blunting of dopamine blunting of dopamine by viewing light in the middle of the by viewing light in the middle of the by viewing light in the middle of the night. I realize this is not a night. I realize this is not a night. I realize this is not a discussion about sleep and circadian discussion about sleep and circadian discussion about sleep and circadian rhythms, but the data now are so strong rhythms, but the data now are so strong rhythms, but the data now are so strong showing that viewing bright light from showing that viewing bright light from showing that viewing bright light from about 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. about 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. about 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. too often too often too often triggers activation of this circuit triggers activation of this circuit triggers activation of this circuit called the habenula. So, this is I to called the habenula. So, this is I to called the habenula. So, this is I to goes from your retina to a structure goes from your retina to a structure goes from your retina to a structure called the habenula, h a b e n u l a. called the habenula, h a b e n u l a. called the habenula, h a b e n u l a. Then, from the habenula to some of this Then, from the habenula to some of this Then, from the habenula to some of this reward circuitry and it suppresses the reward circuitry and it suppresses the reward circuitry and it suppresses the activation of the reward circuitry activation of the reward circuitry activation of the reward circuitry not just in that moment, but to things not just in that moment, but to things not just in that moment, but to things that you normally positively anticipate that you normally positively anticipate that you normally positively anticipate and pursue. And the reason I'm bringing and pursue. And the reason I'm bringing and pursue. And the reason I'm bringing this up now is cuz I haven't really gone this up now is cuz I haven't really gone this up now is cuz I haven't really gone into depth on the dopamine system into depth on the dopamine system into depth on the dopamine system before. Now, you understand you have before. Now, you understand you have before. Now, you understand you have this very precious reward system that's this very precious reward system that's this very precious reward system that's kind of a double-edged sword. It needs kind of a double-edged sword. It needs kind of a double-edged sword. It needs to be taken care of and treated well. to be taken care of and treated well. to be taken care of and treated well. You want to use it, but not overuse it, You want to use it, but not overuse it, You want to use it, but not overuse it, etc. But, getting bright light exposure in But, getting bright light exposure in But, getting bright light exposure in the middle of the night is reducing your the middle of the night is reducing your the middle of the night is reducing your capacity to release dopamine. So, it's capacity to release dopamine. So, it's capacity to release dopamine. So, it's not just about the sleep that you're not just about the sleep that you're not just about the sleep that you're not getting in that time. It's also that getting in that time. It's also that getting in that time. It's also that you're not uh getting the dopamine you're not uh getting the dopamine you're not uh getting the dopamine that's a that would otherwise be that's a that would otherwise be that's a that would otherwise be available to you. So, you're actually available to you. So, you're actually available to you. So, you're actually taking Think of light in the middle of taking Think of light in the middle of taking Think of light in the middle of the night as a kind of antagonist, as the night as a kind of antagonist, as the night as a kind of antagonist, as kind of a blocker of dopamine. Maybe kind of a blocker of dopamine. Maybe kind of a blocker of dopamine. Maybe that'll help you. If you're somebody who that'll help you. If you're somebody who that'll help you. If you're somebody who has to work in the middle of the night has to work in the middle of the night has to work in the middle of the night and you want to bypass this dopamine and you want to bypass this dopamine and you want to bypass this dopamine suppression, please see the episode suppression, please see the episode suppression, please see the episode about jet lag and shift work because about jet lag and shift work because about jet lag and shift work because there are a lot of tips there that will there are a lot of tips there that will there are a lot of tips there that will allow you to do that. In order to allow you to do that. In order to allow you to do that. In order to understand how to control the dopamine understand how to control the dopamine understand how to control the dopamine system, how to leverage it for a better system, how to leverage it for a better system, how to leverage it for a better life, you need to understand the results of a you need to understand the results of a you need to understand the results of a very important experiment. very important experiment. very important experiment. This experiment was able to separate This experiment was able to separate This experiment was able to separate pleasure from motivation. It's a very pleasure from motivation. It's a very pleasure from motivation. It's a very simple, but like many simple simple, but like many simple simple, but like many simple experiments, a very elegant experiment. experiments, a very elegant experiment. experiments, a very elegant experiment. What they did, and this has now been What they did, and this has now been What they did, and this has now been done in animals and in humans, done in animals and in humans, done in animals and in humans, they offered rats food. they offered rats food. they offered rats food. It was a food that they particularly It was a food that they particularly It was a food that they particularly liked. And the animals would lever press for a And the animals would lever press for a And the animals would lever press for a pellet of food, kind of classic pellet of food, kind of classic pellet of food, kind of classic experiment. They'd eat the food and they experiment. They'd eat the food and they experiment. They'd eat the food and they presumably liked the food because they presumably liked the food because they presumably liked the food because they were motivated to press the lever and were motivated to press the lever and were motivated to press the lever and eat it. Great. They took other rats. eat it. Great. They took other rats. eat it. Great. They took other rats. They eliminated the dopamine neurons. They eliminated the dopamine neurons. They eliminated the dopamine neurons. You can do this by injection of a You can do this by injection of a You can do this by injection of a neurotoxin that destroys these neurons. neurotoxin that destroys these neurons. neurotoxin that destroys these neurons. So, they actually had no dopamine in So, they actually had no dopamine in So, they actually had no dopamine in their brain. They have no ability to their brain. They have no ability to their brain. They have no ability to release dopamine. release dopamine. release dopamine. And they gave them a lever. And they gave them a lever. And they gave them a lever. The rats would sit there and they'd hit The rats would sit there and they'd hit The rats would sit there and they'd hit the lever and they'd eat the food. They the lever and they'd eat the food. They the lever and they'd eat the food. They still enjoyed the food. enjoyed the food. enjoyed the food. So, you say, "Well, okay, so dopamine So, you say, "Well, okay, so dopamine So, you say, "Well, okay, so dopamine isn't involved in motivation and it isn't involved in motivation and it isn't involved in motivation and it isn't involved in pleasure." No, it isn't involved in pleasure." No, it isn't involved in pleasure." No, it absolutely is. absolutely is. absolutely is. They could still enjoy the food, They could still enjoy the food, They could still enjoy the food, but if they moved the rat literally one but if they moved the rat literally one but if they moved the rat literally one body length away from the lever, body length away from the lever, body length away from the lever, what they found was the animals that had what they found was the animals that had what they found was the animals that had dopamine would move over to the lever, dopamine would move over to the lever, dopamine would move over to the lever, press it, and eat. And the ones the rats press it, and eat. And the ones the rats press it, and eat. And the ones the rats that did not have dopamine available to that did not have dopamine available to that did not have dopamine available to them, wouldn't even move one body length, one wouldn't even move one body length, one wouldn't even move one body length, one rat length, rat length, rat length, to the lever in order to press it and to the lever in order to press it and to the lever in order to press it and get the food. Dopamine, therefore, is get the food. Dopamine, therefore, is get the food. Dopamine, therefore, is not about the ability to experience not about the ability to experience not about the ability to experience pleasure. It is about motivation for pleasure. It is about motivation for pleasure. It is about motivation for pleasure. This has been repeated in humans in a This has been repeated in humans in a This has been repeated in humans in a variety of different scenarios. You variety of different scenarios. You variety of different scenarios. You can't really do the lever press thing can't really do the lever press thing can't really do the lever press thing quite as easily. quite as easily. quite as easily. But we know that people have low levels But we know that people have low levels But we know that people have low levels of dopamine are simply less motivated of dopamine are simply less motivated of dopamine are simply less motivated even though they can achieve pleasure. even though they can achieve pleasure. even though they can achieve pleasure. And this has serious ramifications for And this has serious ramifications for And this has serious ramifications for the fact that now the fact that now the fact that now quote and quote pleasure or ways to quote and quote pleasure or ways to quote and quote pleasure or ways to induce things that we believe give us induce things that we believe give us induce things that we believe give us pleasure are everywhere and they're within reach. are everywhere and they're within reach. are everywhere and they're within reach. We don't have to forage for our food. We don't have to forage for our food. We don't have to forage for our food. There's lot of highly processed, high There's lot of highly processed, high There's lot of highly processed, high sugar, high fat foods. There's also sugar, high fat foods. There's also sugar, high fat foods. There's also foods that are healthy that taste good. foods that are healthy that taste good. foods that are healthy that taste good. But they're and hopefully they're pretty But they're and hopefully they're pretty But they're and hopefully they're pretty easy to get. Although that different easy to get. Although that different easy to get. Although that different people have different access to things, people have different access to things, people have different access to things, of course. of course. of course. But dopamine isn't about the ability to But dopamine isn't about the ability to But dopamine isn't about the ability to experience pleasure. It's about how experience pleasure. It's about how experience pleasure. It's about how motivated you are to reach those motivated you are to reach those motivated you are to reach those pleasures. And so, many of you are probably And so, many of you are probably And so, many of you are probably thinking, "Wow, I'm not a very motivated person." "Wow, I'm not a very motivated person." "Wow, I'm not a very motivated person." Like you talked about the one kind of Like you talked about the one kind of Like you talked about the one kind of procrastination earlier, what about when procrastination earlier, what about when procrastination earlier, what about when I just feel kind of meh about life? Now, I just feel kind of meh about life? Now, I just feel kind of meh about life? Now, it for some of you there may be a real it for some of you there may be a real it for some of you there may be a real clinical depression and you should talk clinical depression and you should talk clinical depression and you should talk to a professional. There are very good to a professional. There are very good to a professional. There are very good prescription drugs prescription drugs prescription drugs that can really help people. There's that can really help people. There's that can really help people. There's also great non-drug treatments of also great non-drug treatments of also great non-drug treatments of psychotherapy and other treatments that psychotherapy and other treatments that psychotherapy and other treatments that are being developed are being developed are being developed in addition to psychotherapy and the in addition to psychotherapy and the in addition to psychotherapy and the various kinds of psychoanalysis, etc., various kinds of psychoanalysis, etc., various kinds of psychoanalysis, etc., that one can use. I think the data that one can use. I think the data that one can use. I think the data really point to the fact that a really point to the fact that a really point to the fact that a combination of pharmacology and combination of pharmacology and combination of pharmacology and talk therapies are generally best, and talk therapies are generally best, and talk therapies are generally best, and there are a huge range of these things. there are a huge range of these things. there are a huge range of these things. I know many of you are in these I know many of you are in these I know many of you are in these professions. We're not going to talk professions. We're not going to talk professions. We're not going to talk about that right now. There is a about that right now. There is a about that right now. There is a compound that's kind of interesting in compound that's kind of interesting in compound that's kind of interesting in the supplement space that isn't the supplement space that isn't the supplement space that isn't Mucuna pruriens L-DOPA. It's not Mucuna pruriens L-DOPA. It's not Mucuna pruriens L-DOPA. It's not L-tyrosine that isn't that isn't that isn't promoting massive releases of dopamine promoting massive releases of dopamine promoting massive releases of dopamine or even dopamine alone, but a or even dopamine alone, but a or even dopamine alone, but a combination of dopamine and serotonin, combination of dopamine and serotonin, combination of dopamine and serotonin, and it's an intriguing molecule. It's and it's an intriguing molecule. It's and it's an intriguing molecule. It's sold over the counter. Again, you have sold over the counter. Again, you have sold over the counter. Again, you have to check with your healthcare to check with your healthcare to check with your healthcare provider before you would take anything provider before you would take anything provider before you would take anything or remove anything. That's very or remove anything. That's very or remove anything. That's very important. Which is But, it's Which is But, it's Which is But, it's phenylethylamine or PEA. PEA or beta-phenylethylamine or beta-phenylethylamine or beta-phenylethylamine releases dopamine at low levels, but also dopamine at low levels, but also dopamine at low levels, but also serotonin at low levels. So, it's kind serotonin at low levels. So, it's kind serotonin at low levels. So, it's kind of a cocktail of the motivation of a cocktail of the motivation of a cocktail of the motivation molecules as well as the quote-unquote molecules as well as the quote-unquote molecules as well as the quote-unquote here and now molecules. And people's here and now molecules. And people's here and now molecules. And people's response to this varies widely. response to this varies widely. response to this varies widely. But, many people report feeling But, many people report feeling But, many people report feeling heightened sense of mental acuity, heightened sense of mental acuity, heightened sense of mental acuity, well-being, etc. It is a bit of a well-being, etc. It is a bit of a well-being, etc. It is a bit of a stimulant, like anything that triggers stimulant, like anything that triggers stimulant, like anything that triggers activation of the dopamine and activation of the dopamine and activation of the dopamine and norepinephrine pathway. But, it is an norepinephrine pathway. But, it is an norepinephrine pathway. But, it is an interesting supplement. I actually interesting supplement. I actually interesting supplement. I actually haven't tried it before. haven't tried it before. haven't tried it before. So, I can't report on my own So, I can't report on my own So, I can't report on my own experiences. I will point you, however, experiences. I will point you, however, experiences. I will point you, however, to examine.com. It wouldn't be a Huberman examine.com. It wouldn't be a Huberman examine.com. It wouldn't be a Huberman Lab podcast episode if I didn't point Lab podcast episode if I didn't point Lab podcast episode if I didn't point you to examine.com, this incredible free you to examine.com, this incredible free you to examine.com, this incredible free resource where you can put in any resource where you can put in any resource where you can put in any supplement, and it will tell you the supplement, and it will tell you the supplement, and it will tell you the quote-unquote human effect matrix. It'll quote-unquote human effect matrix. It'll quote-unquote human effect matrix. It'll point you to the various studies. We point you to the various studies. We point you to the various studies. We always provide a link to this in the always provide a link to this in the always provide a link to this in the caption. It's an amazing resource. So, caption. It's an amazing resource. So, caption. It's an amazing resource. So, you can go there to explore more. But, I you can go there to explore more. But, I you can go there to explore more. But, I haven't talked about um haven't talked about um haven't talked about um beta-phenyl-L-ethylamine in previous podcasts, and I wanted to in previous podcasts, and I wanted to in previous podcasts, and I wanted to add it to the um list of things that tap add it to the um list of things that tap add it to the um list of things that tap into the dopamine system into the dopamine system into the dopamine system that are uh in this I guess we call it that are uh in this I guess we call it that are uh in this I guess we call it now the supplementation space. now the supplementation space. now the supplementation space. I personally am fascinated by these I personally am fascinated by these I personally am fascinated by these supplements and the things that exist supplements and the things that exist supplements and the things that exist out there that are non-prescription that out there that are non-prescription that out there that are non-prescription that seem to seem to seem to at least in some people have positive at least in some people have positive at least in some people have positive effects. Uh for instance, last episode effects. Uh for instance, last episode effects. Uh for instance, last episode we talked about acetyl-L-carnitine, we talked about acetyl-L-carnitine, we talked about acetyl-L-carnitine, which uh there are several papers that which uh there are several papers that which uh there are several papers that report antidepressant effects as well as report antidepressant effects as well as report antidepressant effects as well as positive effects on other things, um positive effects on other things, um positive effects on other things, um sperm health, ovarian health, etc. I sperm health, ovarian health, etc. I sperm health, ovarian health, etc. I learned from a colleague that learned from a colleague that learned from a colleague that acetyl-L-carnitine in Europe is actually acetyl-L-carnitine in Europe is actually acetyl-L-carnitine in Europe is actually a prescription drug. In the US, it's a prescription drug. In the US, it's a prescription drug. In the US, it's sold over the counter. So, I guess sold over the counter. So, I guess sold over the counter. So, I guess depending on where you're listening to depending on where you're listening to depending on where you're listening to this, the availability might vary. And this, the availability might vary. And this, the availability might vary. And as always, I put the caveat you have to as always, I put the caveat you have to as always, I put the caveat you have to check with your health care provider if check with your health care provider if check with your health care provider if it's right for you, but I'm fascinated it's right for you, but I'm fascinated it's right for you, but I'm fascinated by the fact that these things exist and by the fact that these things exist and by the fact that these things exist and that they lie somewhere between that they lie somewhere between that they lie somewhere between prescription drugs and doing nothing. prescription drugs and doing nothing. prescription drugs and doing nothing. And that makes them uh interesting And that makes them uh interesting And that makes them uh interesting compounds, and I think that PEA, compounds, and I think that PEA, compounds, and I think that PEA, um beta-phenyl-ethylamine, um beta-phenyl-ethylamine, um beta-phenyl-ethylamine, is uh yet another one of the of such is uh yet another one of the of such is uh yet another one of the of such compounds. I I'm going to talk a lot about attention I'm going to talk a lot about attention I'm going to talk a lot about attention deficit and attention deficit and attention deficit and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in a future hyperactivity disorder in a future hyperactivity disorder in a future episode, but I do want to mention it episode, but I do want to mention it episode, but I do want to mention it today in the context of dopamine and today in the context of dopamine and today in the context of dopamine and impulsivity. So, ADHD or ADD, so impulsivity. So, ADHD or ADD, so impulsivity. So, ADHD or ADD, so attention deficit hyperactivity attention deficit hyperactivity attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADD, are clinical diagnoses. I disorder, ADD, are clinical diagnoses. I disorder, ADD, are clinical diagnoses. I think a lot of people nowadays walk think a lot of people nowadays walk think a lot of people nowadays walk around and say, "I have ADD." or "You around and say, "I have ADD." or "You around and say, "I have ADD." or "You have ADD." have ADD." have ADD." Um and indeed, one can create a sort of Um and indeed, one can create a sort of Um and indeed, one can create a sort of ADD by attention switching all the time. ADD by attention switching all the time. ADD by attention switching all the time. Uh I'm a big fan of Cal Newport. He Uh I'm a big fan of Cal Newport. He Uh I'm a big fan of Cal Newport. He wrote the book Deep Work. He uh I wrote the book Deep Work. He uh I wrote the book Deep Work. He uh I believe he was the one who said context believe he was the one who said context believe he was the one who said context switching is terrible for the brain. switching is terrible for the brain. switching is terrible for the brain. It's like the worst thing for the brain It's like the worst thing for the brain It's like the worst thing for the brain because then the brain learns to context because then the brain learns to context because then the brain learns to context switch and real deep work, productivity, switch and real deep work, productivity, switch and real deep work, productivity, learning of all kinds, good learning of all kinds, good learning of all kinds, good relationships of all kinds really come relationships of all kinds really come relationships of all kinds really come from depth of experience, not from depth of experience, not from depth of experience, not from breadth of experience within the breadth of experience within the breadth of experience within the moment." And so, moment." And so, moment." And so, I think it's important to know that I think it's important to know that I think it's important to know that there's clinical ADHD and ADD, and then there's clinical ADHD and ADD, and then there's clinical ADHD and ADD, and then there's the kind that people are kind of there's the kind that people are kind of there's the kind that people are kind of inducing and through distraction and social media and through distraction and social media and through distraction and social media and phones, etc. And those can sometimes and phones, etc. And those can sometimes and phones, etc. And those can sometimes lead to clinical ADHD and ADD. But, I lead to clinical ADHD and ADD. But, I lead to clinical ADHD and ADD. But, I want to talk about ADHD and ADD in kids want to talk about ADHD and ADD in kids want to talk about ADHD and ADD in kids just briefly. The drugs that are just briefly. The drugs that are just briefly. The drugs that are normally given to treat those normally given to treat those normally given to treat those conditions, ADHD and ADD, are things conditions, ADHD and ADD, are things conditions, ADHD and ADD, are things like Adderall, things that have very like Adderall, things that have very like Adderall, things that have very amphetamine-like qualities and amphetamine-like qualities and amphetamine-like qualities and structures. And you might ask, "Why structures. And you might ask, "Why structures. And you might ask, "Why would they do that?" Well, it turns out that they do that?" Well, it turns out that they do that?" Well, it turns out that in kids, these activate that forebrain in kids, these activate that forebrain in kids, these activate that forebrain circuitry, the break that exists on the circuitry, the break that exists on the circuitry, the break that exists on the deeper mesolimbic circuitry. So, as you deeper mesolimbic circuitry. So, as you deeper mesolimbic circuitry. So, as you recall, there's the VTA and nucleus recall, there's the VTA and nucleus recall, there's the VTA and nucleus accumbens, those are kind of accumbens, those are kind of accumbens, those are kind of accelerators on dopamine, and then accelerators on dopamine, and then accelerators on dopamine, and then there's the prefrontal cortex, which there's the prefrontal cortex, which there's the prefrontal cortex, which acts as a break and can limit acts as a break and can limit acts as a break and can limit impulsivity. And those drugs tend to impulsivity. And those drugs tend to impulsivity. And those drugs tend to increase the activity of neurons in that increase the activity of neurons in that increase the activity of neurons in that pathway, the prefrontal cortex, and it pathway, the prefrontal cortex, and it pathway, the prefrontal cortex, and it reduces impulsivity. In fact, there's a reduces impulsivity. In fact, there's a reduces impulsivity. In fact, there's a experiment described in the book The experiment described in the book The experiment described in the book The Molecule of More, which is really Molecule of More, which is really Molecule of More, which is really interesting, where they looked at interesting, where they looked at interesting, where they looked at impulsivity in obese children. And it impulsivity in obese children. And it impulsivity in obese children. And it turns out uh they did this experiment in turns out uh they did this experiment in turns out uh they did this experiment in a safe way that they looked at kids um a safe way that they looked at kids um a safe way that they looked at kids um both obese kids and non-obese kids and both obese kids and non-obese kids and both obese kids and non-obese kids and their willingness to cross a very busy their willingness to cross a very busy their willingness to cross a very busy highway. And it turns out that the obese highway. And it turns out that the obese highway. And it turns out that the obese kids got hit by cars more often than uh kids got hit by cars more often than uh kids got hit by cars more often than uh non-obese children. It turns out this non-obese children. It turns out this non-obese children. It turns out this was a virtual reality experiment. It had was a virtual reality experiment. It had was a virtual reality experiment. It had nothing to do with the fact that they nothing to do with the fact that they nothing to do with the fact that they were obese or limitations on movement were obese or limitations on movement were obese or limitations on movement or speed of movement. It was that the or speed of movement. It was that the or speed of movement. It was that the obese children were more impulsive in a obese children were more impulsive in a obese children were more impulsive in a variety of contexts, not just in this variety of contexts, not just in this variety of contexts, not just in this virtual crossing the street thing. And virtual crossing the street thing. And virtual crossing the street thing. And it turns out uh the data point to the it turns out uh the data point to the it turns out uh the data point to the fact that impulsivity at age 10 is fact that impulsivity at age 10 is fact that impulsivity at age 10 is actually predictive of overeating actually predictive of overeating actually predictive of overeating disorders at a later stage in life. So, disorders at a later stage in life. So, disorders at a later stage in life. So, some of these drugs that are designed to some of these drugs that are designed to some of these drugs that are designed to create heightened activity in the create heightened activity in the create heightened activity in the braking system, the decelerator of the braking system, the decelerator of the braking system, the decelerator of the reward pathway, are designed to reduce reward pathway, are designed to reduce reward pathway, are designed to reduce impulsivity because they suppress the impulsivity because they suppress the impulsivity because they suppress the release of dopamine and they allow release of dopamine and they allow release of dopamine and they allow hopefully, they allow children and it hopefully, they allow children and it hopefully, they allow children and it and when they become adults to better and when they become adults to better and when they become adults to better control the schedule of dopamine control the schedule of dopamine control the schedule of dopamine release. So, now let's talk about what release. So, now let's talk about what release. So, now let's talk about what is a dopamine schedule and how you can is a dopamine schedule and how you can is a dopamine schedule and how you can leverage this in order to have leverage this in order to have leverage this in order to have heightened levels of motivation, but not heightened levels of motivation, but not heightened levels of motivation, but not get so much dopamine that you're get so much dopamine that you're get so much dopamine that you're experiencing a crash afterwards, and experiencing a crash afterwards, and experiencing a crash afterwards, and also so that you can experience also so that you can experience also so that you can experience heightened pleasure from the various heightened pleasure from the various heightened pleasure from the various pursuits that you are engaged in pursuits that you are engaged in pursuits that you are engaged in life. I know many of you are interested in I know many of you are interested in I know many of you are interested in tools that will allow you to be more that will allow you to be more that will allow you to be more motivated, to focus longer, motivated, to focus longer, motivated, to focus longer, sleep better. That's really what the sleep better. That's really what the sleep better. That's really what the Huberman Lab podcast is all about, but Huberman Lab podcast is all about, but Huberman Lab podcast is all about, but always framed in the context of always framed in the context of always framed in the context of neurobiological principles and objective neurobiological principles and objective neurobiological principles and objective mechanisms. There are some tools that we can apply There are some tools that we can apply There are some tools that we can apply to the dopamine system and motivation to the dopamine system and motivation to the dopamine system and motivation that can really improve our ability to that can really improve our ability to that can really improve our ability to stay in pursuit of things, as well as stay in pursuit of things, as well as stay in pursuit of things, as well as enjoy things after we've achieved our enjoy things after we've achieved our enjoy things after we've achieved our goals or even en route to our goals. goals or even en route to our goals. goals or even en route to our goals. And here's the key principle. And here's the key principle. And here's the key principle. Dopamine is very subjective, meaning you Dopamine is very subjective, meaning you Dopamine is very subjective, meaning you can either allow yourself to experience can either allow yourself to experience can either allow yourself to experience the pleasure of reaching a milestone, of the pleasure of reaching a milestone, of the pleasure of reaching a milestone, of achieving or some craving, achieving or some craving, achieving or some craving, or not. or not. or not. Now, that won't work in the extreme Now, that won't work in the extreme Now, that won't work in the extreme cases of drugs like cocaine and cases of drugs like cocaine and cases of drugs like cocaine and amphetamine, but it's actually pretty amphetamine, but it's actually pretty amphetamine, but it's actually pretty powerful what one can do with the powerful what one can do with the powerful what one can do with the subjective system. In I'm going to subjective system. In I'm going to subjective system. In I'm going to describe you an experiment that describe you an experiment that describe you an experiment that highlights just how powerful the highlights just how powerful the highlights just how powerful the subjective readout or the subjective readout or the subjective readout or the subjective interpretation of a given experience interpretation of a given experience interpretation of a given experience really can be, even at the level of really can be, even at the level of really can be, even at the level of pharmacology. I love examples of subjective effects I love examples of subjective effects I love examples of subjective effects over things that would otherwise seem over things that would otherwise seem over things that would otherwise seem hardwired because they really illustrate hardwired because they really illustrate hardwired because they really illustrate the interplay between our cognition, our the interplay between our cognition, our the interplay between our cognition, our belief system, and what would otherwise belief system, and what would otherwise belief system, and what would otherwise be these, you know, just be these, you know, just be these, you know, just plug and chug kind of mechanisms of, you plug and chug kind of mechanisms of, you plug and chug kind of mechanisms of, you know, you eat x amount of chocolate or know, you eat x amount of chocolate or know, you eat x amount of chocolate or you drink x amount of water after being you drink x amount of water after being you drink x amount of water after being water deprived for a certain amount of water deprived for a certain amount of water deprived for a certain amount of time and you get x amount of dopamine. time and you get x amount of dopamine. time and you get x amount of dopamine. Here's the experiment. The experiment Here's the experiment. The experiment Here's the experiment. The experiment was just published on March 18th, 2021, was just published on March 18th, 2021, was just published on March 18th, 2021, so very recently. And the title of the so very recently. And the title of the so very recently. And the title of the experiment is expectation for stimulant experiment is expectation for stimulant experiment is expectation for stimulant type modifies caffeine's effects on mood type modifies caffeine's effects on mood type modifies caffeine's effects on mood and cognition. And this was done in and cognition. And this was done in and cognition. And this was done in college students. It's a fascinating college students. It's a fascinating college students. It's a fascinating study. What they did is they gave study. What they did is they gave study. What they did is they gave college students college students college students either placebo, essentially nothing, or 200 mg of essentially nothing, or 200 mg of essentially nothing, or 200 mg of caffeine. 200 mg of caffeine is about caffeine. 200 mg of caffeine is about caffeine. 200 mg of caffeine is about what's in uh what's in uh what's in uh well, a typical coffee, like a medium well, a typical coffee, like a medium well, a typical coffee, like a medium coffee that you'll buy, a drip coffee, coffee that you'll buy, a drip coffee, coffee that you'll buy, a drip coffee, or um a coffee that you'd make at home. or um a coffee that you'd make at home. or um a coffee that you'd make at home. It's a fair amount of caffeine. If you It's a fair amount of caffeine. If you It's a fair amount of caffeine. If you were to take it in pill form, it would were to take it in pill form, it would were to take it in pill form, it would definitely make you feel more alert definitely make you feel more alert definitely make you feel more alert unless you were one of those um mutants, unless you were one of those um mutants, unless you were one of those um mutants, literally mutants, that um literally mutants, that um literally mutants, that um is insensitive to caffeine. And those is insensitive to caffeine. And those is insensitive to caffeine. And those mutants are pretty rare. So, they took mutants are pretty rare. So, they took mutants are pretty rare. So, they took 65 undergraduate students 65 undergraduate students 65 undergraduate students in college. They randomized them to in college. They randomized them to in college. They randomized them to either placebo or caffeine. either placebo or caffeine. either placebo or caffeine. And they told them that they were either And they told them that they were either And they told them that they were either getting caffeine or Adderall. getting caffeine or Adderall. getting caffeine or Adderall. Now, Adderall cognitively carries a very Now, Adderall cognitively carries a very Now, Adderall cognitively carries a very different um expectation. College different um expectation. College different um expectation. College students know Adderall to be a much students know Adderall to be a much students know Adderall to be a much stronger stimulant than caffeine. They stronger stimulant than caffeine. They stronger stimulant than caffeine. They know it to create a sort of high. This know it to create a sort of high. This know it to create a sort of high. This is the way the students described it. is the way the students described it. is the way the students described it. And they thought that it would increase And they thought that it would increase And they thought that it would increase their level of focus and their ability their level of focus and their ability their level of focus and their ability to perform work. So, what was really to perform work. So, what was really to perform work. So, what was really interesting is there was interesting is there was interesting is there was Oh, definitely an effect of placebo Oh, definitely an effect of placebo Oh, definitely an effect of placebo versus caffeine. That's not surprising, versus caffeine. That's not surprising, versus caffeine. That's not surprising, however, right? You take a placebo, however, right? You take a placebo, however, right? You take a placebo, you may or may not feel more alert. Um you may or may not feel more alert. Um you may or may not feel more alert. Um but, you take 200 mg of caffeine, very but, you take 200 mg of caffeine, very but, you take 200 mg of caffeine, very likely you're going to feel very alert. likely you're going to feel very alert. likely you're going to feel very alert. But, there was also an effect of whether But, there was also an effect of whether But, there was also an effect of whether or not the students thought they were or not the students thought they were or not the students thought they were getting caffeine or Adderall. getting caffeine or Adderall. getting caffeine or Adderall. The subjects receiving caffeine reported The subjects receiving caffeine reported The subjects receiving caffeine reported feeling more stimulated, anxious, and feeling more stimulated, anxious, and feeling more stimulated, anxious, and motivated than the subjects that motivated than the subjects that motivated than the subjects that received the placebo. Okay. But, the received the placebo. Okay. But, the received the placebo. Okay. But, the ones that expected Adderall reported ones that expected Adderall reported ones that expected Adderall reported stronger amphetamine effects. So, they stronger amphetamine effects. So, they stronger amphetamine effects. So, they felt much more high. They performed felt much more high. They performed felt much more high. They performed better on a working memory test. And in better on a working memory test. And in better on a working memory test. And in general, they had all the increased general, they had all the increased general, they had all the increased cognitive effects that they would have cognitive effects that they would have cognitive effects that they would have been seen with Adderall, but they were been seen with Adderall, but they were been seen with Adderall, but they were only ingesting caffeine. And so, this only ingesting caffeine. And so, this only ingesting caffeine. And so, this shows an interaction between the drug, shows an interaction between the drug, shows an interaction between the drug, caffeine, and the expectation that it caffeine, and the expectation that it caffeine, and the expectation that it was Adderall. was Adderall. was Adderall. So, it led to heightened performance So, it led to heightened performance So, it led to heightened performance simply because the students thought they simply because the students thought they simply because the students thought they were getting Adderall. Now, I don't know were getting Adderall. Now, I don't know were getting Adderall. Now, I don't know whether or not whether or not whether or not they uh told them at the end that it they uh told them at the end that it they uh told them at the end that it wasn't Adderall. I doubt that they did. wasn't Adderall. I doubt that they did. wasn't Adderall. I doubt that they did. This, if you want to look it up, um the This, if you want to look it up, um the This, if you want to look it up, um the study was uh published in the ex- uh the study was uh published in the ex- uh the study was uh published in the ex- uh the Journal of Experimental Clinical um Journal of Experimental Clinical um Journal of Experimental Clinical um Psychopharmacology. Uh the paper is Luby et al. l o b y et Uh the paper is Luby et al. l o b y et Uh the paper is Luby et al. l o b y et al. And again, it was just published uh al. And again, it was just published uh al. And again, it was just published uh March 18th, 2021. Speaks to the fact March 18th, 2021. Speaks to the fact March 18th, 2021. Speaks to the fact that yes, there are so-called placebo that yes, there are so-called placebo that yes, there are so-called placebo effects, but this is different than effects, but this is different than effects, but this is different than placebo. This is a belief effect about placebo. This is a belief effect about placebo. This is a belief effect about what the specific reactions to a given what the specific reactions to a given what the specific reactions to a given stimulant ought to be. And I think this stimulant ought to be. And I think this stimulant ought to be. And I think this is very important because I think that is very important because I think that is very important because I think that it points to the fact that the it points to the fact that the it points to the fact that the top-down, the kind of higher-level top-down, the kind of higher-level top-down, the kind of higher-level cognitive processes are impacting even cognitive processes are impacting even cognitive processes are impacting even the most basic fundamental aspects of the most basic fundamental aspects of the most basic fundamental aspects of the say dopamine release or our amount the say dopamine release or our amount the say dopamine release or our amount uh adrenaline release or epinephrine uh adrenaline release or epinephrine uh adrenaline release or epinephrine release in ways that can positively release in ways that can positively release in ways that can positively impact performance. In this case, it was impact performance. In this case, it was impact performance. In this case, it was a positive improvement in working memory a positive improvement in working memory a positive improvement in working memory and focus. As long as we're talking and focus. As long as we're talking and focus. As long as we're talking about caffeine, I'd like to point out a about caffeine, I'd like to point out a about caffeine, I'd like to point out a study that's really interesting. This study that's really interesting. This study that's really interesting. This was published in Journal of was published in Journal of was published in Journal of Neuroscience, which is the Society for Neuroscience, which is the Society for Neuroscience, which is the Society for Neurosciences kind of flagship journal. Neurosciences kind of flagship journal. Neurosciences kind of flagship journal. It's their journal. It's a It's a good It's their journal. It's a It's a good It's their journal. It's a It's a good journal. And what they showed was that journal. And what they showed was that journal. And what they showed was that caffeine can increase dopamine release caffeine can increase dopamine release caffeine can increase dopamine release in the brain by about 30%. That wasn't in the brain by about 30%. That wasn't in the brain by about 30%. That wasn't surprising. I even said that earlier. surprising. I even said that earlier. surprising. I even said that earlier. But what they also showed is that it has a what they also showed is that it has a what they also showed is that it has a protective effect on dopamine neurons. protective effect on dopamine neurons. protective effect on dopamine neurons. So, caffeine in some cases may not just So, caffeine in some cases may not just So, caffeine in some cases may not just increase dopamine release, but it might increase dopamine release, but it might increase dopamine release, but it might actually have a protective effect on actually have a protective effect on actually have a protective effect on dopamine neurons. Now, that's distinctly dopamine neurons. Now, that's distinctly dopamine neurons. Now, that's distinctly different from some claims that drugs different from some claims that drugs different from some claims that drugs like MDMA, ecstasy, have been It's been like MDMA, ecstasy, have been It's been like MDMA, ecstasy, have been It's been argued can are neurotoxic for things argued can are neurotoxic for things argued can are neurotoxic for things like dopamine and serotonin neurons. The like dopamine and serotonin neurons. The like dopamine and serotonin neurons. The study that was published about that in study that was published about that in study that was published about that in the journal Science, which is an the journal Science, which is an the journal Science, which is an extremely prestigious, excellent extremely prestigious, excellent extremely prestigious, excellent journal, later it was shown that it wasn't MDMA, later it was shown that it wasn't MDMA, later it was shown that it wasn't MDMA, ecstasy, that was given um in that case. ecstasy, that was given um in that case. ecstasy, that was given um in that case. It was actually amphetamine, which is It was actually amphetamine, which is It was actually amphetamine, which is known to destroy dopaminergic and known to destroy dopaminergic and known to destroy dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons. So, what does this serotonergic neurons. So, what does this serotonergic neurons. So, what does this mean? This means that low levels of mean? This means that low levels of mean? This means that low levels of caffeine may, at least in a few studies, caffeine may, at least in a few studies, caffeine may, at least in a few studies, be protective for dopamine neurons over be protective for dopamine neurons over be protective for dopamine neurons over time. That MDMA, ecstasy, something time. That MDMA, ecstasy, something time. That MDMA, ecstasy, something that's in clinical trials right now for that's in clinical trials right now for that's in clinical trials right now for the treatment of trauma, PTSD of various the treatment of trauma, PTSD of various the treatment of trauma, PTSD of various kinds and depression, but still illegal kinds and depression, but still illegal kinds and depression, but still illegal at this point in time, at this point in time, at this point in time, uh may, although it doesn't appear yet uh may, although it doesn't appear yet uh may, although it doesn't appear yet from any published studies, destroy from any published studies, destroy from any published studies, destroy dopaminergic neurons, perhaps dopaminergic neurons, perhaps dopaminergic neurons, perhaps serotonergic neurons. So, there's a real serotonergic neurons. So, there's a real serotonergic neurons. So, there's a real asterisk and a question mark there, but asterisk and a question mark there, but asterisk and a question mark there, but amphetamine, and in particular amphetamine, and in particular amphetamine, and in particular methamphetamine, is very destructive for dopaminergic is very destructive for dopaminergic is very destructive for dopaminergic neurons. So, I don't think any of us neurons. So, I don't think any of us neurons. So, I don't think any of us needed any additional reasons to avoid needed any additional reasons to avoid needed any additional reasons to avoid methamphetamine, uh this drug that methamphetamine, uh this drug that methamphetamine, uh this drug that creates huge increases in dopamine and creates huge increases in dopamine and creates huge increases in dopamine and then huge crashes from that dopamine. then huge crashes from that dopamine. then huge crashes from that dopamine. Very destructive drug, but in addition Very destructive drug, but in addition Very destructive drug, but in addition to that seems to destroy dopaminergic to that seems to destroy dopaminergic to that seems to destroy dopaminergic neurons. From time to time I've talked neurons. From time to time I've talked neurons. From time to time I've talked about nicotine on here, not smoking about nicotine on here, not smoking about nicotine on here, not smoking because obviously smoking is bad, lung because obviously smoking is bad, lung because obviously smoking is bad, lung cancer is bad for health, etc. cancer is bad for health, etc. cancer is bad for health, etc. Um but nicotine it's in supplemental form. but nicotine it's in supplemental form. but nicotine it's in supplemental form. I've mentioned that a very famous I've mentioned that a very famous I've mentioned that a very famous neuroscientist, Nobel Prize winning neuroscientist, Nobel Prize winning neuroscientist, Nobel Prize winning scientist, chews a lot of Nicorette. I scientist, chews a lot of Nicorette. I scientist, chews a lot of Nicorette. I know other people who chew Nicorette. know other people who chew Nicorette. know other people who chew Nicorette. They believe in its neuroprotective They believe in its neuroprotective They believe in its neuroprotective effects for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. effects for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. effects for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. And indeed nicotine can stimulate And indeed nicotine can stimulate And indeed nicotine can stimulate dopamine release. We talked about that dopamine release. We talked about that dopamine release. We talked about that earlier. Whether or not it has a earlier. Whether or not it has a earlier. Whether or not it has a protective effect isn't clear. The protective effect isn't clear. The protective effect isn't clear. The protective effects might be through the protective effects might be through the protective effects might be through the noradrenergic and acetylcholine systems. noradrenergic and acetylcholine systems. noradrenergic and acetylcholine systems. Those findings are still unclear, but it Those findings are still unclear, but it Those findings are still unclear, but it is interesting to note that nicotine can is interesting to note that nicotine can is interesting to note that nicotine can increase prolactin somewhat. There are a increase prolactin somewhat. There are a increase prolactin somewhat. There are a couple studies, I'll be happy to link to couple studies, I'll be happy to link to couple studies, I'll be happy to link to them in the caption, that shows that them in the caption, that shows that them in the caption, that shows that nicotine taken too much over too long nicotine taken too much over too long nicotine taken too much over too long periods of time can also increase periods of time can also increase periods of time can also increase prolactin, which again is the opposite prolactin, which again is the opposite prolactin, which again is the opposite side of dopamine. So today we've talked side of dopamine. So today we've talked side of dopamine. So today we've talked a lot about the dopamine system and a lot about the dopamine system and a lot about the dopamine system and those kinds of schedules that will allow those kinds of schedules that will allow those kinds of schedules that will allow craving or addiction. craving or addiction. craving or addiction. But what's the schedule of dopamine But what's the schedule of dopamine But what's the schedule of dopamine that's going to allow you to maximize on that's going to allow you to maximize on that's going to allow you to maximize on your pursuit of pleasure and your pursuit of pleasure and your pursuit of pleasure and your elimination of pain? And we get the elimination of pain? And we get the elimination of pain? And we get the answer to that from answer to that from answer to that from our good friend gambling. our good friend gambling. our good friend gambling. The reason gambling works, the reason The reason gambling works, the reason The reason gambling works, the reason why people will throw their lives away, why people will throw their lives away, why people will throw their lives away, the reason why people go back again and the reason why people go back again and the reason why people go back again and again and again to places like Las Vegas again and again to places like Las Vegas again and again to places like Las Vegas and Atlantic City and Atlantic City and Atlantic City is because of the hope and anticipation. is because of the hope and anticipation. is because of the hope and anticipation. It's a Those are cities and places built It's a Those are cities and places built It's a Those are cities and places built on dopamine. All right? They are on dopamine. All right? They are on dopamine. All right? They are leveraging your dopamine system. And I leveraging your dopamine system. And I leveraging your dopamine system. And I realize that there are experienced realize that there are experienced realize that there are experienced gamblers, there are people that enjoy gamblers, there are people that enjoy gamblers, there are people that enjoy gambling. I'll actually just say, you gambling. I'll actually just say, you gambling. I'll actually just say, you know, I like sitting at the roulette know, I like sitting at the roulette know, I like sitting at the roulette table. I always take a designated amount table. I always take a designated amount table. I always take a designated amount of money. It's not much. I enjoy playing of money. It's not much. I enjoy playing of money. It's not much. I enjoy playing a little bit of roulette. I certainly a little bit of roulette. I certainly a little bit of roulette. I certainly enjoy when I win. I certainly don't like enjoy when I win. I certainly don't like enjoy when I win. I certainly don't like it when I lose. But I do it purely for it when I lose. But I do it purely for it when I lose. But I do it purely for the pleasure of playing and I do it very the pleasure of playing and I do it very the pleasure of playing and I do it very seldom. I don't have a gambling problem. seldom. I don't have a gambling problem. seldom. I don't have a gambling problem. And if I did, I'd probably tell you, but And if I did, I'd probably tell you, but And if I did, I'd probably tell you, but I don't have a gambling problem. Yet, I don't have a gambling problem. Yet, I don't have a gambling problem. Yet, people throw away their entire lives on people throw away their entire lives on people throw away their entire lives on gambling. And as a friend of mine who's gambling. And as a friend of mine who's gambling. And as a friend of mine who's a certified addiction treatment a certified addiction treatment a certified addiction treatment specialist tells me that, you know, specialist tells me that, you know, specialist tells me that, you know, gambling addiction is a particularly gambling addiction is a particularly gambling addiction is a particularly sinister because the next time really sinister because the next time really sinister because the next time really could be the thing that changes could be the thing that changes could be the thing that changes everything. Unlike other addictions, the everything. Unlike other addictions, the everything. Unlike other addictions, the next time really could change next time really could change next time really could change everything, and that's embedded in the everything, and that's embedded in the everything, and that's embedded in the mind of the gambling addict. And rarely mind of the gambling addict. And rarely mind of the gambling addict. And rarely does it work out does it work out does it work out in favor of the well-being of the in favor of the well-being of the in favor of the well-being of the gambling addict and their family. gambling addict and their family. gambling addict and their family. However, the intermittent reinforcement However, the intermittent reinforcement However, the intermittent reinforcement schedule was discovered long ago by schedule was discovered long ago by schedule was discovered long ago by scientific researchers. So, this is the scientific researchers. So, this is the scientific researchers. So, this is the slot machine that every once in a while slot machine that every once in a while slot machine that every once in a while gives you a win to keep you playing. gives you a win to keep you playing. gives you a win to keep you playing. This is the probability of winning This is the probability of winning This is the probability of winning on the craps table or the roulette table on the craps table or the roulette table on the craps table or the roulette table or at blackjack just often enough that or at blackjack just often enough that or at blackjack just often enough that you're willing to buy tickets, head out you're willing to buy tickets, head out you're willing to buy tickets, head out there, play again, go downstairs again there, play again, go downstairs again there, play again, go downstairs again from your room, even though you swore from your room, even though you swore from your room, even though you swore you were done for the night. you were done for the night. you were done for the night. Intermittent reinforcement is the most Intermittent reinforcement is the most Intermittent reinforcement is the most powerful form of dopamine reward powerful form of dopamine reward powerful form of dopamine reward schedule to keep you doing something. schedule to keep you doing something. schedule to keep you doing something. So, we can export that. We can use it So, we can export that. We can use it So, we can export that. We can use it for good. for good. for good. If there's something that you're If there's something that you're If there's something that you're pursuing in life, whether or not it's an pursuing in life, whether or not it's an pursuing in life, whether or not it's an academic goal, or a financial goal, or a academic goal, or a financial goal, or a academic goal, or a financial goal, or a relationship goal, relationship goal, relationship goal, one of the things that you can do to one of the things that you can do to one of the things that you can do to ensure that you will remain on the path ensure that you will remain on the path ensure that you will remain on the path to that goal for a very long time, and to that goal for a very long time, and to that goal for a very long time, and that you will continue to exceed your that you will continue to exceed your that you will continue to exceed your previous performance, as well as previous performance, as well as previous performance, as well as continue to enjoy the dopamine release continue to enjoy the dopamine release continue to enjoy the dopamine release that occurs when you hit the milestones that occurs when you hit the milestones that occurs when you hit the milestones that you want to achieve, that you want to achieve, that you want to achieve, is to occasionally remove rewards is to occasionally remove rewards is to occasionally remove rewards objectively. Let's say you set out a goal of making Let's say you set out a goal of making Let's say you set out a goal of making I'm going to make this quantitative with I'm going to make this quantitative with I'm going to make this quantitative with respect to finances because it just is respect to finances because it just is respect to finances because it just is easy description, but this could also be easy description, but this could also be easy description, but this could also be in sport, this could be in school, this in sport, this could be in school, this in sport, this could be in school, this could be in music, could be in anything could be in music, could be in anything could be in music, could be in anything creative endeavors. But, let's say you creative endeavors. But, let's say you creative endeavors. But, let's say you set out a certain financial goal, or set out a certain financial goal, or set out a certain financial goal, or let's say you want to get certain number let's say you want to get certain number let's say you want to get certain number of followers on whatever social media of followers on whatever social media of followers on whatever social media platform. As you reach each one of those goals, As you reach each one of those goals, As you reach each one of those goals, you should know now that the amount of you should know now that the amount of you should know now that the amount of dopamine is not going to peak. It's dopamine is not going to peak. It's dopamine is not going to peak. It's actually going to diminish and make you actually going to diminish and make you actually going to diminish and make you crave more. The key to avoiding that crave more. The key to avoiding that crave more. The key to avoiding that crash, but to still keep it in healthy crash, but to still keep it in healthy crash, but to still keep it in healthy levels that will allow you to continue levels that will allow you to continue levels that will allow you to continue your pursuit, is as you are staircasing your pursuit, is as you are staircasing your pursuit, is as you are staircasing toward your goal. toward your goal. toward your goal. Maybe that's dollars. Maybe that's Maybe that's dollars. Maybe that's Maybe that's dollars. Maybe that's followers. Maybe that's grades. Maybe followers. Maybe that's grades. Maybe followers. Maybe that's grades. Maybe that's some other metric. It's metals or that's some other metric. It's metals or that's some other metric. It's metals or trophies. You actually want to blunt the reward You actually want to blunt the reward You actually want to blunt the reward response for some of those intermediate response for some of those intermediate response for some of those intermediate goals. Now, I'm not telling you shouldn't Now, I'm not telling you shouldn't Now, I'm not telling you shouldn't celebrate your wins, but I'm telling you celebrate your wins, but I'm telling you celebrate your wins, but I'm telling you not to celebrate all of them. Whereas a not to celebrate all of them. Whereas a not to celebrate all of them. Whereas a good friend of mine who uh recently uh good friend of mine who uh recently uh good friend of mine who uh recently uh fortunately for him uh had a great fortunately for him uh had a great fortunately for him uh had a great financial success, he asked me and financial success, he asked me and financial success, he asked me and somebody else, a good friend of mine somebody else, a good friend of mine somebody else, a good friend of mine who's very tuned into dopamine reward who's very tuned into dopamine reward who's very tuned into dopamine reward schedules, understands how they work at schedules, understands how they work at schedules, understands how they work at a really deep level, and he said, "I a really deep level, and he said, "I a really deep level, and he said, "I don't know what to do next." And we don't know what to do next." And we don't know what to do next." And we said, "Oh, well, that's simple. You said, "Oh, well, that's simple. You said, "Oh, well, that's simple. You should just give most of it away." And should just give most of it away." And should just give most of it away." And this wasn't a ploy to receive any of the this wasn't a ploy to receive any of the this wasn't a ploy to receive any of the money ourselves. This was really about money ourselves. This was really about money ourselves. This was really about reducing the impact of that reward. Now, reducing the impact of that reward. Now, reducing the impact of that reward. Now, hopefully giving your money away, if you hopefully giving your money away, if you hopefully giving your money away, if you already have enough of it, would be already have enough of it, would be already have enough of it, would be something that was rewarding in and of something that was rewarding in and of something that was rewarding in and of itself. But if you're a student who's itself. But if you're a student who's itself. But if you're a student who's pursuing goals in university, or you're pursuing goals in university, or you're pursuing goals in university, or you're an athlete who's pursuing goals, an athlete who's pursuing goals, an athlete who's pursuing goals, it actually makes sense from a rational it actually makes sense from a rational it actually makes sense from a rational perspective, once you understand these perspective, once you understand these perspective, once you understand these mechanisms, to hit a new high point of performance, hit a new high point of performance, hit a new high point of performance, or to get that A+ or for you if it's an or to get that A+ or for you if it's an or to get that A+ or for you if it's an A- etc., and to tell yourself, "Okay, A- etc., and to tell yourself, "Okay, A- etc., and to tell yourself, "Okay, that was good." But to actually actively that was good." But to actually actively that was good." But to actually actively blunt the reward, to not go and blunt the reward, to not go and blunt the reward, to not go and celebrate too intensely. Because in celebrate too intensely. Because in celebrate too intensely. Because in doing that, you keep your dopamine doing that, you keep your dopamine doing that, you keep your dopamine system in check, and you ensure that system in check, and you ensure that system in check, and you ensure that you're going to stay on the path of you're going to stay on the path of you're going to stay on the path of continued pursuit, not just for that continued pursuit, not just for that continued pursuit, not just for that thing, but for all things. Big increases thing, but for all things. Big increases thing, but for all things. Big increases in dopamine lead to big crashes in dopamine lead to big crashes in dopamine lead to big crashes in dopamine, and big increases in dopamine dopamine, and big increases in dopamine dopamine, and big increases in dopamine up the ante. They increase the extent to up the ante. They increase the extent to up the ante. They increase the extent to which you are willing to invest time and you are willing to invest time and you are willing to invest time and energy in order to achieve energy in order to achieve energy in order to achieve goals and rewards that may be out of goals and rewards that may be out of goals and rewards that may be out of your reach. You never really know if your reach. You never really know if your reach. You never really know if you're going to succeed. So, to make you're going to succeed. So, to make you're going to succeed. So, to make this crystal clear, this crystal clear, this crystal clear, celebrate your wins, but don't celebrate your wins, but don't celebrate your wins, but don't celebrate every win. That's one way that you can every win. That's one way that you can every win. That's one way that you can ensure that you're going to continue ensure that you're going to continue ensure that you're going to continue down the path of progress. And I think down the path of progress. And I think down the path of progress. And I think most of the learning tools that are in most of the learning tools that are in most of the learning tools that are in schools are about reward, hopefully for schools are about reward, hopefully for schools are about reward, hopefully for genuine performance. for genuine performance. for genuine performance. They are about encouraging us. We do They are about encouraging us. We do They are about encouraging us. We do have to believe that we can perform have to believe that we can perform have to believe that we can perform well. One of the hallmarks of growth well. One of the hallmarks of growth well. One of the hallmarks of growth mindset is the internalization that mindset is the internalization that mindset is the internalization that we're not getting it right yet. The word we're not getting it right yet. The word we're not getting it right yet. The word yet is very important. And also the yet is very important. And also the yet is very important. And also the sense that we reward our good our good sense that we reward our good our good sense that we reward our good our good behavior, our good performance, but behavior, our good performance, but behavior, our good performance, but not every time. One way to do this is to not every time. One way to do this is to not every time. One way to do this is to actually take the reward and actually take the reward and actually take the reward and reinforcement out of your own hands and reinforcement out of your own hands and reinforcement out of your own hands and your own mind, and you tell somebody your own mind, and you tell somebody your own mind, and you tell somebody that they are in control of whether or that they are in control of whether or that they are in control of whether or not you're allowed to feel good about not you're allowed to feel good about not you're allowed to feel good about your wins. Now, this is I realize it's your wins. Now, this is I realize it's your wins. Now, this is I realize it's very unnatural for most people, but if very unnatural for most people, but if very unnatural for most people, but if you're somebody who's simply going to be you're somebody who's simply going to be you're somebody who's simply going to be in pursuit, and you're going to really in pursuit, and you're going to really in pursuit, and you're going to really register your wins, and you think that register your wins, and you think that register your wins, and you think that that's going to actually make you a that's going to actually make you a that's going to actually make you a better performer, it will in the short better performer, it will in the short better performer, it will in the short term, but not in the long term. So, you term, but not in the long term. So, you term, but not in the long term. So, you can lift the can lift the can lift the uh what Las Vegas and Atlantic City and uh what Las Vegas and Atlantic City and uh what Las Vegas and Atlantic City and other gambling other gambling other gambling uh mechanisms and places have known for a mechanisms and places have known for a mechanisms and places have known for a long time. They lifted it from the long time. They lifted it from the long time. They lifted it from the scientists. You can now take it back, scientists. You can now take it back, scientists. You can now take it back, and you can start to leverage that. And and you can start to leverage that. And and you can start to leverage that. And you just make it intermittent. You you just make it intermittent. You you just make it intermittent. You reward yourself not on a predictable reward yourself not on a predictable reward yourself not on a predictable schedule. So, not every other time or schedule. So, not every other time or schedule. So, not every other time or every third time or every 10th time, but every third time or every 10th time, but every third time or every 10th time, but sometimes it's three in a row, then not sometimes it's three in a row, then not sometimes it's three in a row, then not at all for 10 days. So, at all for 10 days. So, at all for 10 days. So, reward is important, self-reward is reward is important, self-reward is reward is important, self-reward is critically important, but make sure that critically important, but make sure that critically important, but make sure that you're not doing it on such a you're not doing it on such a you're not doing it on such a predictable schedule that you burn out predictable schedule that you burn out predictable schedule that you burn out these dopamine circuits, or that you these dopamine circuits, or that you these dopamine circuits, or that you undercut your own ability to strive and undercut your own ability to strive and undercut your own ability to strive and achieve. I actually have a story from graduate I actually have a story from graduate I actually have a story from graduate school which I was forced into an intermittent which I was forced into an intermittent which I was forced into an intermittent reinforcement schedule that I do believe reinforcement schedule that I do believe reinforcement schedule that I do believe has served me very well in my scientific has served me very well in my scientific has served me very well in my scientific career and other aspects of life. career and other aspects of life. career and other aspects of life. My graduate advisor was an amazing My graduate advisor was an amazing My graduate advisor was an amazing scientist. Unfortunately, she passed scientist. Unfortunately, she passed scientist. Unfortunately, she passed away, but amazing scientist and amazing away, but amazing scientist and amazing away, but amazing scientist and amazing human being with a very dry and um human being with a very dry and um human being with a very dry and um somewhat cruel sense of humor. Her name somewhat cruel sense of humor. Her name somewhat cruel sense of humor. Her name was Barbara Chapman and we published a was Barbara Chapman and we published a was Barbara Chapman and we published a paper in the journal Science. And paper in the journal Science. And paper in the journal Science. And Science, Nature, and Cell are considered Science, Nature, and Cell are considered Science, Nature, and Cell are considered the big three, the most competitive the big three, the most competitive the big three, the most competitive journals to publish in. I had a first journals to publish in. I had a first journals to publish in. I had a first author paper in Science. It was um author paper in Science. It was um author paper in Science. It was um really exciting to me. I was a graduate really exciting to me. I was a graduate really exciting to me. I was a graduate student. I was very excited about the student. I was very excited about the student. I was very excited about the discovery. I was excited that it was in discovery. I was excited that it was in discovery. I was excited that it was in Science. I was just, you know, thrilled. Science. I was just, you know, thrilled. Science. I was just, you know, thrilled. And I remember when the paper finally And I remember when the paper finally And I remember when the paper finally got accepted because it involved a ton got accepted because it involved a ton got accepted because it involved a ton of revisions and a lot of very hard of revisions and a lot of very hard of revisions and a lot of very hard work. And she came in and she said, you know, And she came in and she said, you know, And she came in and she said, you know, paper got accepted. I was super excited paper got accepted. I was super excited paper got accepted. I was super excited and she just kind of sat there and she just kind of sat there and she just kind of sat there and nodded and I said, nodded and I said, nodded and I said, "Are we going to celebrate? Are we going "Are we going to celebrate? Are we going "Are we going to celebrate? Are we going to have a party? Or what like what are to have a party? Or what like what are to have a party? Or what like what are we going to do?" And I'll never forget we going to do?" And I'll never forget we going to do?" And I'll never forget her answer. She said, her answer. She said, her answer. She said, "Mm. I think we should skip this one." I think we should skip this one." I think we should skip this one." And I thought she was joking. And I And I thought she was joking. And I And I thought she was joking. And I said, "What do you mean skip this one? said, "What do you mean skip this one? said, "What do you mean skip this one? We're going to publish the paper." She We're going to publish the paper." She We're going to publish the paper." She said, "Yeah, we're going to publish the said, "Yeah, we're going to publish the said, "Yeah, we're going to publish the paper, but she said, paper, but she said, paper, but she said, you know, maybe when you get like four you know, maybe when you get like four you know, maybe when you get like four more, maybe three, maybe two." And I thought maybe three, maybe two." And I thought maybe three, maybe two." And I thought she was messing with me. And she wasn't she was messing with me. And she wasn't she was messing with me. And she wasn't messing with me and she was right. We messing with me and she was right. We messing with me and she was right. We never had a party. We never had a never had a party. We never had a never had a party. We never had a celebration for that paper. I think she celebration for that paper. I think she celebration for that paper. I think she was really trying to instill two ideas was really trying to instill two ideas was really trying to instill two ideas in me. One is that the work itself was in me. One is that the work itself was in me. One is that the work itself was what was supposed to be most rewarding. what was supposed to be most rewarding. what was supposed to be most rewarding. The practice of experimentation, of The practice of experimentation, of The practice of experimentation, of writing the paper, the experience of writing the paper, the experience of writing the paper, the experience of achieving something that you worked very achieving something that you worked very achieving something that you worked very hard at. And that did indeed feel hard at. And that did indeed feel hard at. And that did indeed feel amazing. I actually can still feel it in amazing. I actually can still feel it in amazing. I actually can still feel it in my body now, the excitement. So there's my body now, the excitement. So there's my body now, the excitement. So there's a still a dopamine release or that arc a still a dopamine release or that arc a still a dopamine release or that arc is going very long. This would be uh is going very long. This would be uh is going very long. This would be uh almost 20 years ago now almost 20 years ago now almost 20 years ago now that this happened. So, that's that this happened. So, that's that this happened. So, that's remarkable. The other one is that remarkable. The other one is that remarkable. The other one is that she's right. We never went out and she's right. We never went out and she's right. We never went out and celebrated and we did celebrate other celebrated and we did celebrate other celebrated and we did celebrate other wins, other papers in the future, and wins, other papers in the future, and wins, other papers in the future, and things of that sort. But, she was uh things of that sort. But, she was uh things of that sort. But, she was uh either consciously or subconsciously either consciously or subconsciously either consciously or subconsciously putting me on an intermittent reward putting me on an intermittent reward putting me on an intermittent reward schedule. And to this day, when schedule. And to this day, when schedule. And to this day, when something really good happens, I something really good happens, I something really good happens, I actually hesitate as to whether or not I actually hesitate as to whether or not I actually hesitate as to whether or not I want to internalize that and celebrate, want to internalize that and celebrate, want to internalize that and celebrate, whether or not I want to tell anybody, whether or not I want to tell anybody, whether or not I want to tell anybody, which is its own form of celebration cuz which is its own form of celebration cuz which is its own form of celebration cuz then you're getting positive feedback. then you're getting positive feedback. then you're getting positive feedback. And so, I'm very cautious with how I And so, I'm very cautious with how I And so, I'm very cautious with how I deploy dopamine release in response to deploy dopamine release in response to deploy dopamine release in response to wins. It's certainly not the only way wins. It's certainly not the only way wins. It's certainly not the only way that I've navigated my career. that I've navigated my career. that I've navigated my career. Um there are a number of other Um there are a number of other Um there are a number of other principles I incorporate, but principles I incorporate, but principles I incorporate, but intermittent reward for wins, intermittent reward for wins, intermittent reward for wins, for achievements, is a very powerful way for achievements, is a very powerful way for achievements, is a very powerful way to ensure that you will stay on the path to ensure that you will stay on the path to ensure that you will stay on the path of pursuit. of pursuit. of pursuit. At this point in the podcast, I'd like At this point in the podcast, I'd like At this point in the podcast, I'd like to take a moment to address some to take a moment to address some to take a moment to address some corrections. I made some errors in corrections. I made some errors in corrections. I made some errors in previous episodes. They weren't major previous episodes. They weren't major previous episodes. They weren't major errors, but a couple of you pointed them errors, but a couple of you pointed them errors, but a couple of you pointed them out, and it's important to me that we out, and it's important to me that we out, and it's important to me that we strive for accuracy. So, the first one strive for accuracy. So, the first one strive for accuracy. So, the first one was I talked in a previous episode about was I talked in a previous episode about was I talked in a previous episode about the potential benefits for some people, the potential benefits for some people, the potential benefits for some people, not all, of ashwagandha and its role in not all, of ashwagandha and its role in not all, of ashwagandha and its role in blunting cortisol and a way of blunting cortisol and a way of blunting cortisol and a way of offsetting medium-term and some offsetting medium-term and some offsetting medium-term and some long-term stress. It's a supplement that long-term stress. It's a supplement that long-term stress. It's a supplement that I've benefited from. It works through I've benefited from. It works through I've benefited from. It works through the GABA system and some other systems. the GABA system and some other systems. the GABA system and some other systems. Someone pointed out a study that uh Someone pointed out a study that uh Someone pointed out a study that uh admittedly was done in rats. I point I admittedly was done in rats. I point I admittedly was done in rats. I point I was focusing mainly on studies in humans was focusing mainly on studies in humans was focusing mainly on studies in humans during the episode, but they point out a during the episode, but they point out a during the episode, but they point out a uh study that was done in rats that uh study that was done in rats that uh study that was done in rats that showed that long-term administration of showed that long-term administration of showed that long-term administration of ashwagandha could actually create of ashwagandha could actually create of ashwagandha could actually create some negative effects, uh mainly on the some negative effects, uh mainly on the some negative effects, uh mainly on the thyroid and um perhaps even the cortisol thyroid and um perhaps even the cortisol thyroid and um perhaps even the cortisol system. Maybe the melatonin system. I just want Maybe the melatonin system. I just want Maybe the melatonin system. I just want to acknowledge that study. Um I'll to acknowledge that study. Um I'll to acknowledge that study. Um I'll reference it in the caption. Uh again, reference it in the caption. Uh again, reference it in the caption. Uh again, that was a rat study. I was focused on that was a rat study. I was focused on that was a rat study. I was focused on human studies. Please go to examine.com, human studies. Please go to examine.com, human studies. Please go to examine.com, put in ashwagandha, it will tell you the put in ashwagandha, it will tell you the put in ashwagandha, it will tell you the various effects on different aspects of various effects on different aspects of various effects on different aspects of brain and body. It will also link to the brain and body. It will also link to the brain and body. It will also link to the PubMed articles that are relevant there. PubMed articles that are relevant there. PubMed articles that are relevant there. It is called the human effect matrix cuz It is called the human effect matrix cuz It is called the human effect matrix cuz that's only focused on humans. That's that's only focused on humans. That's that's only focused on humans. That's one of the reasons I like examine.com is one of the reasons I like examine.com is one of the reasons I like examine.com is it's focused on human studies. Again, a it's focused on human studies. Again, a it's focused on human studies. Again, a wonderful free resource. wonderful free resource. wonderful free resource. But, I do appreciate that you pointed But, I do appreciate that you pointed But, I do appreciate that you pointed out that study because I do want people out that study because I do want people out that study because I do want people to be aware of the range of effects to be aware of the range of effects to be aware of the range of effects that these various compounds can have. that these various compounds can have. that these various compounds can have. As well, a couple times in previous As well, a couple times in previous As well, a couple times in previous episodes, I said 5-HTP episodes, I said 5-HTP episodes, I said 5-HTP and not 5-HT. 5-HT is serotonin. 5-HTP and not 5-HT. 5-HT is serotonin. 5-HTP and not 5-HT. 5-HT is serotonin. 5-HTP is a precursor to a serotonin. I was is a precursor to a serotonin. I was is a precursor to a serotonin. I was talking about supplements and compounds talking about supplements and compounds talking about supplements and compounds that can stimulate the release of that can stimulate the release of that can stimulate the release of serotonin uh in the previous episode. I was uh in the previous episode. I was uh in the previous episode. I was actually referring to it in a context actually referring to it in a context actually referring to it in a context for which I don't personally like to for which I don't personally like to for which I don't personally like to take 5-HTP. That's just my own bias um take 5-HTP. That's just my own bias um take 5-HTP. That's just my own bias um for reasons I described in that episode. for reasons I described in that episode. for reasons I described in that episode. But, uh if you heard me say 5-HTP when I But, uh if you heard me say 5-HTP when I But, uh if you heard me say 5-HTP when I meant to say 5-HT, meant to say 5-HT, meant to say 5-HT, um I apologize. And then, last, I just um I apologize. And then, last, I just um I apologize. And then, last, I just want to point out again something I want to point out again something I want to point out again something I mentioned at the beginning, which is mentioned at the beginning, which is mentioned at the beginning, which is that the Huberman Lab podcast is now that the Huberman Lab podcast is now that the Huberman Lab podcast is now subtitled in Spanish. Episodes 1 and 2, subtitled in Spanish. Episodes 1 and 2, subtitled in Spanish. Episodes 1 and 2, as well as our welcome video, are in as well as our welcome video, are in as well as our welcome video, are in Spanish. The other ones will be Spanish. The other ones will be Spanish. The other ones will be subtitled soon. You can expect that subtitled soon. You can expect that subtitled soon. You can expect that within the next couple weeks. So, if you within the next couple weeks. So, if you within the next couple weeks. So, if you know Spanish-speaking um people who know Spanish-speaking um people who know Spanish-speaking um people who prefer to digest the information in prefer to digest the information in prefer to digest the information in Spanish, or that's you, um you can look Spanish, or that's you, um you can look Spanish, or that's you, um you can look forward to the Spanish subtitles. You forward to the Spanish subtitles. You forward to the Spanish subtitles. You need to activate those uh in the caption need to activate those uh in the caption need to activate those uh in the caption feature on YouTube. Unfortunately, we feature on YouTube. Unfortunately, we feature on YouTube. Unfortunately, we don't have Spanish um dubbing over on in don't have Spanish um dubbing over on in don't have Spanish um dubbing over on in the audio platforms. the audio platforms. the audio platforms. I realize, once again, we've covered a I realize, once again, we've covered a I realize, once again, we've covered a lot of material. lot of material. lot of material. Hopefully, you now know far more about Hopefully, you now know far more about Hopefully, you now know far more about the dopamine system, reward, and the dopamine system, reward, and the dopamine system, reward, and motivation than you did at the beginning motivation than you did at the beginning motivation than you did at the beginning of this podcast. Hopefully, you also of this podcast. Hopefully, you also of this podcast. Hopefully, you also understand the other side of dopamine understand the other side of dopamine understand the other side of dopamine and reward, which is pain, and the and reward, which is pain, and the and reward, which is pain, and the balance of this pleasure-pain system, as balance of this pleasure-pain system, as balance of this pleasure-pain system, as well as the molecules that we call or well as the molecules that we call or well as the molecules that we call or that were described in the Molecule of that were described in the Molecule of that were described in the Molecule of More book, I should say, as the More book, I should say, as the More book, I should say, as the here-and-now molecules, things like here-and-now molecules, things like here-and-now molecules, things like serotonin and the endocannabinoids. serotonin and the endocannabinoids. serotonin and the endocannabinoids. We talked about a variety of We talked about a variety of We talked about a variety of supplement-based tools, things like supplement-based tools, things like supplement-based tools, things like vitamin B6 and zinc as they relate to vitamin B6 and zinc as they relate to vitamin B6 and zinc as they relate to prolactin, PEA, very interesting prolactin, PEA, very interesting prolactin, PEA, very interesting compound. Again, I've never tried it. Uh compound. Again, I've never tried it. Uh compound. Again, I've never tried it. Uh very interesting, definitely in use out very interesting, definitely in use out very interesting, definitely in use out there. L-DOPA, mucuna pruriens, talked there. L-DOPA, mucuna pruriens, talked there. L-DOPA, mucuna pruriens, talked about caffeine. about caffeine. about caffeine. Talked about nicotine. Talked about how Talked about nicotine. Talked about how Talked about nicotine. Talked about how some of the effects of Adderall can be some of the effects of Adderall can be some of the effects of Adderall can be created purely cognitively without created purely cognitively without created purely cognitively without actually ingesting Adderall, simply by actually ingesting Adderall, simply by actually ingesting Adderall, simply by telling people they're ingesting telling people they're ingesting telling people they're ingesting Adderall and giving them caffeine. Very Adderall and giving them caffeine. Very Adderall and giving them caffeine. Very interesting study uh that I referenced a interesting study uh that I referenced a interesting study uh that I referenced a little bit earlier. little bit earlier. little bit earlier. And we talked about scheduling dopamine, And we talked about scheduling dopamine, And we talked about scheduling dopamine, adopting the intermittent reward adopting the intermittent reward adopting the intermittent reward schedule for yourself in order to ensure schedule for yourself in order to ensure schedule for yourself in order to ensure long-term engagement with pursuits that long-term engagement with pursuits that long-term engagement with pursuits that I hope are healthy pursuits and ones I hope are healthy pursuits and ones I hope are healthy pursuits and ones that serve you well. that serve you well. that serve you well. This was by no means an exhaustive This was by no means an exhaustive This was by no means an exhaustive coverage of all things dopamine and coverage of all things dopamine and coverage of all things dopamine and motivation. It was by no means the only time that It was by no means the only time that It was by no means the only time that we're going to talk about dopamine and we're going to talk about dopamine and we're going to talk about dopamine and motivation. Next episode, we're going to continue to Next episode, we're going to continue to Next episode, we're going to continue to talk about emotions from yet another talk about emotions from yet another talk about emotions from yet another perspective. But hopefully you have enough now to But hopefully you have enough now to But hopefully you have enough now to think about in the meantime and that you think about in the meantime and that you think about in the meantime and that you can consider adopting in your own life can consider adopting in your own life can consider adopting in your own life and practices. and practices. and practices. As always, I really want to thank you As always, I really want to thank you As always, I really want to thank you for your time and attention. If you've for your time and attention. If you've for your time and attention. If you've learned something useful today, please learned something useful today, please learned something useful today, please pass it along. One of the things that we pass it along. One of the things that we pass it along. One of the things that we teach in science that I think is really teach in science that I think is really teach in science that I think is really wonderful to adopt in general in life is wonderful to adopt in general in life is wonderful to adopt in general in life is this idea of watch one, do one, teach this idea of watch one, do one, teach this idea of watch one, do one, teach one. This is what we tell graduate one. This is what we tell graduate one. This is what we tell graduate students and med students and postdocs. students and med students and postdocs. students and med students and postdocs. Watch somebody do something, learn it, Watch somebody do something, learn it, Watch somebody do something, learn it, then do it, apply it, see if it works then do it, apply it, see if it works then do it, apply it, see if it works for you, and then teach it. So it's for you, and then teach it. So it's for you, and then teach it. So it's usually not watch one, do one, teach usually not watch one, do one, teach usually not watch one, do one, teach one, it's usually watch one, do one, it's usually watch one, do one, it's usually watch one, do 20, teach as many people as you uh 20, teach as many people as you uh 20, teach as many people as you uh possibly want. I'm not looking for possibly want. I'm not looking for possibly want. I'm not looking for attribution. These are tools that are attribution. These are tools that are attribution. These are tools that are grounded in neuroscience for which I grounded in neuroscience for which I grounded in neuroscience for which I can't claim attribution. I'm just can't claim attribution. I'm just can't claim attribution. I'm just passing them along so that you can adopt passing them along so that you can adopt passing them along so that you can adopt them if you like and pass them along if them if you like and pass them along if them if you like and pass them along if you think people can benefit from them. you think people can benefit from them. you think people can benefit from them. Many of you have continued to ask how Many of you have continued to ask how Many of you have continued to ask how you can help support the Huberman Lab you can help support the Huberman Lab you can help support the Huberman Lab podcast. If you like what we're doing podcast. If you like what we're doing podcast. If you like what we're doing here and you like the information that here and you like the information that here and you like the information that we're sharing, please click subscribe on we're sharing, please click subscribe on we're sharing, please click subscribe on the YouTube channel. That really helps the YouTube channel. That really helps the YouTube channel. That really helps us. As well, if you want to hit the us. As well, if you want to hit the us. As well, if you want to hit the notifications button, notifications button, notifications button, that will allow you to make sure you that will allow you to make sure you that will allow you to make sure you don't miss any episodes. Typically, we don't miss any episodes. Typically, we don't miss any episodes. Typically, we release episodes every Monday, but in release episodes every Monday, but in release episodes every Monday, but in the future, we may release episodes as the future, we may release episodes as the future, we may release episodes as well as short clips more often than well as short clips more often than well as short clips more often than that. As well, if you want to subscribe on As well, if you want to subscribe on As well, if you want to subscribe on Apple or Spotify or both, that's a great Apple or Spotify or both, that's a great Apple or Spotify or both, that's a great help to us. And on Apple, you have the help to us. And on Apple, you have the help to us. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a opportunity to leave us up to a opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. We do use the comment five-star review. We do use the comment five-star review. We do use the comment section here on YouTube to inform future section here on YouTube to inform future section here on YouTube to inform future content and to address any questions and content and to address any questions and content and to address any questions and clear up any mis- communications clear up any mis- communications clear up any mis- communications or misconceptions that might arise. So, or misconceptions that might arise. So, or misconceptions that might arise. So, please put your questions, your please put your questions, your please put your questions, your comments, and your suggestions for comments, and your suggestions for comments, and your suggestions for future content in the comment section future content in the comment section future content in the comment section below. The other way to support us is to below. The other way to support us is to below. The other way to support us is to check out our sponsors that were check out our sponsors that were check out our sponsors that were mentioned at the beginning of the mentioned at the beginning of the mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. The links to those sponsors are podcast. The links to those sponsors are podcast. The links to those sponsors are in the captions. As well, we've set up a in the captions. As well, we've set up a in the captions. As well, we've set up a Patreon account, which is that allows Patreon account, which is that allows Patreon account, which is that allows you to support the podcast at any level that you like. at any level that you like. at any level that you like. As well, because we've mentioned As well, because we've mentioned As well, because we've mentioned supplements from time to time throughout supplements from time to time throughout supplements from time to time throughout the podcast and people always ask about the podcast and people always ask about the podcast and people always ask about what brands and sources we use or what brands and sources we use or what brands and sources we use or suggest for those supplements, we've suggest for those supplements, we've suggest for those supplements, we've partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e. partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e. partnered with Thorne, t h o r n e. Thorne supplements are known to be among Thorne supplements are known to be among Thorne supplements are known to be among the most stringent supplements in terms the most stringent supplements in terms the most stringent supplements in terms of the specificity of what's in the of the specificity of what's in the of the specificity of what's in the bottle matches what's on the label, the bottle matches what's on the label, the bottle matches what's on the label, the quality of the ingredients is quality of the ingredients is quality of the ingredients is exceedingly high. exceedingly high. exceedingly high. The Mayo Clinic and all the major sports The Mayo Clinic and all the major sports The Mayo Clinic and all the major sports organizations are partnered with Thorne organizations are partnered with Thorne organizations are partnered with Thorne because of that stringency and that because of that stringency and that because of that stringency and that commitment to rigor. If you'd like to commitment to rigor. If you'd like to commitment to rigor. If you'd like to see the supplements that I personally see the supplements that I personally see the supplements that I personally take, as well as get 20% off any of the as well as get 20% off any of the as well as get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes, you can supplements that Thorne makes, you can supplements that Thorne makes, you can go to thorne.com/u, go to thorne.com/u, go to thorne.com/u, that's the letter U, /huberman, and you that's the letter U, /huberman, and you that's the letter U, /huberman, and you can see what I take and any of those can see what I take and any of those can see what I take and any of those supplements, as well as any of the other supplements, as well as any of the other supplements, as well as any of the other products on the Thorne site, will be products on the Thorne site, will be products on the Thorne site, will be available to you at 20% off. That's available to you at 20% off. That's available to you at 20% off. That's thorne.com/u/huberman to get 20% off any of the supplements to get 20% off any of the supplements to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. that Thorne makes. that Thorne makes. Finally, I want to thank you for your Finally, I want to thank you for your Finally, I want to thank you for your time and attention today. I hope you time and attention today. I hope you time and attention today. I hope you learned a lot and that you learned a lot learned a lot and that you learned a lot learned a lot and that you learned a lot of possible tools that you could of possible tools that you could of possible tools that you could incorporate into your life as it relates incorporate into your life as it relates incorporate into your life as it relates to motivation and emotions. Thank you to motivation and emotions. Thank you to motivation and emotions. Thank you for your interest in science.