Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Ryan Suave. Medicine. My guest today is Ryan Suave. Medicine. My guest today is Ryan Suave. Ryan Suave is a renowned expert in Ryan Suave is a renowned expert in Ryan Suave is a renowned expert in addiction treatment and trauma recovery. addiction treatment and trauma recovery. addiction treatment and trauma recovery. Ryan has spent decades on the front Ryan has spent decades on the front Ryan has spent decades on the front lines helping people overcome addictions lines helping people overcome addictions lines helping people overcome addictions to substances like alcohol, and various to substances like alcohol, and various to substances like alcohol, and various drugs, as well as behavioral addictions, drugs, as well as behavioral addictions, drugs, as well as behavioral addictions, including gambling, video games, and including gambling, video games, and including gambling, video games, and pornography. His approach combines pornography. His approach combines pornography. His approach combines evidence-based protocols tailored to evidence-based protocols tailored to evidence-based protocols tailored to each person's unique family history and each person's unique family history and each person's unique family history and needs. During today's episode, we needs. During today's episode, we needs. During today's episode, we explore all aspects of addiction, explore all aspects of addiction, explore all aspects of addiction, including the relationship between including the relationship between including the relationship between addiction and trauma. Ryan shares addiction and trauma. Ryan shares addiction and trauma. Ryan shares insights from his extensive clinical insights from his extensive clinical insights from his extensive clinical work and provides clear zerocost work and provides clear zerocost work and provides clear zerocost protocols for effective recovery that protocols for effective recovery that protocols for effective recovery that leverage neuroplasticity, which is your leverage neuroplasticity, which is your leverage neuroplasticity, which is your brain's ability to change with intention brain's ability to change with intention brain's ability to change with intention and experience. We discuss and compare and experience. We discuss and compare and experience. We discuss and compare residential treatment programs, 12step residential treatment programs, 12step residential treatment programs, 12step programs, self-guided addiction programs, self-guided addiction programs, self-guided addiction recovery, and more. If you or someone recovery, and more. If you or someone recovery, and more. If you or someone you know suffers from addiction, the you know suffers from addiction, the you know suffers from addiction, the information and tools offered in this information and tools offered in this information and tools offered in this episode ought to be of tremendous episode ought to be of tremendous episode ought to be of tremendous benefit to initiate and maintain benefit to initiate and maintain benefit to initiate and maintain sobriety from that behavior or sobriety from that behavior or sobriety from that behavior or substance. Before we begin, I'd like to substance. Before we begin, I'd like to substance. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and consumer information about science and consumer information about science and science related tools to the general science related tools to the general science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this public. In keeping with that theme, this public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now episode does include sponsors. And now episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Ryan Suave. Ryan for my discussion with Ryan Suave. Ryan for my discussion with Ryan Suave. Ryan Suave, welcome. I'm glad to be here. Suave, welcome. I'm glad to be here. Suave, welcome. I'm glad to be here. Thank you for having me. You're the guy Thank you for having me. You're the guy Thank you for having me. You're the guy that people call, reach out that people call, reach out that people call, reach out to, cry to, cry to, cry to when everything comes crashing to when everything comes crashing to when everything comes crashing down. That's kind of your thing. Yeah. down. That's kind of your thing. Yeah. down. That's kind of your thing. Yeah. And you have this incredible uh gift And you have this incredible uh gift And you have this incredible uh gift really to really to really to u orient people in time and space when u orient people in time and space when u orient people in time and space when that sort of thing is happening. that sort of thing is happening. that sort of thing is happening. And you do this for men, And you do this for men, And you do this for men, women, teens, kids, adults, women, teens, kids, adults, women, teens, kids, adults, families. You've pretty much seen it families. You've pretty much seen it families. You've pretty much seen it all, although I'm sure there's more to all, although I'm sure there's more to all, although I'm sure there's more to come. I would love for you to just come. I would love for you to just come. I would love for you to just explain to people explain to people explain to people listening what addiction listening what addiction listening what addiction is and how you see it show up in people's and how you see it show up in people's and how you see it show up in people's lives. I know that you tend to get lives. I know that you tend to get lives. I know that you tend to get things like a trauma surgeon would see things like a trauma surgeon would see things like a trauma surgeon would see the human body hemorrhaging and in need the human body hemorrhaging and in need the human body hemorrhaging and in need of great support, but how do you think of great support, but how do you think of great support, but how do you think about addiction? First, I I'd like to make a addiction? First, I I'd like to make a addiction? First, I I'd like to make a little bit of a distinction. You know, little bit of a distinction. You know, little bit of a distinction. You know, we're going to talk about addiction. Um, we're going to talk about addiction. Um, we're going to talk about addiction. Um, when we look at the DSM, the when we look at the DSM, the when we look at the DSM, the diagnostic manual that we use for diagnostic manual that we use for diagnostic manual that we use for diagnosing psychological disorders, not diagnosing psychological disorders, not diagnosing psychological disorders, not really addiction as a diagnosis. That's really addiction as a diagnosis. That's really addiction as a diagnosis. That's not super important necessarily because not super important necessarily because not super important necessarily because we can talk about it in the term of we can talk about it in the term of we can talk about it in the term of addiction, but you know, we can look at addiction, but you know, we can look at addiction, but you know, we can look at people and look at biological uh people and look at biological uh people and look at biological uh psychological and social factors and psychological and social factors and psychological and social factors and make a diagnosis to see that they've got make a diagnosis to see that they've got make a diagnosis to see that they've got a substance use disorder, an alcohol use a substance use disorder, an alcohol use a substance use disorder, an alcohol use disorder, uh whether it's moderate or disorder, uh whether it's moderate or disorder, uh whether it's moderate or severe or they're dependent on it. And severe or they're dependent on it. And severe or they're dependent on it. And not to give people an out, but not all not to give people an out, but not all not to give people an out, but not all people that show up with an alcohol use people that show up with an alcohol use people that show up with an alcohol use disorder for a point in time are disorder for a point in time are disorder for a point in time are necessarily an addict. They may not be necessarily an addict. They may not be necessarily an addict. They may not be forever. It might been a life forever. It might been a life forever. It might been a life circumstance that kind of that brought circumstance that kind of that brought circumstance that kind of that brought them there. Um, that said, someone that them there. Um, that said, someone that them there. Um, that said, someone that at a point in time in their life could at a point in time in their life could at a point in time in their life could have an alcohol use disorder or a have an alcohol use disorder or a have an alcohol use disorder or a substance use disorder, you know, substance use disorder, you know, substance use disorder, you know, they're probably prone to that and they they're probably prone to that and they they're probably prone to that and they probably shouldn't probably shouldn't probably shouldn't uh continue down that path or gamble uh continue down that path or gamble uh continue down that path or gamble with it. with it. with it. Um, so talking about addiction in Um, so talking about addiction in Um, so talking about addiction in general, I like to broaden that general, I like to broaden that general, I like to broaden that definition to really, you know, question definition to really, you know, question definition to really, you know, question I'll ask people is does it have you or I'll ask people is does it have you or I'll ask people is does it have you or do you have it? Is it driving you and do you have it? Is it driving you and do you have it? Is it driving you and your behaviors? Are you really leaning your behaviors? Are you really leaning your behaviors? Are you really leaning on it in a way that that's your uh your on it in a way that that's your uh your on it in a way that that's your uh your medicine? Because I don't really see medicine? Because I don't really see medicine? Because I don't really see addiction as the problem. You know, addiction as the problem. You know, addiction as the problem. You know, addiction is the solution. Whatever addiction is the solution. Whatever addiction is the solution. Whatever they're addicted to is the solution to they're addicted to is the solution to they're addicted to is the solution to some underlying stressor. You know, I some underlying stressor. You know, I some underlying stressor. You know, I think as humans, we when we're dis think as humans, we when we're dis think as humans, we when we're dis when we're uncomfortable, when we're when we're uncomfortable, when we're when we're uncomfortable, when we're experiencing pain, our kind of immediate experiencing pain, our kind of immediate experiencing pain, our kind of immediate reaction is to get out of that. And when reaction is to get out of that. And when reaction is to get out of that. And when that stress becomes really big, we're that stress becomes really big, we're that stress becomes really big, we're going to look for the things that are going to look for the things that are going to look for the things that are going to impact us a lot quicker. You going to impact us a lot quicker. You going to impact us a lot quicker. You know, taking a drink, using a drug. Now, know, taking a drink, using a drug. Now, know, taking a drink, using a drug. Now, once people start doing that, depending once people start doing that, depending once people start doing that, depending on what it is, you know, if it's uh on what it is, you know, if it's uh on what it is, you know, if it's uh heroin or fentanyl, uh they could become heroin or fentanyl, uh they could become heroin or fentanyl, uh they could become physically addicted to it very quickly physically addicted to it very quickly physically addicted to it very quickly or alcohol over time. Um or alcohol over time. Um or alcohol over time. Um But I think the definition can be But I think the definition can be But I think the definition can be expanded to a lot of other things. Maybe expanded to a lot of other things. Maybe expanded to a lot of other things. Maybe even things that seem mundane, you know, even things that seem mundane, you know, even things that seem mundane, you know, and we can have addictive and we can have addictive and we can have addictive behaviors at different points in our behaviors at different points in our behaviors at different points in our life. And maybe we're have the same life. And maybe we're have the same life. And maybe we're have the same behavior that sometimes is addictive and behavior that sometimes is addictive and behavior that sometimes is addictive and sometime isn't. You know, this is very sometime isn't. You know, this is very sometime isn't. You know, this is very mundane, but sometimes I'm binge mundane, but sometimes I'm binge mundane, but sometimes I'm binge watching Netflix because I'm on a plane watching Netflix because I'm on a plane watching Netflix because I'm on a plane and don't have anything to do or I'm and don't have anything to do or I'm and don't have anything to do or I'm sick and I can't get out of bed. And sick and I can't get out of bed. And sick and I can't get out of bed. And other times I might have a really other times I might have a really other times I might have a really stressful day or have something going on stressful day or have something going on stressful day or have something going on that I don't want to deal with and I end that I don't want to deal with and I end that I don't want to deal with and I end up watching TV too late and then I don't up watching TV too late and then I don't up watching TV too late and then I don't sleep. And now is that a addiction that sleep. And now is that a addiction that sleep. And now is that a addiction that I need to get treatment for or be pulled I need to get treatment for or be pulled I need to get treatment for or be pulled away from my family for? Probably not. away from my family for? Probably not. away from my family for? Probably not. But it's I think in talking about But it's I think in talking about But it's I think in talking about addiction we want to understand you know addiction we want to understand you know addiction we want to understand you know what is it that people are using whether what is it that people are using whether what is it that people are using whether it's a substance or a behavior and why it's a substance or a behavior and why it's a substance or a behavior and why are they using it? you know that while I are they using it? you know that while I are they using it? you know that while I say it's addiction is not the problem, say it's addiction is not the problem, say it's addiction is not the problem, it's the solution. It's a solution that it's the solution. It's a solution that it's the solution. It's a solution that becomes very problematic for people. Um becomes very problematic for people. Um becomes very problematic for people. Um and you know you will know this better and you know you will know this better and you know you will know this better than I will be able to explain it than I will be able to explain it than I will be able to explain it better than I would but you know they better than I would but you know they better than I would but you know they get a benefit in their brain and body get a benefit in their brain and body get a benefit in their brain and body for feeling the sense of relief that for feeling the sense of relief that for feeling the sense of relief that they'll feel when they use the they'll feel when they use the they'll feel when they use the substance. You know one of the uh substance. You know one of the uh substance. You know one of the uh doctors who initially supported the doctors who initially supported the doctors who initially supported the people who founded Alcoholics Anonymous people who founded Alcoholics Anonymous people who founded Alcoholics Anonymous his name was Dr. Silkworth and he wrote his name was Dr. Silkworth and he wrote his name was Dr. Silkworth and he wrote this opinion and he said men and women this opinion and he said men and women this opinion and he said men and women drink essentially because they like the drink essentially because they like the drink essentially because they like the effect produced by alcohol. I believe effect produced by alcohol. I believe effect produced by alcohol. I believe that effect is relief. So people are that effect is relief. So people are that effect is relief. So people are looking for some sort of relief and the looking for some sort of relief and the looking for some sort of relief and the question has to be I think when we're question has to be I think when we're question has to be I think when we're talking about addiction what is it that talking about addiction what is it that talking about addiction what is it that they're looking for relief from? So when they're looking for relief from? So when they're looking for relief from? So when somebody comes to you or someone or in somebody comes to you or someone or in somebody comes to you or someone or in some cases is brought to you Yeah. who's some cases is brought to you Yeah. who's some cases is brought to you Yeah. who's in the throws of addiction what's your first line of addiction what's your first line of addiction what's your first line of attack so to speak? Are you focused on attack so to speak? Are you focused on attack so to speak? Are you focused on what the underlying stressor is or what the underlying stressor is or what the underlying stressor is or you're trying to stabilize them? I mean you're trying to stabilize them? I mean you're trying to stabilize them? I mean these are people who um sometimes and these are people who um sometimes and these are people who um sometimes and you know sadly I've seen this in my you know sadly I've seen this in my you know sadly I've seen this in my friends um fortunately who are now sober friends um fortunately who are now sober friends um fortunately who are now sober but um you know people wrap the truck but um you know people wrap the truck but um you know people wrap the truck around a tree at 7:00 in the morning around a tree at 7:00 in the morning around a tree at 7:00 in the morning having drank a bottle of wine and it having drank a bottle of wine and it having drank a bottle of wine and it taken a Xanax or jail or worse. Right. taken a Xanax or jail or worse. Right. taken a Xanax or jail or worse. Right. And so when somebody comes in, what And so when somebody comes in, what And so when somebody comes in, what are the first questions that what are the first questions that what are the first questions that you're asking and what's the goal? you're asking and what's the goal? you're asking and what's the goal? Let's talk about the most acute first. Let's talk about the most acute first. Let's talk about the most acute first. So I serve as a chief clinical officer So I serve as a chief clinical officer So I serve as a chief clinical officer for Guardian Recovery. We do treatment for Guardian Recovery. We do treatment for Guardian Recovery. We do treatment in different states. You know, we serve in different states. You know, we serve in different states. You know, we serve thousands of people a year and we have thousands of people a year and we have thousands of people a year and we have medical detoxes that we start with. So medical detoxes that we start with. So medical detoxes that we start with. So if somebody needs to be detoxed from if somebody needs to be detoxed from if somebody needs to be detoxed from alcohol or drugs, you know, they're alcohol or drugs, you know, they're alcohol or drugs, you know, they're going to come in. We're not going to going to come in. We're not going to going to come in. We're not going to start asking questions about what the start asking questions about what the start asking questions about what the underlying stressor is. you know, we're underlying stressor is. you know, we're underlying stressor is. you know, we're going to first do medical assessments, going to first do medical assessments, going to first do medical assessments, nursing assessments. Sometimes we have nursing assessments. Sometimes we have nursing assessments. Sometimes we have to send them to the ER if they're, you to send them to the ER if they're, you to send them to the ER if they're, you know, if they're uh in dire need or know, if they're uh in dire need or know, if they're uh in dire need or they're so acute that they can't even be they're so acute that they can't even be they're so acute that they can't even be in the facility that we have. Um, in the facility that we have. Um, in the facility that we have. Um, we're going to just get them physically we're going to just get them physically we're going to just get them physically stabilized, you know, and as we're stabilized, you know, and as we're stabilized, you know, and as we're getting them physically stabilized, you getting them physically stabilized, you getting them physically stabilized, you know, the thing with addiction is a lot know, the thing with addiction is a lot know, the thing with addiction is a lot of people just say stop. But for people of people just say stop. But for people of people just say stop. But for people that just stop and assuming they're not that just stop and assuming they're not that just stop and assuming they're not in danger, like in alcohol, if you just in danger, like in alcohol, if you just in danger, like in alcohol, if you just stop, you could, you know, you can have stop, you could, you know, you can have stop, you could, you know, you can have seizures and die. You know, uh other seizures and die. You know, uh other seizures and die. You know, uh other drugs, if you just stop, it can be drugs, if you just stop, it can be drugs, if you just stop, it can be extremely uncomfortable. But even if extremely uncomfortable. But even if extremely uncomfortable. But even if they went to a detox and were able to they went to a detox and were able to they went to a detox and were able to stop, you know, their life doesn't stop, you know, their life doesn't stop, you know, their life doesn't generally get better right away. In generally get better right away. In generally get better right away. In fact, a lot of times it gets worse. Now, fact, a lot of times it gets worse. Now, fact, a lot of times it gets worse. Now, maybe it's better in the fact that maybe it's better in the fact that maybe it's better in the fact that they're not about to die. you know, they they're not about to die. you know, they they're not about to die. you know, they don't have these physical symptoms, but don't have these physical symptoms, but don't have these physical symptoms, but emotionally, you know, they've been emotionally, you know, they've been emotionally, you know, they've been using this substance or this or alcohol using this substance or this or alcohol using this substance or this or alcohol as a as a medicator. Now, all of a as a as a medicator. Now, all of a as a as a medicator. Now, all of a sudden, the medicine's gone, you know, sudden, the medicine's gone, you know, sudden, the medicine's gone, you know, and they've got to deal with life. And and they've got to deal with life. And and they've got to deal with life. And so, they can actually feel a lot worse so, they can actually feel a lot worse so, they can actually feel a lot worse right when they come in. So, first, what right when they come in. So, first, what right when they come in. So, first, what we're going to do is really understand we're going to do is really understand we're going to do is really understand what's going on with them what's going on with them what's going on with them biologically so that we can make sure biologically so that we can make sure biologically so that we can make sure they're safe. And then as we can support they're safe. And then as we can support they're safe. And then as we can support them over the days that they start, you them over the days that they start, you them over the days that they start, you know, becoming a little more know, becoming a little more know, becoming a little more comfortable, their comfortable, their comfortable, their uh their physical conditions start to uh their physical conditions start to uh their physical conditions start to stabilize, then we can start to really stabilize, then we can start to really stabilize, then we can start to really understand what's going on with them in understand what's going on with them in understand what's going on with them in their environment, you know, what is their environment, you know, what is their environment, you know, what is their pattern of use, you know, when do their pattern of use, you know, when do their pattern of use, you know, when do they use, what are the what are the they use, what are the what are the they use, what are the what are the effects that it's having in their life, effects that it's having in their life, effects that it's having in their life, you know, um because we want to you know, um because we want to you know, um because we want to understand how it's playing out understand how it's playing out understand how it's playing out everywhere, like I said, biologically, everywhere, like I said, biologically, everywhere, like I said, biologically, psychologically, and socially, psychologically, and socially, psychologically, and socially, and really get a clear picture of and really get a clear picture of and really get a clear picture of who this person is, you know, and who this person is, you know, and who this person is, you know, and sometimes people come in more motivated sometimes people come in more motivated sometimes people come in more motivated than others. You know, sometimes they than others. You know, sometimes they than others. You know, sometimes they get brought to us, like you said, and get brought to us, like you said, and get brought to us, like you said, and I've seen it work either way that I've seen it work either way that I've seen it work either way that someone who's comes in and says, "I need someone who's comes in and says, "I need someone who's comes in and says, "I need help, you know, I'm willing to do help, you know, I'm willing to do help, you know, I'm willing to do anything." That they end up not anything." That they end up not anything." That they end up not following through with their treatment. following through with their treatment. following through with their treatment. And other people that come in fighting And other people that come in fighting And other people that come in fighting and screaming, end up, you know, doing and screaming, end up, you know, doing and screaming, end up, you know, doing very well over time. I actually like it very well over time. I actually like it very well over time. I actually like it when people come in that kind of when people come in that kind of when people come in that kind of struggle. I think, you know, the more struggle. I think, you know, the more struggle. I think, you know, the more people kind of struggle with something people kind of struggle with something people kind of struggle with something up front, it's kind of like the you pull up front, it's kind of like the you pull up front, it's kind of like the you pull an arrow back, you know, the further you an arrow back, you know, the further you an arrow back, you know, the further you can pull the bow back and hold it, the can pull the bow back and hold it, the can pull the bow back and hold it, the more attention in it, the farther it's more attention in it, the farther it's more attention in it, the farther it's going to fly. And I really like when going to fly. And I really like when going to fly. And I really like when we have people who say, "I'm not going we have people who say, "I'm not going we have people who say, "I'm not going to do this," or, "I'm going to leave." to do this," or, "I'm going to leave." to do this," or, "I'm going to leave." You know, they're You know, they're You know, they're actually telling us something about actually telling us something about actually telling us something about themselves and where they are, and we themselves and where they are, and we themselves and where they are, and we can be there with them in that struggle. can be there with them in that struggle. can be there with them in that struggle. You know, sometimes people come in and You know, sometimes people come in and You know, sometimes people come in and they're just like checking the boxes and they're just like checking the boxes and they're just like checking the boxes and they're going to be a good student and they're going to be a good student and they're going to be a good student and everything's fine because they're not everything's fine because they're not everything's fine because they're not drinking anymore. And then we're never drinking anymore. And then we're never drinking anymore. And then we're never able to really get to kind of the causes able to really get to kind of the causes able to really get to kind of the causes and conditions of it. You know, when and conditions of it. You know, when and conditions of it. You know, when they're in a treatment setting, we'll they're in a treatment setting, we'll they're in a treatment setting, we'll have them for anywhere from, you know, 7 have them for anywhere from, you know, 7 have them for anywhere from, you know, 7 days to 90 days. You know, we like to days to 90 days. You know, we like to days to 90 days. You know, we like to keep them, you know, and keep them, you know, and keep them, you know, and understand, you know, what's going on understand, you know, what's going on understand, you know, what's going on with them so we can meet them at their with them so we can meet them at their with them so we can meet them at their different stages and the different stages and the different stages and the environment. We kind of try to create a environment. We kind of try to create a environment. We kind of try to create a microcosm of their social universe so microcosm of their social universe so microcosm of their social universe so that you know they can experience some that you know they can experience some that you know they can experience some stressors while we're not creating the stressors while we're not creating the stressors while we're not creating the stressors but we're having them stressors but we're having them stressors but we're having them communicate with their families. We're communicate with their families. We're communicate with their families. We're having them face some of the things they having them face some of the things they having them face some of the things they don't want to face. And we have a saying don't want to face. And we have a saying don't want to face. And we have a saying that says you know treatment can't that says you know treatment can't that says you know treatment can't really begin till the crisis occurs. And really begin till the crisis occurs. And really begin till the crisis occurs. And what that means is more of the internal what that means is more of the internal what that means is more of the internal or existential crisis. If someone's or existential crisis. If someone's or existential crisis. If someone's coming in going well I'm great. coming in going well I'm great. coming in going well I'm great. Everything's great. you know, why were Everything's great. you know, why were Everything's great. you know, why were they maybe things are feeling great they maybe things are feeling great they maybe things are feeling great right now, but why were right now, but why were right now, but why were they drinking or using in a way that was they drinking or using in a way that was they drinking or using in a way that was harming themselves, others, you know, harming themselves, others, you know, harming themselves, others, you know, ripping their lives apart, you know, ripping their lives apart, you know, ripping their lives apart, you know, sometimes people will say addiction is a sometimes people will say addiction is a sometimes people will say addiction is a choice. I don't buy that all the time, choice. I don't buy that all the time, choice. I don't buy that all the time, right? Uh I but people will say that and right? Uh I but people will say that and right? Uh I but people will say that and I would what I would say to that is even I would what I would say to that is even I would what I would say to that is even if it is a choice even if people could if it is a choice even if people could if it is a choice even if people could wake up and say I'm going to do this or wake up and say I'm going to do this or wake up and say I'm going to do this or I'm not like why would they continue to I'm not like why would they continue to I'm not like why would they continue to choose a life that they're hurting choose a life that they're hurting choose a life that they're hurting themselves and others. So while they're themselves and others. So while they're themselves and others. So while they're in treatment with us, you know, we in treatment with us, you know, we in treatment with us, you know, we want to um start to really understand want to um start to really understand want to um start to really understand who they are, start to understand, you who they are, start to understand, you who they are, start to understand, you know, what is happening in their know, what is happening in their know, what is happening in their environment. And then as they, you know, environment. And then as they, you know, environment. And then as they, you know, stabilize more physically and then they stabilize more physically and then they stabilize more physically and then they stabilize emotionally, as we can start stabilize emotionally, as we can start stabilize emotionally, as we can start to raise their capacity to raise their capacity to raise their capacity to experience difficult emotions. I mean, I experience difficult emotions. I mean, I experience difficult emotions. I mean, I say this all the time to my clients. I say this all the time to my clients. I say this all the time to my clients. You know, what I really do with them is You know, what I really do with them is You know, what I really do with them is help them learn how to feel bad. you help them learn how to feel bad. you help them learn how to feel bad. you know, we don't put that on the website know, we don't put that on the website know, we don't put that on the website because no one's going to come to us to because no one's going to come to us to because no one's going to come to us to say, "How can I feel really bad?" But I say, "How can I feel really bad?" But I say, "How can I feel really bad?" But I think that's at the core of it. think that's at the core of it. think that's at the core of it. You know, how can we build a distress You know, how can we build a distress You know, how can we build a distress tolerance so that they can face tolerance so that they can face tolerance so that they can face discomfort? They can face pain and not discomfort? They can face pain and not discomfort? They can face pain and not choose the thing that gives immediate choose the thing that gives immediate choose the thing that gives immediate short-term relief that's going to end up hurting relief that's going to end up hurting relief that's going to end up hurting them and th those around them to them and th those around them to them and th those around them to allow them to really lean in to whatever allow them to really lean in to whatever allow them to really lean in to whatever that discomfort is. And and when people that discomfort is. And and when people that discomfort is. And and when people are able to be available for the depths are able to be available for the depths are able to be available for the depths of discomfort, then they're really of discomfort, then they're really of discomfort, then they're really become more available for the heights of become more available for the heights of become more available for the heights of joy and satisfaction and in joy and satisfaction and in joy and satisfaction and in life. Um, so we start to build that life. Um, so we start to build that life. Um, so we start to build that capacity so that then we can start capacity so that then we can start capacity so that then we can start looking at the beliefs that maybe the looking at the beliefs that maybe the looking at the beliefs that maybe the limiting type beliefs that have been the limiting type beliefs that have been the limiting type beliefs that have been driving them that are often set from driving them that are often set from driving them that are often set from earlier on in the life in their life and earlier on in the life in their life and earlier on in the life in their life and the way that they were shaped, you know, the way that they were shaped, you know, the way that they were shaped, you know, and that's often what we talk about as and that's often what we talk about as and that's often what we talk about as trauma. Not always a big event that as trauma. Not always a big event that as trauma. Not always a big event that happened on a single day, although that happened on a single day, although that happened on a single day, although that does occur. But the shapings that does occur. But the shapings that does occur. But the shapings that people had in their life people had in their life people had in their life that were the ad you know we're adaptive that were the ad you know we're adaptive that were the ad you know we're adaptive people are very adaptive and you know people are very adaptive and you know people are very adaptive and you know kids and as they're in their formative kids and as they're in their formative kids and as they're in their formative years will develop strategies to live years will develop strategies to live years will develop strategies to live life that adapt them in a way that they life that adapt them in a way that they life that adapt them in a way that they can survive the environments that can survive the environments that can survive the environments that they're in. And you know if that they're in. And you know if that they're in. And you know if that adaptation which was appropriate in adaptation which was appropriate in adaptation which was appropriate in their family, their school, their family, their school, their family, their school, their environment, whatever it was, maybe all environment, whatever it was, maybe all environment, whatever it was, maybe all of those was something that um was more of those was something that um was more of those was something that um was more toward like a survival response, like a toward like a survival response, like a toward like a survival response, like a fight orflight type response. And now fight orflight type response. And now fight orflight type response. And now that's never resolved in some way and in that's never resolved in some way and in that's never resolved in some way and in a way. and then later in life they're a way. and then later in life they're a way. and then later in life they're still applying these adaptive still applying these adaptive still applying these adaptive strategies in situations that it's not strategies in situations that it's not strategies in situations that it's not appropriate for. I'd like to take a appropriate for. I'd like to take a appropriate for. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online therapist carried out entirely online therapist carried out entirely online now. I personally have been doing now. I personally have been doing now. I personally have been doing therapy weekly for well over 30 years. therapy weekly for well over 30 years. therapy weekly for well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It Initially, I didn't have a choice. It Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay was a condition of being allowed to stay was a condition of being allowed to stay in school. But pretty soon I realized in school. But pretty soon I realized in school. But pretty soon I realized that therapy is an extremely important that therapy is an extremely important that therapy is an extremely important component to one's overall health. In component to one's overall health. In component to one's overall health. In fact, I consider doing regular therapy fact, I consider doing regular therapy fact, I consider doing regular therapy just as important as getting regular just as important as getting regular just as important as getting regular exercise, which of course I also do exercise, which of course I also do exercise, which of course I also do every week. There are essentially three every week. There are essentially three every week. There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. things that great therapy provides. things that great therapy provides. First of all, it provides a good rapport First of all, it provides a good rapport First of all, it provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and with somebody that you can trust and with somebody that you can trust and talk to about pretty much any issue talk to about pretty much any issue talk to about pretty much any issue with. Second of all, it can provide with. Second of all, it can provide with. Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support in the form of emotional support and directed guidance. And third, expert and directed guidance. And third, expert and directed guidance. And third, expert therapy can provide useful insights. therapy can provide useful insights. therapy can provide useful insights. insights that allow you to better not insights that allow you to better not insights that allow you to better not just your emotional life and your just your emotional life and your just your emotional life and your relationship life, but of course also relationship life, but of course also relationship life, but of course also the relationship to yourself and your the relationship to yourself and your the relationship to yourself and your professional life and to all sorts of professional life and to all sorts of professional life and to all sorts of goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to find an expert therapist with whom you find an expert therapist with whom you find an expert therapist with whom you resonate with and that can provide you resonate with and that can provide you resonate with and that can provide you those three benefits that come from those three benefits that come from those three benefits that come from effective therapy. Also, because effective therapy. Also, because effective therapy. Also, because BetterHel allows for therapy to be done BetterHel allows for therapy to be done BetterHel allows for therapy to be done entirely online, it's super entirely online, it's super entirely online, it's super timeefficient and easy to fit into a timeefficient and easy to fit into a timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. If you'd like to try busy schedule. If you'd like to try busy schedule. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's your first month. Again, that's your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Today's episode betterhelp.com/huberman. Today's episode betterhelp.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Levels. Levels is also brought to us by Levels. Levels is also brought to us by Levels. Levels is a program that lets you see how is a program that lets you see how is a program that lets you see how different foods affect your health by different foods affect your health by different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your giving you real-time feedback on your giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor. diet using a continuous glucose monitor. diet using a continuous glucose monitor. One of the most important factors in One of the most important factors in One of the most important factors in both short and long-term health is your both short and long-term health is your both short and long-term health is your body's ability to manage glucose. This body's ability to manage glucose. This body's ability to manage glucose. This is something I've discussed in depth on is something I've discussed in depth on is something I've discussed in depth on this podcast with experts such as Dr. this podcast with experts such as Dr. this podcast with experts such as Dr. Chris Palmer, Dr. Robert Lustig, and Dr. Chris Palmer, Dr. Robert Lustig, and Dr. Chris Palmer, Dr. Robert Lustig, and Dr. Casey Means. One thing that's abundantly Casey Means. One thing that's abundantly Casey Means. One thing that's abundantly clear is that to maintain energy and clear is that to maintain energy and clear is that to maintain energy and focus throughout the day, you want to focus throughout the day, you want to focus throughout the day, you want to keep your blood glucose relatively keep your blood glucose relatively keep your blood glucose relatively steady without any big spikes or steady without any big spikes or steady without any big spikes or crashes. I first started using Levels crashes. I first started using Levels crashes. I first started using Levels about 3 years ago as a way to try and about 3 years ago as a way to try and about 3 years ago as a way to try and understand how different foods impact my understand how different foods impact my understand how different foods impact my blood glucose levels. Levels has proven blood glucose levels. Levels has proven blood glucose levels. Levels has proven to be incredibly informative for helping to be incredibly informative for helping to be incredibly informative for helping me determine what food choices I should me determine what food choices I should me determine what food choices I should make and when best to eat relative to make and when best to eat relative to make and when best to eat relative to things like exercise, sleep, and work. things like exercise, sleep, and work. things like exercise, sleep, and work. Indeed, using Levels has helped me shape Indeed, using Levels has helped me shape Indeed, using Levels has helped me shape my entire schedule. I now have more my entire schedule. I now have more my entire schedule. I now have more energy than ever and I sleep better than energy than ever and I sleep better than energy than ever and I sleep better than ever. And I attribute that largely to ever. And I attribute that largely to ever. And I attribute that largely to understanding how different foods and understanding how different foods and understanding how different foods and behaviors impact my blood glucose. So, behaviors impact my blood glucose. So, behaviors impact my blood glucose. So, if you're interested in learning more if you're interested in learning more if you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, go to go to go to levels.link/huberman. Right now, Levels levels.link/huberman. Right now, Levels levels.link/huberman. Right now, Levels is offering an additional two free is offering an additional two free is offering an additional two free months of membership when signing up. months of membership when signing up. months of membership when signing up. Again, that's levels.link, spelled, of Again, that's levels.link, spelled, of Again, that's levels.link, spelled, of course, LIK/Huberman, to get the additional two LIK/Huberman, to get the additional two LIK/Huberman, to get the additional two free months of membership. free months of membership. free months of membership. The thing you said earlier that's The thing you said earlier that's The thing you said earlier that's ringing in my brain ringing in my brain ringing in my brain is does it have you or do you have it? is does it have you or do you have it? is does it have you or do you have it? And I think for people listening and And I think for people listening and And I think for people listening and watching um I think this is a really watching um I think this is a really watching um I think this is a really important distinction. And maybe you important distinction. And maybe you important distinction. And maybe you could just elaborate on how one starts could just elaborate on how one starts could just elaborate on how one starts to answer that question because these to answer that question because these to answer that question because these days we hear, you know, people are days we hear, you know, people are days we hear, you know, people are addicted to social media, people are addicted to social media, people are addicted to social media, people are addicted to sugar, people are addicted to sugar, people are addicted to sugar, people are addicted to, you know, all sorts of things and to, you know, all sorts of things and to, you know, all sorts of things and online shopping, you know, and on online shopping, you know, and on online shopping, you know, and on and on. Let's just set aside alcoholism and on. Let's just set aside alcoholism and on. Let's just set aside alcoholism for the moment because that's a an a for the moment because that's a an a for the moment because that's a an a unique case where as you mentioned unique case where as you mentioned unique case where as you mentioned immediate withdrawal can cause death and immediate withdrawal can cause death and immediate withdrawal can cause death and um uh it has its own kind of unique um uh it has its own kind of unique um uh it has its own kind of unique features but for everything else features but for everything else features but for everything else like if somebody out there is like if somebody out there is like if somebody out there is listening and they're like well you know listening and they're like well you know listening and they're like well you know I have a hard time clicking off of uh I have a hard time clicking off of uh I have a hard time clicking off of uh social media um even though I know I social media um even though I know I social media um even though I know I need to sleep I need to study or have a need to sleep I need to study or have a need to sleep I need to study or have a hard time disengaging from video games I hard time disengaging from video games I hard time disengaging from video games I think is a common one in a lot of think is a common one in a lot of think is a common one in a lot of young people, how do they know if young people, how do they know if young people, how do they know if they're addicted? Is there a litmus they're addicted? Is there a litmus they're addicted? Is there a litmus test? I mean, could we test ourselves as test? I mean, could we test ourselves as test? I mean, could we test ourselves as um as individuals? Like, can I go an um as individuals? Like, can I go an um as individuals? Like, can I go an afternoon without it? Can I go a week afternoon without it? Can I go a week afternoon without it? Can I go a week without it? Is that the test? I think without it? Is that the test? I think without it? Is that the test? I think that's a great test. I mean, probably that's a great test. I mean, probably that's a great test. I mean, probably more than an afternoon or a week, but more than an afternoon or a week, but more than an afternoon or a week, but you know, can I quit for a month? And you know, can I quit for a month? And you know, can I quit for a month? And you know, if you're if when you're when you know, if you're if when you're when you know, if you're if when you're when you've stopped, if all you're thinking you've stopped, if all you're thinking you've stopped, if all you're thinking about is either doing it or when you're about is either doing it or when you're about is either doing it or when you're doing it, all you're thinking about is doing it, all you're thinking about is doing it, all you're thinking about is how can I how can I stop doing this? how can I how can I stop doing this? how can I how can I stop doing this? That's a pretty good indication that it That's a pretty good indication that it That's a pretty good indication that it has you, you know, and you know, you has you, you know, and you know, you has you, you know, and you know, you also have to look at like what are the also have to look at like what are the also have to look at like what are the things that it's impacting in your in things that it's impacting in your in things that it's impacting in your in your life. And that's one of the things your life. And that's one of the things your life. And that's one of the things we can help people kind of orient to. we can help people kind of orient to. we can help people kind of orient to. They might think that if it's somebody They might think that if it's somebody They might think that if it's somebody that comes to us at their family saying that comes to us at their family saying that comes to us at their family saying this is a huge problem, they may not see this is a huge problem, they may not see this is a huge problem, they may not see it yet or they may be avoiding it. We it yet or they may be avoiding it. We it yet or they may be avoiding it. We call that denial. But a lot of times call that denial. But a lot of times call that denial. But a lot of times it's they there's something deep down it's they there's something deep down it's they there's something deep down where they know that, you know, I'm where they know that, you know, I'm where they know that, you know, I'm really disengaged from life. I'm lonely. really disengaged from life. I'm lonely. really disengaged from life. I'm lonely. I'm I don't have the quality of I'm I don't have the quality of I'm I don't have the quality of relationships. I'm not able to be relationships. I'm not able to be relationships. I'm not able to be motivated to do the things that I want motivated to do the things that I want motivated to do the things that I want to do. What if it still feels good to do. What if it still feels good to do. What if it still feels good to them? However, like family isn't saying, them? However, like family isn't saying, them? However, like family isn't saying, look, you know, kid isn't getting their look, you know, kid isn't getting their look, you know, kid isn't getting their schoolwork done, but um it's kind of schoolwork done, but um it's kind of schoolwork done, but um it's kind of outrageous. You know, you four hours a outrageous. You know, you four hours a outrageous. You know, you four hours a day playing video games, 3 hours a day, day playing video games, 3 hours a day, day playing video games, 3 hours a day, that might not even seem like that much that might not even seem like that much that might not even seem like that much to a lot of people, but parents um can to a lot of people, but parents um can to a lot of people, but parents um can see the opportunity cost of that. This see the opportunity cost of that. This see the opportunity cost of that. This is time that kid isn't running around is time that kid isn't running around is time that kid isn't running around and getting exercise. This is time that and getting exercise. This is time that and getting exercise. This is time that um is eating and to sleep. This is time um is eating and to sleep. This is time um is eating and to sleep. This is time that could be spent studying. So maybe that could be spent studying. So maybe that could be spent studying. So maybe grades haven't cratered yet, right? Um, grades haven't cratered yet, right? Um, grades haven't cratered yet, right? Um, and we live in the quote unquote and we live in the quote unquote and we live in the quote unquote American dream model, uh, where kids American dream model, uh, where kids American dream model, uh, where kids say, "Well, so and so makes millions of say, "Well, so and so makes millions of say, "Well, so and so makes millions of dollars every year playing video games, dollars every year playing video games, dollars every year playing video games, right?" So, I'm actually on the path. I right?" So, I'm actually on the path. I right?" So, I'm actually on the path. I think you see that fairly often these think you see that fairly often these think you see that fairly often these days, right? Yeah. I'll relate it back days, right? Yeah. I'll relate it back days, right? Yeah. I'll relate it back to drugs for a second. You and I are the to drugs for a second. You and I are the to drugs for a second. You and I are the same age, and you probably remember the, same age, and you probably remember the, same age, and you probably remember the, you know, this is your brain. This is you know, this is your brain. This is you know, this is your brain. This is your brain on drugs when they cracked your brain on drugs when they cracked your brain on drugs when they cracked the, you know, showed the egg, this is the, you know, showed the egg, this is the, you know, showed the egg, this is your brain, and Yeah. disrespectful to your brain, and Yeah. disrespectful to your brain, and Yeah. disrespectful to eggs, which I I'm a big fan of. Uh, but eggs, which I I'm a big fan of. Uh, but eggs, which I I'm a big fan of. Uh, but and then this is your brain on Well, and then this is your brain on Well, and then this is your brain on Well, it did call the egg a brain, so that was it did call the egg a brain, so that was it did call the egg a brain, so that was pretty true. You're right. Your logic is pretty true. You're right. Your logic is pretty true. You're right. Your logic is impeccable. Thank you. And this is your impeccable. Thank you. And this is your impeccable. Thank you. And this is your brain on drugs and it showed the fried brain on drugs and it showed the fried brain on drugs and it showed the fried egg. I think that was a terrible egg. I think that was a terrible egg. I think that was a terrible example for kids example for kids example for kids because most of the time when people do because most of the time when people do because most of the time when people do drugs the first time, it doesn't feel drugs the first time, it doesn't feel drugs the first time, it doesn't feel like that. It feels good. It feels like that. It feels good. It feels like that. It feels good. It feels great. You know, it's over time when you great. You know, it's over time when you great. You know, it's over time when you keep doing that it, you know, keep doing that it, you know, keep doing that it, you know, especially, you know, a kid that doesn't especially, you know, a kid that doesn't especially, you know, a kid that doesn't have all of the responsibility and the have all of the responsibility and the have all of the responsibility and the things in life that they might have or things in life that they might have or things in life that they might have or want to have later on, you know, uh want to have later on, you know, uh want to have later on, you know, uh they're not going to they're not going they're not going to they're not going they're not going to they're not going to see that that's a problem to see that that's a problem to see that that's a problem necessarily. And some of their heroes necessarily. And some of their heroes necessarily. And some of their heroes are um very public about the fact that are um very public about the fact that are um very public about the fact that they like smoke a ton of high THC weed, they like smoke a ton of high THC weed, they like smoke a ton of high THC weed, right? I mean that when I was growing up right? I mean that when I was growing up right? I mean that when I was growing up that was associated with um lack of that was associated with um lack of that was associated with um lack of agency and kind of being a quote unquote agency and kind of being a quote unquote agency and kind of being a quote unquote burnout was the idea. Nowadays there are burnout was the idea. Nowadays there are burnout was the idea. Nowadays there are just as many examples of people that just as many examples of people that just as many examples of people that smoke a lot of weed are vocal about that smoke a lot of weed are vocal about that smoke a lot of weed are vocal about that and by all external measures are doing and by all external measures are doing and by all external measures are doing very well perhaps better than most. It very well perhaps better than most. It very well perhaps better than most. It also wasn't as highly concentrated when also wasn't as highly concentrated when also wasn't as highly concentrated when we were kids. I mean, this is we were kids. I mean, this is we were kids. I mean, this is pretty intense these days and can have pretty intense these days and can have pretty intense these days and can have some really longlasting effects on some really longlasting effects on some really longlasting effects on people and there's some people that people and there's some people that people and there's some people that it's not going to affect in the same way it's not going to affect in the same way it's not going to affect in the same way other, you know, it does others. Some other, you know, it does others. Some other, you know, it does others. Some people are going to be able to smoke people are going to be able to smoke people are going to be able to smoke that amount of THC or vape it or however that amount of THC or vape it or however that amount of THC or vape it or however they're doing it, right? I mean, the they're doing it, right? I mean, the they're doing it, right? I mean, the delivery methods are very it's delivery methods are very it's delivery methods are very it's crazy these days because, you know, used crazy these days because, you know, used crazy these days because, you know, used people used to have to roll a joint, go people used to have to roll a joint, go people used to have to roll a joint, go behind the store, you know, it was like behind the store, you know, it was like behind the store, you know, it was like an event to go do that. Now, and you had an event to go do that. Now, and you had an event to go do that. Now, and you had to break the law. You had to break the to break the law. You had to break the to break the law. You had to break the law. Now it's every it's in a candy. I law. Now it's every it's in a candy. I law. Now it's every it's in a candy. I mean it's candy, right? It's gummy mean it's candy, right? It's gummy mean it's candy, right? It's gummy bears. Wild. It's really wild. gummy bears. Wild. It's really wild. gummy bears. Wild. It's really wild. Um and you know the thing with those Um and you know the thing with those Um and you know the thing with those people that are succeeding at it like people that are succeeding at it like people that are succeeding at it like when we really look at that like what when we really look at that like what when we really look at that like what how what percentage of the people is how what percentage of the people is how what percentage of the people is that right? It's a very small that right? It's a very small that right? It's a very small percentage. Of course kids are going to percentage. Of course kids are going to percentage. Of course kids are going to uh look at that and say well I can do uh look at that and say well I can do uh look at that and say well I can do that. you know, um I would I've had a that. you know, um I would I've had a that. you know, um I would I've had a conversation with my teenage son about conversation with my teenage son about conversation with my teenage son about that, you know, and even if he's playing that, you know, and even if he's playing that, you know, and even if he's playing if they're playing games four hours a if they're playing games four hours a if they're playing games four hours a day, I imagine those guys that win these day, I imagine those guys that win these day, I imagine those guys that win these video game or they're the YouTubers video game or they're the YouTubers video game or they're the YouTubers that are making all kinds of money. I that are making all kinds of money. I that are making all kinds of money. I mean, they're approaching it mean, they're approaching it mean, they're approaching it like a like a pretty intense job. You like a like a pretty intense job. You like a like a pretty intense job. You know, they're really working at it. But know, they're really working at it. But know, they're really working at it. But you know we don't want to take away that you know we don't want to take away that you know we don't want to take away that imagin imagination and creativity from imagin imagination and creativity from imagin imagination and creativity from kids but you know it's our job as kids but you know it's our job as kids but you know it's our job as parents to look and see you know the parents to look and see you know the parents to look and see you know the kids aren't going to see what's happen kids aren't going to see what's happen kids aren't going to see what's happen you know they're kind of timing is like you know they're kind of timing is like you know they're kind of timing is like now or not now they're not really now or not now they're not really now or not now they're not really looking too far into the future and looking too far into the future and looking too far into the future and that's a beautiful thing about that's a beautiful thing about that's a beautiful thing about being a kid as well. It's it's our job being a kid as well. It's it's our job being a kid as well. It's it's our job to put those guard rails on and as to put those guard rails on and as to put those guard rails on and as parents really understand what are the parents really understand what are the parents really understand what are the things that um may impact them over the things that um may impact them over the things that um may impact them over the long term. But we also have to long term. But we also have to long term. But we also have to understand, you know, it's easy for me understand, you know, it's easy for me understand, you know, it's easy for me to look at, you know, I had video games to look at, you know, I had video games to look at, you know, I had video games when I was a kid, you know, but it was when I was a kid, you know, but it was when I was a kid, you know, but it was Nintendo and Sega and, you know, it Nintendo and Sega and, you know, it Nintendo and Sega and, you know, it was not as it didn't pull you in as was not as it didn't pull you in as was not as it didn't pull you in as much. And we were outside all the time. much. And we were outside all the time. much. And we were outside all the time. It was a little bit, you know, it was a It was a little bit, you know, it was a It was a little bit, you know, it was a different we'd come in and play video different we'd come in and play video different we'd come in and play video games at night, you know. Um, you know, games at night, you know. Um, you know, games at night, you know. Um, you know, now these things really pull you in and now these things really pull you in and now these things really pull you in and you're interactive and they communicate you're interactive and they communicate you're interactive and they communicate with other people. You know, they a lot with other people. You know, they a lot with other people. You know, they a lot of kids have their social connection out of kids have their social connection out of kids have their social connection out of playing video games. I actually had a of playing video games. I actually had a of playing video games. I actually had a um a uh mentor once who was involved in um a uh mentor once who was involved in um a uh mentor once who was involved in a leadership program with all these a leadership program with all these a leadership program with all these other adults and they did their other adults and they did their other adults and they did their leadership program. They were all over leadership program. They were all over leadership program. They were all over the world and they would meet in I think the world and they would meet in I think the world and they would meet in I think it was World of Warcraft and play it was World of Warcraft and play it was World of Warcraft and play together and they had different things together and they had different things together and they had different things that they would do to work through that they would do to work through that they would do to work through their whatever they were doing in the their whatever they were doing in the their whatever they were doing in the leadership program. So there is some leadership program. So there is some leadership program. So there is some benefits to it for people. You know they benefits to it for people. You know they benefits to it for people. You know they these kids can really connect with each these kids can really connect with each these kids can really connect with each other when they and especially other when they and especially other when they and especially through the pan pandemic this through the pan pandemic this through the pan pandemic this happened. I'm going to come back to what happened. I'm going to come back to what happened. I'm going to come back to what I was going to say about as a parent. I was going to say about as a parent. I was going to say about as a parent. It's easy for me to look at and say, It's easy for me to look at and say, It's easy for me to look at and say, "Well, there's too much social media. "Well, there's too much social media. "Well, there's too much social media. It's too much video games. It's too much It's too much video games. It's too much It's too much video games. It's too much this." You know, it would be great if this." You know, it would be great if this." You know, it would be great if all that stuff was taken away. Well, all that stuff was taken away. Well, all that stuff was taken away. Well, guess what? It's not going guess what? It's not going guess what? It's not going anywhere, you know, and I can't really anywhere, you know, and I can't really anywhere, you know, and I can't really relate to it in the same way that my relate to it in the same way that my relate to it in the same way that my kids will relate to it. You know, I have kids will relate to it. You know, I have kids will relate to it. You know, I have younger kids that I have no idea what's younger kids that I have no idea what's younger kids that I have no idea what's going to be there when they're of going to be there when they're of going to be there when they're of age to look at screens or be in the age to look at screens or be in the age to look at screens or be in the world or communicate with others. But, world or communicate with others. But, world or communicate with others. But, you know, it's our job as parents you know, it's our job as parents you know, it's our job as parents to look at and get to know our kids in a to look at and get to know our kids in a to look at and get to know our kids in a way that we can see what are the things way that we can see what are the things way that we can see what are the things that are going to benefit them and what that are going to benefit them and what that are going to benefit them and what are the things that aren't. You know, I are the things that aren't. You know, I are the things that aren't. You know, I don't think every kid shouldn't play I don't think every kid shouldn't play I don't think every kid shouldn't play video games. No, neither do I. I think video games. No, neither do I. I think video games. No, neither do I. I think that the um the contrast with the video that the um the contrast with the video that the um the contrast with the video games that you played when you were games that you played when you were games that you played when you were younger and then you mentioned going younger and then you mentioned going younger and then you mentioned going outside. I think um I realize this is outside. I think um I realize this is outside. I think um I realize this is not a strict definition of addiction by not a strict definition of addiction by not a strict definition of addiction by any means, but if something in the any means, but if something in the any means, but if something in the electronic sphere makes quote unquote electronic sphere makes quote unquote electronic sphere makes quote unquote real life underwhelming, Yeah. Um I real life underwhelming, Yeah. Um I real life underwhelming, Yeah. Um I don't know if that means it's addictive, don't know if that means it's addictive, don't know if that means it's addictive, but it certainly means it has a but it certainly means it has a but it certainly means it has a gravitational pole, right? And and we gravitational pole, right? And and we gravitational pole, right? And and we can set this as a kind of a pillar for can set this as a kind of a pillar for can set this as a kind of a pillar for context when we talk about pornography context when we talk about pornography context when we talk about pornography for instance, right? So when um I mean for instance, right? So when um I mean for instance, right? So when um I mean there's a saying, right? A picture is there's a saying, right? A picture is there's a saying, right? A picture is worth a thousand words. Um and I would worth a thousand words. Um and I would worth a thousand words. Um and I would say as a vision scientist that a movie say as a vision scientist that a movie say as a vision scientist that a movie um or even a real or a clip on Tik Tok um or even a real or a clip on Tik Tok um or even a real or a clip on Tik Tok is worth a billion pictures. You know, is worth a billion pictures. You know, is worth a billion pictures. You know, never before have we been exposed to so never before have we been exposed to so never before have we been exposed to so many movies with so much richness in many movies with so much richness in many movies with so much richness in sound and um and eyes. you know, the sound and um and eyes. you know, the sound and um and eyes. you know, the more times we see eyes and you've more times we see eyes and you've more times we see eyes and you've got all this elaborate context. So got all this elaborate context. So got all this elaborate context. So whether or not you're talking about whether or not you're talking about whether or not you're talking about pornography, whether or not you're pornography, whether or not you're pornography, whether or not you're talking about video games, you know, the talking about video games, you know, the talking about video games, you know, the sort of sensory richness of it, richness sort of sensory richness of it, richness sort of sensory richness of it, richness feels like the wrong word, right? But feels like the wrong word, right? But feels like the wrong word, right? But the kind of like the amount the kind of like the amount the kind of like the amount of sensory information coming in through of sensory information coming in through of sensory information coming in through uh any one of those very brief uh any one of those very brief uh any one of those very brief experiences in a experiences in a experiences in a moment, it doesn't necessarily overwhelm moment, it doesn't necessarily overwhelm moment, it doesn't necessarily overwhelm the brain. Clearly, the brain can handle the brain. Clearly, the brain can handle the brain. Clearly, the brain can handle it. But then you walk out into a it. But then you walk out into a it. But then you walk out into a landscape like a park with a couple landscape like a park with a couple landscape like a park with a couple basketball hoops and a um and some paint basketball hoops and a um and some paint basketball hoops and a um and some paint drawn on the concrete and a ball and it drawn on the concrete and a ball and it drawn on the concrete and a ball and it looks boring. It's the difference looks boring. It's the difference looks boring. It's the difference between eating a, you know, as a kid, between eating a, you know, as a kid, between eating a, you know, as a kid, you know, a hot fudge Sunday banana you know, a hot fudge Sunday banana you know, a hot fudge Sunday banana split and then being offered a plate of split and then being offered a plate of split and then being offered a plate of broccoli. Like you have to know a lot broccoli. Like you have to know a lot broccoli. Like you have to know a lot about nutrition and care a lot about the about nutrition and care a lot about the about nutrition and care a lot about the long-term effects of nutrition on the long-term effects of nutrition on the long-term effects of nutrition on the body to um to not think that the hot body to um to not think that the hot body to um to not think that the hot fudge Sunday is the better option. I fudge Sunday is the better option. I fudge Sunday is the better option. I mean, it just makes sense from a like a mean, it just makes sense from a like a mean, it just makes sense from a like a neural perspective. So I wonder neural perspective. So I wonder neural perspective. So I wonder whether or not this definition of whether or not this definition of whether or not this definition of addiction or habit forming behaviors or addiction or habit forming behaviors or addiction or habit forming behaviors or dependence um could be expanded to dependence um could be expanded to dependence um could be expanded to include um you know the ratio of include um you know the ratio of include um you know the ratio of kind of gravitational kind of gravitational kind of gravitational pole versus you know how it makes other pole versus you know how it makes other pole versus you know how it makes other things seem. Yeah. Right. Um and things seem. Yeah. Right. Um and things seem. Yeah. Right. Um and obviously you know I don't believe that obviously you know I don't believe that obviously you know I don't believe that we should remove technology. I think we should remove technology. I think we should remove technology. I think technology is wonderful, but I could technology is wonderful, but I could technology is wonderful, but I could imagine that for a young brain and for imagine that for a young brain and for imagine that for a young brain and for an old older brain, right? I mean, can I an old older brain, right? I mean, can I an old older brain, right? I mean, can I just ask you, do you do you find any just ask you, do you do you find any just ask you, do you do you find any adults or do you encounter many adults or do you encounter many adults or do you encounter many adults who are addicted or have a have a habit who are addicted or have a have a habit who are addicted or have a have a habit of excessive online shopping? I mean, of excessive online shopping? I mean, of excessive online shopping? I mean, it's so easy to buy stuff online. I it's so easy to buy stuff online. I it's so easy to buy stuff online. I mean, just the barriers to entry are mean, just the barriers to entry are mean, just the barriers to entry are so low. Yeah, absolutely. So, does that so low. Yeah, absolutely. So, does that so low. Yeah, absolutely. So, does that make sense? like this contrast between make sense? like this contrast between make sense? like this contrast between richness and dullness that exacerbates richness and dullness that exacerbates richness and dullness that exacerbates the dullness the more that you engage in the dullness the more that you engage in the dullness the more that you engage in some behavior. Yeah. And and I want to some behavior. Yeah. And and I want to some behavior. Yeah. And and I want to be clear, you know, while I said it's be clear, you know, while I said it's be clear, you know, while I said it's not necessarily a problem for everyone, not necessarily a problem for everyone, not necessarily a problem for everyone, I believe it can absolutely the video I believe it can absolutely the video I believe it can absolutely the video games as an example can absolutely be games as an example can absolutely be games as an example can absolutely be addictive. I mean, there's been studies addictive. I mean, there's been studies addictive. I mean, there's been studies that have shown and I uh that, you that have shown and I uh that, you that have shown and I uh that, you know, it's impacting the brain in the know, it's impacting the brain in the know, it's impacting the brain in the same way as a lot of drugs are. You same way as a lot of drugs are. You same way as a lot of drugs are. You know, I've worked with kids who know, I've worked with kids who know, I've worked with kids who were video games were taken away and were video games were taken away and were video games were taken away and they were like and their Wi-Fi was shut they were like and their Wi-Fi was shut they were like and their Wi-Fi was shut down and they were somehow stealing some down and they were somehow stealing some down and they were somehow stealing some console and like in the bushes near console and like in the bushes near console and like in the bushes near another home somehow pirating their another home somehow pirating their another home somehow pirating their Wi-Fi to play the video games during the Wi-Fi to play the video games during the Wi-Fi to play the video games during the day. I mean, it sounds like an addict day. I mean, it sounds like an addict day. I mean, it sounds like an addict like a crack addict, you know, or you like a crack addict, you know, or you like a crack addict, you know, or you know, in the street a kid like this, you know, in the street a kid like this, you know, in the street a kid like this, you know, probably 15 or 16 year old kid. So know, probably 15 or 16 year old kid. So know, probably 15 or 16 year old kid. So they took away his Wi-Fi. Yeah. And they took away his Wi-Fi. Yeah. And they took away his Wi-Fi. Yeah. And video games and he's hiding. I'm video games and he's hiding. I'm video games and he's hiding. I'm chuckling, but it's terrible. I mean, chuckling, but it's terrible. I mean, chuckling, but it's terrible. I mean, you can only imagine what's going on you can only imagine what's going on you can only imagine what's going on inside that kid that they can't, as you inside that kid that they can't, as you inside that kid that they can't, as you mentioned be before, handle the mentioned be before, handle the mentioned be before, handle the discomfort of this thing that's like discomfort of this thing that's like discomfort of this thing that's like their medicine. It's the thing, it's the their medicine. It's the thing, it's the their medicine. It's the thing, it's the thing that makes them feel good. And and thing that makes them feel good. And and thing that makes them feel good. And and we have these adolescent treatment we have these adolescent treatment we have these adolescent treatment centers and these kids come in and centers and these kids come in and centers and these kids come in and they'll be very disregulated even if they'll be very disregulated even if they'll be very disregulated even if they're, you know, they've been off of they're, you know, they've been off of they're, you know, they've been off of drugs or usually it's a lot of drugs or usually it's a lot of drugs or usually it's a lot of marijuana these days. and you know they marijuana these days. and you know they marijuana these days. and you know they start to clear up from that but they start to clear up from that but they start to clear up from that but they're extremely disregulated agitated they're extremely disregulated agitated they're extremely disregulated agitated reactive and you know reactive and you know reactive and you know after sometimes 3 4 weeks we start to after sometimes 3 4 weeks we start to after sometimes 3 4 weeks we start to see a completely different person and see a completely different person and see a completely different person and one of the things I'm convinced is that one of the things I'm convinced is that one of the things I'm convinced is that they haven't been with their phones they haven't been with their phones they haven't been with their phones they haven't been on social media they haven't been on social media they haven't been on social media they haven't been playing video games and I'm haven't been playing video games and I'm haven't been playing video games and I'm not saying the answer is to take that not saying the answer is to take that not saying the answer is to take that away but you can start to see the impact away but you can start to see the impact away but you can start to see the impact that has on them you know they're that has on them you know they're that has on them you know they're so anxious about not being connected in so anxious about not being connected in so anxious about not being connected in that way or being I would imagine in that way or being I would imagine in that way or being I would imagine in that universe that you're talking about that universe that you're talking about that universe that you're talking about that's hot fudge Sunday all the time. that's hot fudge Sunday all the time. that's hot fudge Sunday all the time. Like who doesn't want to eat hot fudge Like who doesn't want to eat hot fudge Like who doesn't want to eat hot fudge Sunday all the time? Well, and then hot Sunday all the time? Well, and then hot Sunday all the time? Well, and then hot fudge Sunday doesn't seem to taste so fudge Sunday doesn't seem to taste so fudge Sunday doesn't seem to taste so good. Then you need more hot fudge good. Then you need more hot fudge good. Then you need more hot fudge Sunday. Yeah. I mean that's the dopamine Sunday. Yeah. I mean that's the dopamine Sunday. Yeah. I mean that's the dopamine dynamic stuff that um thank goodness uh dynamic stuff that um thank goodness uh dynamic stuff that um thank goodness uh Anna author of Dopamine Nation made so Anna author of Dopamine Nation made so Anna author of Dopamine Nation made so clear that those big fast inflections in clear that those big fast inflections in clear that those big fast inflections in dopamine very quickly lead to smaller dopamine very quickly lead to smaller dopamine very quickly lead to smaller and smaller peaks in dopamine from the and smaller peaks in dopamine from the and smaller peaks in dopamine from the same behavior or substance and then the same behavior or substance and then the same behavior or substance and then the trough of low that comes after is just trough of low that comes after is just trough of low that comes after is just immense. In fact, there's just what I immense. In fact, there's just what I immense. In fact, there's just what I the other day before I forget, there was the other day before I forget, there was the other day before I forget, there was a post on AXA of a guy. He sold his a post on AXA of a guy. He sold his a post on AXA of a guy. He sold his company for a billion plus dollars and company for a billion plus dollars and company for a billion plus dollars and he was expressing the extreme depression he was expressing the extreme depression he was expressing the extreme depression of not knowing what to do with himself of not knowing what to do with himself of not knowing what to do with himself now. And everyone will say, "Oh, poor now. And everyone will say, "Oh, poor now. And everyone will say, "Oh, poor guy, right? I don't illustrate that guy, right? I don't illustrate that guy, right? I don't illustrate that point to make it a point about point to make it a point about point to make it a point about billionaires or not, but it wasn't the billionaires or not, but it wasn't the billionaires or not, but it wasn't the pursuit of pleasure. It was the pleasure pursuit of pleasure. It was the pleasure pursuit of pleasure. It was the pleasure of pursuit that drives dopamine. He gets of pursuit that drives dopamine. He gets of pursuit that drives dopamine. He gets the goal. There's no more pleasure from the goal. There's no more pleasure from the goal. There's no more pleasure from pursuit because he's not pursuing pursuit because he's not pursuing pursuit because he's not pursuing anything anymore. And you think, how anything anymore. And you think, how anything anymore. And you think, how could that possibly be? He can buy could that possibly be? He can buy could that possibly be? He can buy anything he wants. But the whole point anything he wants. But the whole point anything he wants. But the whole point is that the dopamine isn't deployed for is that the dopamine isn't deployed for is that the dopamine isn't deployed for the reward. It's deployed for the reward. It's deployed for the reward. It's deployed for the pursuit of the reward. So that trough is pursuit of the reward. So that trough is pursuit of the reward. So that trough is a very real thing. Yeah. And in the a very real thing. Yeah. And in the a very real thing. Yeah. And in the trough, you're still not going to go trough, you're still not going to go trough, you're still not going to go back to a plate of broccoli. You're back to a plate of broccoli. You're back to a plate of broccoli. You're going to keep going after, you know, the going to keep going after, you know, the going to keep going after, you know, the hot fudge Sunday feeling even though the hot fudge Sunday feeling even though the hot fudge Sunday feeling even though the hot fudge Sunday isn't giving it to you hot fudge Sunday isn't giving it to you hot fudge Sunday isn't giving it to you anymore. Well, that's an extremely anymore. Well, that's an extremely anymore. Well, that's an extremely important point that people are chasing important point that people are chasing important point that people are chasing a feeling. I had a friend who um a feeling. I had a friend who um a feeling. I had a friend who um thankfully is a recovered addict. thankfully is a recovered addict. thankfully is a recovered addict. Obviously, won't disclose who this is. A Obviously, won't disclose who this is. A Obviously, won't disclose who this is. A former methamphetamine addict, very former methamphetamine addict, very former methamphetamine addict, very successful um in life, but had a serious successful um in life, but had a serious successful um in life, but had a serious meth issue. Um got sober and contacted meth issue. Um got sober and contacted meth issue. Um got sober and contacted me not long ago me not long ago me not long ago um requesting some support because they um requesting some support because they um requesting some support because they were thinking about abusing aderall. And were thinking about abusing aderall. And were thinking about abusing aderall. And we had a conversation. Fortunately, they we had a conversation. Fortunately, they we had a conversation. Fortunately, they didn't do this. um he's doing great, didn't do this. um he's doing great, didn't do this. um he's doing great, goes to meetings, has a sponsor, is goes to meetings, has a sponsor, is goes to meetings, has a sponsor, is taking care of that. But the description taking care of that. But the description taking care of that. But the description of why they were pursuing this uh idea of why they were pursuing this uh idea of why they were pursuing this uh idea of abusing aderall was this recollection of abusing aderall was this recollection of abusing aderall was this recollection of a feeling, you know, he kept talking of a feeling, you know, he kept talking of a feeling, you know, he kept talking about like there's I just remember that about like there's I just remember that about like there's I just remember that feeling. It was, you know, and feeling. It was, you know, and feeling. It was, you know, and everything felt and he was talking about everything felt and he was talking about everything felt and he was talking about something that I can't relate to because something that I can't relate to because something that I can't relate to because I've never done meth. have no intention I've never done meth. have no intention I've never done meth. have no intention of doing math, but his it's almost like of doing math, but his it's almost like of doing math, but his it's almost like it was a like a like a love affair that it was a like a like a love affair that it was a like a like a love affair that had been spectacular that he was missing had been spectacular that he was missing had been spectacular that he was missing this person, but it was a thing. Yeah. this person, but it was a thing. Yeah. this person, but it was a thing. Yeah. If it sounded like love, like I missed If it sounded like love, like I missed If it sounded like love, like I missed that feeling. I think that's a very that feeling. I think that's a very that feeling. I think that's a very important point important point important point because I see people as having spiritual because I see people as having spiritual because I see people as having spiritual relationships with alcohol and drugs. relationships with alcohol and drugs. relationships with alcohol and drugs. You know, I mean, they use them as You know, I mean, they use them as You know, I mean, they use them as something that makes them feel something that makes them feel something that makes them feel connected. They feel whole. I mean, what connected. They feel whole. I mean, what connected. They feel whole. I mean, what do we what is alcohol called? Spirits. do we what is alcohol called? Spirits. do we what is alcohol called? Spirits. You know that it it's something that You know that it it's something that You know that it it's something that can uh allow them even if for a period of uh allow them even if for a period of uh allow them even if for a period of time to feel the way that maybe they time to feel the way that maybe they time to feel the way that maybe they want to feel or not feel the way that want to feel or not feel the way that want to feel or not feel the way that they don't want to feel, you know. Can they don't want to feel, you know. Can they don't want to feel, you know. Can we dissect that a little bit? um to feel we dissect that a little bit? um to feel we dissect that a little bit? um to feel the way they want to feel versus not the way they want to feel versus not the way they want to feel versus not feel the way they don't want to feel. I feel the way they don't want to feel. I feel the way they don't want to feel. I remember reading Augustine Burough's remember reading Augustine Burough's remember reading Augustine Burough's book dry. He's a recovered alcoholic and book dry. He's a recovered alcoholic and book dry. He's a recovered alcoholic and there's this paragraph in there where he there's this paragraph in there where he there's this paragraph in there where he talks about his first drink of alcohol talks about his first drink of alcohol talks about his first drink of alcohol and I'm going to get the exact wording and I'm going to get the exact wording and I'm going to get the exact wording wrong but it went something like you wrong but it went something like you wrong but it went something like you know on that first drink he felt he's in know on that first drink he felt he's in know on that first drink he felt he's in the first person he's saying I felt it the first person he's saying I felt it the first person he's saying I felt it mesh with my blood and my physiology and mesh with my blood and my physiology and mesh with my blood and my physiology and my physiology felt correct for the first my physiology felt correct for the first my physiology felt correct for the first time and I thought oh my goodness like I time and I thought oh my goodness like I time and I thought oh my goodness like I certainly don't have that relationship I certainly don't have that relationship I certainly don't have that relationship to alcohol but I have friends who are to alcohol but I have friends who are to alcohol but I have friends who are serious alcoholics fortunately now sober serious alcoholics fortunately now sober serious alcoholics fortunately now sober who describe alcohol that way from the who describe alcohol that way from the who describe alcohol that way from the first drink. It was like this is they first drink. It was like this is they first drink. It was like this is they say this is me. It's like they're they say this is me. It's like they're they say this is me. It's like they're finding themselves. Yeah. And that's finding themselves. Yeah. And that's finding themselves. Yeah. And that's very different than avoiding the way very different than avoiding the way very different than avoiding the way they felt previously. Yeah. Most of them they felt previously. Yeah. Most of them they felt previously. Yeah. Most of them didn't pick up a drink the first time didn't pick up a drink the first time didn't pick up a drink the first time because they were trying to find that because they were trying to find that because they were trying to find that person or because they were trying to person or because they were trying to person or because they were trying to avoid something else. It was because avoid something else. It was because avoid something else. It was because there was booze at a party or booze at there was booze at a party or booze at there was booze at a party or booze at home. Even the people that like him home. Even the people that like him home. Even the people that like him that are talking about alcohol like that are talking about alcohol like that are talking about alcohol like that. And I've heard this that. And I've heard this that. And I've heard this story thousands of times, you know, from story thousands of times, you know, from story thousands of times, you know, from people that never read that book, you people that never read that book, you people that never read that book, you know, that that's how they felt. They know, that that's how they felt. They know, that that's how they felt. They they couldn't have been using it most of they couldn't have been using it most of they couldn't have been using it most of the time to get away or to move away the time to get away or to move away the time to get away or to move away from how they're feeling because they from how they're feeling because they from how they're feeling because they didn't even recognize that's how they're didn't even recognize that's how they're didn't even recognize that's how they're feeling. That was just the world they feeling. That was just the world they feeling. That was just the world they were in. You know, we're especially a were in. You know, we're especially a were in. You know, we're especially a lot of times this is kids and lot of times this is kids and lot of times this is kids and adolescence who that's the first time adolescence who that's the first time adolescence who that's the first time they're drinking and they don't they're drinking and they don't they're drinking and they don't realize that they could feel the way realize that they could feel the way realize that they could feel the way that they're feeling. that they're feeling. that they're feeling. You know, these are the way that we You know, these are the way that we You know, these are the way that we grow up are just the waters we swim in. grow up are just the waters we swim in. grow up are just the waters we swim in. We don't often know that there's a We don't often know that there's a We don't often know that there's a difference between who we are and how we difference between who we are and how we difference between who we are and how we can be. And to be able to a lot of can be. And to be able to a lot of can be. And to be able to a lot of people the first time even the first people the first time even the first people the first time even the first time they'll do it and it's not always time they'll do it and it's not always time they'll do it and it's not always like that for everybody, right? Some like that for everybody, right? Some like that for everybody, right? Some people just are using it socially and people just are using it socially and people just are using it socially and then later on when there are stressors then later on when there are stressors then later on when there are stressors realize that you know I can use this to realize that you know I can use this to realize that you know I can use this to medicate as well. But the ones that are medicate as well. But the ones that are medicate as well. But the ones that are having the relationship that you just having the relationship that you just having the relationship that you just described is you know they didn't even described is you know they didn't even described is you know they didn't even know they had no idea that life or their know they had no idea that life or their know they had no idea that life or their emotional state or their physiological emotional state or their physiological emotional state or their physiological state could be different than it was. state could be different than it was. state could be different than it was. So, how do you persuade somebody that So, how do you persuade somebody that So, how do you persuade somebody that it's a good idea to take that away from it's a good idea to take that away from it's a good idea to take that away from themselves? Because I imagine some of themselves? Because I imagine some of themselves? Because I imagine some of the first thoughts that go through their the first thoughts that go through their the first thoughts that go through their mind um mind um mind um include I can't imagine life without include I can't imagine life without include I can't imagine life without that feeling. You know, St. Augustine that feeling. You know, St. Augustine that feeling. You know, St. Augustine said, and I'm not going to get it said, and I'm not going to get it said, and I'm not going to get it exactly right, but he said something exactly right, but he said something exactly right, but he said something like, you know, like, you know, like, you know, a well-living depends on reordering your a well-living depends on reordering your a well-living depends on reordering your loves. And he was talking about people loves. And he was talking about people loves. And he was talking about people living with a disordered a living with a disordered a living with a disordered a disordered life. And and the question it disordered life. And and the question it disordered life. And and the question it begged is what are you loving the most? begged is what are you loving the most? begged is what are you loving the most? And his argument I think was whatever And his argument I think was whatever And his argument I think was whatever you're loving the most becomes your god, you're loving the most becomes your god, you're loving the most becomes your god, your higher your higher your higher power. You know, if I'm loving money power. You know, if I'm loving money power. You know, if I'm loving money the most, if that's the most important the most, if that's the most important the most, if that's the most important thing to me, then money is my higher thing to me, then money is my higher thing to me, then money is my higher power. The thing is money will fail me, power. The thing is money will fail me, power. The thing is money will fail me, right? like you just talked about like I right? like you just talked about like I right? like you just talked about like I could the guy could get a billion could the guy could get a billion could the guy could get a billion dollars and want to kill himself, right? dollars and want to kill himself, right? dollars and want to kill himself, right? Or if I put my relationship at the, you Or if I put my relationship at the, you Or if I put my relationship at the, you know, the if I if I said, you know, the know, the if I if I said, you know, the know, the if I if I said, you know, the most important thing to me is that my most important thing to me is that my most important thing to me is that my wife is happy, you know, and that's my wife is happy, you know, and that's my wife is happy, you know, and that's my most important thing. That sounds great, most important thing. That sounds great, most important thing. That sounds great, but she's not going to be happy all the but she's not going to be happy all the but she's not going to be happy all the time. And when she is, I'm going to feel time. And when she is, I'm going to feel time. And when she is, I'm going to feel great. When she's not, I'm going to feel great. When she's not, I'm going to feel great. When she's not, I'm going to feel like I'm doing something wrong. you like I'm doing something wrong. you like I'm doing something wrong. you know, are we making sex the most know, are we making sex the most know, are we making sex the most important thing? Are we making, you important thing? Are we making, you important thing? Are we making, you know, and his argument was love God know, and his argument was love God know, and his argument was love God first and then do as you do as you will? first and then do as you do as you will? first and then do as you do as you will? Like find the highest power because Like find the highest power because Like find the highest power because these powers don't that we're putting up these powers don't that we're putting up these powers don't that we're putting up there like money, sex, food, all things there like money, sex, food, all things there like money, sex, food, all things that aren't problematic. We need them. that aren't problematic. We need them. that aren't problematic. We need them. They only become problematic when They only become problematic when They only become problematic when they're problematic, right? When they're problematic, right? When they're problematic, right? When they're when we're making them that thing that's when we're making them that thing that's when we're making them that thing that's going to solve our problems. What about going to solve our problems. What about going to solve our problems. What about kids? Um, I know a number of people who kids? Um, I know a number of people who kids? Um, I know a number of people who are excellent parents who are super are excellent parents who are super are excellent parents who are super devoted to their kids and they say like, devoted to their kids and they say like, devoted to their kids and they say like, "My kids are my life. My kids are my "My kids are my life. My kids are my "My kids are my life. My kids are my kids are everything." Um, that might kids are everything." Um, that might kids are everything." Um, that might just be language, right? They could also just be language, right? They could also just be language, right? They could also have a relationship to a higher power, have a relationship to a higher power, have a relationship to a higher power, but um do you see people um suffering by but um do you see people um suffering by but um do you see people um suffering by virtue of virtue of virtue of overemphasizing their kids or their you overemphasizing their kids or their you overemphasizing their kids or their you mentioned spouse, but as a priority in mentioned spouse, but as a priority in mentioned spouse, but as a priority in their life? Yeah. And and it's great their life? Yeah. And and it's great their life? Yeah. And and it's great that you made a distinction about just that you made a distinction about just that you made a distinction about just being language because you know people being language because you know people being language because you know people can say those things like I my kids are can say those things like I my kids are can say those things like I my kids are very important to me probably I would very important to me probably I would very important to me probably I would say you know one of the most important say you know one of the most important say you know one of the most important things in my life is to be a father things in my life is to be a father things in my life is to be a father right but if the energy in the house right but if the energy in the house right but if the energy in the house again and again is that my kids are my again and again is that my kids are my again and again is that my kids are my life what are like what a burden life what are like what a burden life what are like what a burden that is for that child. That means that is for that child. That means that is for that child. That means that in know like that child might in those in know like that child might in those in know like that child might in those instances show up in a way that instances show up in a way that instances show up in a way that uh they need to be happy. They need to uh they need to be happy. They need to uh they need to be happy. They need to perform. They need to they can't show perform. They need to they can't show perform. They need to they can't show sadness. They in order for their becomes sadness. They in order for their becomes sadness. They in order for their becomes their job to make their parents okay. their job to make their parents okay. their job to make their parents okay. And can you imagine that And can you imagine that And can you imagine that kid later grown kid later grown kid later grown up looking for a partner and the up looking for a partner and the up looking for a partner and the expectation on that partner or the expectation on that partner or the expectation on that partner or the expectation on themselves just based on expectation on themselves just based on expectation on themselves just based on that role that role that role internalization of you know like that internalization of you know like that internalization of you know like that they're the center of the universe or they're the center of the universe or they're the center of the universe or that maintaining this beam of love from that maintaining this beam of love from that maintaining this beam of love from the other person is essential or else it the other person is essential or else it the other person is essential or else it feels life-threatening. Yeah. I mean, feels life-threatening. Yeah. I mean, feels life-threatening. Yeah. I mean, it's a it's a covert form of abuse to it's a it's a covert form of abuse to it's a it's a covert form of abuse to use our children to meet our needs. You use our children to meet our needs. You use our children to meet our needs. You know, we're there to meet their needs know, we're there to meet their needs know, we're there to meet their needs depending on their age, right? I mean, depending on their age, right? I mean, depending on their age, right? I mean, we're going to you have an infant, we're going to you have an infant, we're going to you have an infant, you're their highest power. You have to you're their highest power. You have to you're their highest power. You have to do it. They they uh they can't do it. They they uh they can't do it. They they uh they can't survive without you. You know, they survive without you. You know, they survive without you. You know, they can't feed themselves. And you carry can't feed themselves. And you carry can't feed themselves. And you carry them all the time, right? And then, you them all the time, right? And then, you them all the time, right? And then, you know, eventually they start crawling and know, eventually they start crawling and know, eventually they start crawling and walking and you carry them more than walking and you carry them more than walking and you carry them more than you don't. And then eventually than you don't. And then eventually than you don't. And then eventually they're walking all the time and you're they're walking all the time and you're they're walking all the time and you're carrying them just a little bit and you carrying them just a little bit and you carrying them just a little bit and you know, then you're not carrying them know, then you're not carrying them know, then you're not carrying them anymore. If you're still carrying them anymore. If you're still carrying them anymore. If you're still carrying them all the time when they're 16 or 17, all the time when they're 16 or 17, all the time when they're 16 or 17, that's a that that's a that's a problem. that's a that that's a that's a problem. that's a that that's a that's a problem. But when we're using them to meet our But when we're using them to meet our But when we're using them to meet our needs again and again, now it becomes needs again and again, now it becomes needs again and again, now it becomes their job to care for us. And most their job to care for us. And most their job to care for us. And most parents that do this, and I see this all parents that do this, and I see this all parents that do this, and I see this all the time, are not setting out and the time, are not setting out and the time, are not setting out and saying, "I'm going to uh use my child to saying, "I'm going to uh use my child to saying, "I'm going to uh use my child to make me happy." They really have the make me happy." They really have the make me happy." They really have the best intentions. And it probably best intentions. And it probably best intentions. And it probably comes out of however they were shaped comes out of however they were shaped comes out of however they were shaped growing up and how their family was growing up and how their family was growing up and how their family was shaped growing up. But, you know, I shaped growing up. But, you know, I shaped growing up. But, you know, I see this, you know, with my kids. You see this, you know, with my kids. You see this, you know, with my kids. You know, sometimes I come home, I two that know, sometimes I come home, I two that know, sometimes I come home, I two that are six and three, and I come home from are six and three, and I come home from are six and three, and I come home from work and they're like, "Daddy, daddy, work and they're like, "Daddy, daddy, work and they're like, "Daddy, daddy, daddy," and they're running to me and daddy," and they're running to me and daddy," and they're running to me and they jump on me and it feels they jump on me and it feels they jump on me and it feels amazing. And other times I walk in and amazing. And other times I walk in and amazing. And other times I walk in and like they've got a show on or something like they've got a show on or something like they've got a show on or something and I'm like, "Hey, kids." And they're and I'm like, "Hey, kids." And they're and I'm like, "Hey, kids." And they're like, they don't even say anything. like, they don't even say anything. like, they don't even say anything. Now, that doesn't feel great. But what I Now, that doesn't feel great. But what I Now, that doesn't feel great. But what I know is that doesn't mean they don't know is that doesn't mean they don't know is that doesn't mean they don't love me, right? If every day I came home love me, right? If every day I came home love me, right? If every day I came home and they were like in the middle of this and they were like in the middle of this and they were like in the middle of this and I forced them to get up and give and I forced them to get up and give and I forced them to get up and give me a hug, you do this once, it's not me a hug, you do this once, it's not me a hug, you do this once, it's not going to be, you know, a problem going to be, you know, a problem going to be, you know, a problem necessarily, but if I did that every day necessarily, but if I did that every day necessarily, but if I did that every day and now I need them to give me a hug in and now I need them to give me a hug in and now I need them to give me a hug in order for me to feel safe and order for me to feel safe and order for me to feel safe and comfortable coming in the home or just comfortable coming in the home or just comfortable coming in the home or just feel happy, they're going to start feel happy, they're going to start feel happy, they're going to start having the job of we got to hug daddy in having the job of we got to hug daddy in having the job of we got to hug daddy in order for him to have a nice evening. order for him to have a nice evening. order for him to have a nice evening. That's a big job for a little kid to That's a big job for a little kid to That's a big job for a little kid to have. And I see that play out a lot in have. And I see that play out a lot in have. And I see that play out a lot in the people that come to us in that the people that come to us in that the people that come to us in that they've unconsciously been assigned they've unconsciously been assigned they've unconsciously been assigned these roles in childhood like, you know, these roles in childhood like, you know, these roles in childhood like, you know, they're the hero of the family, you they're the hero of the family, you they're the hero of the family, you know, we can use those the terms or know, we can use those the terms or know, we can use those the terms or the scapegoat or they're the, you or the scapegoat or they're the, you or the scapegoat or they're the, you know, but really what was the job that know, but really what was the job that know, but really what was the job that they were given? You know, it's my job they were given? You know, it's my job they were given? You know, it's my job to take care of mom and dad. you know, to take care of mom and dad. you know, to take care of mom and dad. you know, maybe they were in the middle of the maybe they were in the middle of the maybe they were in the middle of the relationship or you know, if mom relationship or you know, if mom relationship or you know, if mom and dad are fighting all the time, but and dad are fighting all the time, but and dad are fighting all the time, but kids are often assigned these roles kids are often assigned these roles kids are often assigned these roles early on and then they don't know how to early on and then they don't know how to early on and then they don't know how to shed them later on and so then they just shed them later on and so then they just shed them later on and so then they just use that role later in life. I mean, my use that role later in life. I mean, my use that role later in life. I mean, my field is full of people who are assigned field is full of people who are assigned field is full of people who are assigned roles, you know, the therapists and roles, you know, the therapists and roles, you know, the therapists and nurses and things like that. You know, nurses and things like that. You know, nurses and things like that. You know, we want to care for people, but it's we want to care for people, but it's we want to care for people, but it's hard to parse some of that stuff apart, hard to parse some of that stuff apart, hard to parse some of that stuff apart, you know, because we don't want to blame you know, because we don't want to blame you know, because we don't want to blame parents for how their kids end up, but parents for how their kids end up, but parents for how their kids end up, but when we're doing work with our clients, when we're doing work with our clients, when we're doing work with our clients, we want to understand the patterns that we want to understand the patterns that we want to understand the patterns that were developed. not to blame them but to were developed. not to blame them but to were developed. not to blame them but to start understanding what were the to start understanding what were the to start understanding what were the systemic challenges in the family system systemic challenges in the family system systemic challenges in the family system so that we can you know develop and so that we can you know develop and so that we can you know develop and deploy systemic solutions for them. I'd deploy systemic solutions for them. I'd deploy systemic solutions for them. I'd like to take a quick break and like to take a quick break and like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also contains adaptogens. I started also contains adaptogens. I started also contains adaptogens. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I even knew what a podcast was. I even knew what a podcast was. I even knew what a podcast was. I started taking it and I still take it started taking it and I still take it started taking it and I still take it every single day because it ensures that every single day because it ensures that every single day because it ensures that I meet my quota for daily vitamins and I meet my quota for daily vitamins and I meet my quota for daily vitamins and minerals and it helps make sure that I minerals and it helps make sure that I minerals and it helps make sure that I get enough prebiotics and probiotics to get enough prebiotics and probiotics to get enough prebiotics and probiotics to support my gut health. Over the past 10 support my gut health. Over the past 10 support my gut health. Over the past 10 years, gut health has emerged as years, gut health has emerged as years, gut health has emerged as something that we realize is important something that we realize is important something that we realize is important not only for the health of our digestion not only for the health of our digestion not only for the health of our digestion but also for our immune system and for but also for our immune system and for but also for our immune system and for the production of neurotransmitters and the production of neurotransmitters and the production of neurotransmitters and neurom modulators, things like dopamine neurom modulators, things like dopamine neurom modulators, things like dopamine and serotonin. In other words, gut and serotonin. In other words, gut and serotonin. In other words, gut health is critical for proper brain health is critical for proper brain health is critical for proper brain function. Now, of course, I strive to function. Now, of course, I strive to function. Now, of course, I strive to eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed sources for the majority of my sources for the majority of my sources for the majority of my nutritional intake. But there are a nutritional intake. But there are a nutritional intake. But there are a number of things in AG1, including number of things in AG1, including number of things in AG1, including specific micronutrients, that are hard specific micronutrients, that are hard specific micronutrients, that are hard or impossible to get from whole foods. or impossible to get from whole foods. or impossible to get from whole foods. So, by taking AG1 daily, I get the So, by taking AG1 daily, I get the So, by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins and minerals that I need, along vitamins and minerals that I need, along vitamins and minerals that I need, along with the probiotics and prebiotics for with the probiotics and prebiotics for with the probiotics and prebiotics for gut health, and in turn brain and immune gut health, and in turn brain and immune gut health, and in turn brain and immune system health, and the adaptogens and system health, and the adaptogens and system health, and the adaptogens and critical micronutrients that are critical micronutrients that are critical micronutrients that are essential for all organs and tissues of essential for all organs and tissues of essential for all organs and tissues of the body. So, anytime somebody asks me the body. So, anytime somebody asks me the body. So, anytime somebody asks me if they were to only take one if they were to only take one if they were to only take one supplement, what that supplement should supplement, what that supplement should supplement, what that supplement should be, I always say AG1 because AG1 be, I always say AG1 because AG1 be, I always say AG1 because AG1 supports so many different systems in supports so many different systems in supports so many different systems in the brain and body that relate to our the brain and body that relate to our the brain and body that relate to our mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, performance. If you'd like to try AG1, performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drink you can go to drink you can go to drink AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before in this podcast, I've highlighted before in this podcast, I've highlighted before in this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 have been shown to help with everything have been shown to help with everything have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to heart from mood and brain health to heart from mood and brain health to heart health and healthy hormone production health and healthy hormone production health and healthy hormone production and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink and much more. Again, that's drink ag.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon ag.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon ag.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also subscription. Today's episode is also subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by Element. Element is an brought to us by Element. Element is an brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need but nothing you don't. That you need but nothing you don't. That you need but nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your the functioning of all the cells in your the functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to in water makes it extremely easy to in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate ensure that you're getting adequate ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. to hydration and adequate electrolytes. to hydration and adequate electrolytes. to make sure that I'm getting proper make sure that I'm getting proper make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes. I amounts of hydration and electrolytes. I amounts of hydration and electrolytes. I dissolve one packet of element in about dissolve one packet of element in about dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning. And I drink that in the morning. And I drink that in the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I basically first thing in the morning. I basically first thing in the morning. I also drink element dissolved in water also drink element dissolved in water also drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise during any kind of physical exercise during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days that I'm doing, especially on hot days that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore when I'm sweating a lot and therefore when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes. losing a lot of water and electrolytes. losing a lot of water and electrolytes. They have a bunch of different great They have a bunch of different great They have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of element. They have tasting flavors of element. They have tasting flavors of element. They have watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, them all. If you'd like to try Element, them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to you can go to you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the free element sample pack with the free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix. purchase of any element drink mix. purchase of any element drink mix. Again, that's Again, that's Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. There's this thing free sample pack. There's this thing free sample pack. There's this thing that happens around any conversation that happens around any conversation that happens around any conversation about addiction where at some point any about addiction where at some point any about addiction where at some point any logical listener starts to say, "Okay, logical listener starts to say, "Okay, logical listener starts to say, "Okay, well," and it sounds like everyone's well," and it sounds like everyone's well," and it sounds like everyone's addicted to something and it's so hard addicted to something and it's so hard addicted to something and it's so hard to stay right in the, you know, between to stay right in the, you know, between to stay right in the, you know, between the lane lines of healthy and healthy the lane lines of healthy and healthy the lane lines of healthy and healthy because yeah, I like I'm not speaking because yeah, I like I'm not speaking because yeah, I like I'm not speaking for myself because I'm not a drinker, for myself because I'm not a drinker, for myself because I'm not a drinker, but like I like a drink at the end of but like I like a drink at the end of but like I like a drink at the end of the day. It helps me relax, makes me a the day. It helps me relax, makes me a the day. It helps me relax, makes me a better parent, makes me a better spouse, better parent, makes me a better spouse, better parent, makes me a better spouse, and I like it. Is it my spiritual higher and I like it. Is it my spiritual higher and I like it. Is it my spiritual higher power? No, but I like it. Would I take power? No, but I like it. Would I take power? No, but I like it. Would I take 30 days off? Prefer not to, but I'm not 30 days off? Prefer not to, but I'm not 30 days off? Prefer not to, but I'm not addicted, you know. But then you think, addicted, you know. But then you think, addicted, you know. But then you think, okay, well, a kid that likes playing okay, well, a kid that likes playing okay, well, a kid that likes playing video games that lets him connect with video games that lets him connect with video games that lets him connect with his friends. Um, he's doing it a bit his friends. Um, he's doing it a bit his friends. Um, he's doing it a bit excessively, but is he addicted? You excessively, but is he addicted? You excessively, but is he addicted? You know, okay. know, okay. know, okay. Um, obviously if somebody if it's Um, obviously if somebody if it's Um, obviously if somebody if it's harming people's profession, it's harming people's profession, it's harming people's profession, it's harming their relationships in very harming their relationships in very harming their relationships in very overt ways, then we place into the overt ways, then we place into the overt ways, then we place into the category of addiction. There's this category of addiction. There's this category of addiction. There's this thing that happens in these thing that happens in these thing that happens in these conversations around addiction where conversations around addiction where conversations around addiction where people start to go, "Okay, it sounds people start to go, "Okay, it sounds people start to go, "Okay, it sounds like I can't really enjoy anything that like I can't really enjoy anything that like I can't really enjoy anything that much because then it takes over much because then it takes over much because then it takes over everything." Like, I'll come clean. everything." Like, I'll come clean. everything." Like, I'll come clean. I've worked anywhere from 10 to 16 hours I've worked anywhere from 10 to 16 hours I've worked anywhere from 10 to 16 hours a day, 5 to six days a week on average, a day, 5 to six days a week on average, a day, 5 to six days a week on average, right? Um, since I was 19. Am I a work right? Um, since I was 19. Am I a work right? Um, since I was 19. Am I a work addict, workaholic? Maybe. But I love my addict, workaholic? Maybe. But I love my addict, workaholic? Maybe. But I love my work and it's done wonderful things for work and it's done wonderful things for work and it's done wonderful things for my life and I have a life that I my life and I have a life that I my life and I have a life that I wouldn't trade for anything. wouldn't trade for anything. wouldn't trade for anything. Did I miss out on a lot of things? Did I miss out on a lot of things? Did I miss out on a lot of things? Probably. Um, but I also love the life Probably. Um, but I also love the life Probably. Um, but I also love the life I've lived and that I continue to live. I've lived and that I continue to live. I've lived and that I continue to live. And a lot of that comes from the And a lot of that comes from the And a lot of that comes from the relationships and experiences I've had relationships and experiences I've had relationships and experiences I've had through work. Right. So, you know, at through work. Right. So, you know, at through work. Right. So, you know, at some point, this is where diagnostic some point, this is where diagnostic some point, this is where diagnostic criteria come become handy. But I do criteria come become handy. But I do criteria come become handy. But I do like the fact that um we have a lipmus like the fact that um we have a lipmus like the fact that um we have a lipmus test now. Could you take 30 days away test now. Could you take 30 days away test now. Could you take 30 days away from it and not um completely lose your from it and not um completely lose your from it and not um completely lose your mind? Or could you just take 30 days mind? Or could you just take 30 days mind? Or could you just take 30 days away from it? if I didn't work for 30 away from it? if I didn't work for 30 away from it? if I didn't work for 30 days that would be very difficult for me days that would be very difficult for me days that would be very difficult for me but I could do it. Um so how should we but I could do it. Um so how should we but I could do it. Um so how should we frame this thing of addiction and frame this thing of addiction and frame this thing of addiction and so that people can ask themselves like so that people can ask themselves like so that people can ask themselves like do I have it or does it have me? Yeah. I do I have it or does it have me? Yeah. I do I have it or does it have me? Yeah. I mean I think how are you using it and mean I think how are you using it and mean I think how are you using it and what is it impacting if anything but what is it impacting if anything but what is it impacting if anything but to be able to be honest with yourself to be able to be honest with yourself to be able to be honest with yourself about it. I you know it's very hard to about it. I you know it's very hard to about it. I you know it's very hard to be it's easy to say be honest with be it's easy to say be honest with be it's easy to say be honest with yourself about it but it's very hard to yourself about it but it's very hard to yourself about it but it's very hard to be honest with ourselves. You know, be honest with ourselves. You know, be honest with ourselves. You know, that's where being in relationship with that's where being in relationship with that's where being in relationship with others, sharing what you're others, sharing what you're others, sharing what you're experiencing. If you're taking 30 days experiencing. If you're taking 30 days experiencing. If you're taking 30 days off, really communicating to somebody off, really communicating to somebody off, really communicating to somebody else, whether it's a therapist or a else, whether it's a therapist or a else, whether it's a therapist or a trusted friend, you know, how am I trusted friend, you know, how am I trusted friend, you know, how am I thinking about this? You know, am I thinking about this? You know, am I thinking about this? You know, am I waking up every day wishing I could be waking up every day wishing I could be waking up every day wishing I could be doing this other than some am I sitting doing this other than some am I sitting doing this other than some am I sitting in a business meeting completely in a business meeting completely in a business meeting completely dissociated from what's going on because dissociated from what's going on because dissociated from what's going on because I'm really focused on that I'm not I'm really focused on that I'm not I'm really focused on that I'm not gambling or that I'm not drinking? you gambling or that I'm not drinking? you gambling or that I'm not drinking? you know, you've got to be able to look at know, you've got to be able to look at know, you've got to be able to look at what it's impacting in the way that what it's impacting in the way that what it's impacting in the way that we're thinking and the way that we're thinking and the way that we're thinking and the way that we're feeling. Can I ask you a question about feeling. Can I ask you a question about feeling. Can I ask you a question about the what how it's impacting things? the what how it's impacting things? the what how it's impacting things? Because one thing I've observed um in Because one thing I've observed um in Because one thing I've observed um in myself and in others is that sometimes myself and in others is that sometimes myself and in others is that sometimes behaviors that if you if we were to just behaviors that if you if we were to just behaviors that if you if we were to just look at through a kind of tunnel vision, look at through a kind of tunnel vision, look at through a kind of tunnel vision, you'd say, "Wow, like this person just you'd say, "Wow, like this person just you'd say, "Wow, like this person just like works a lot or this person like works a lot or this person like works a lot or this person exercises a lot." Um but it provides exercises a lot." Um but it provides exercises a lot." Um but it provides energy that feeds a bigger ecosystem. energy that feeds a bigger ecosystem. energy that feeds a bigger ecosystem. You know, gives me a sense of purpose You know, gives me a sense of purpose You know, gives me a sense of purpose where I have great relationships through where I have great relationships through where I have great relationships through my work and relationships that are not my work and relationships that are not my work and relationships that are not through my work but you know it sits through my work but you know it sits through my work but you know it sits uh not as my higher power but kind of at uh not as my higher power but kind of at uh not as my higher power but kind of at the center of my life and a bunch of the center of my life and a bunch of the center of my life and a bunch of other things wick out from it. And to other things wick out from it. And to other things wick out from it. And to remove that thing would be to disrupt remove that thing would be to disrupt remove that thing would be to disrupt the whole web. I think that's sometimes the whole web. I think that's sometimes the whole web. I think that's sometimes what scares people. Um, especially what scares people. Um, especially what scares people. Um, especially again, I don't I can't relate to alcohol again, I don't I can't relate to alcohol again, I don't I can't relate to alcohol specifically, but what my friends who specifically, but what my friends who specifically, but what my friends who have made the decision to try and quit have made the decision to try and quit have made the decision to try and quit or quit drinking alcohol, for them it's or quit drinking alcohol, for them it's or quit drinking alcohol, for them it's like the their ability to socialize, the like the their ability to socialize, the like the their ability to socialize, the lack of anxiety while they're lack of anxiety while they're lack of anxiety while they're intoxicated, the um knowing there's intoxicated, the um knowing there's intoxicated, the um knowing there's something to do um for them as you know, something to do um for them as you know, something to do um for them as you know, as opposed to like what they would fill as opposed to like what they would fill as opposed to like what they would fill that space with. So sometimes it I feel that space with. So sometimes it I feel that space with. So sometimes it I feel like these addictive behaviors fit into like these addictive behaviors fit into like these addictive behaviors fit into a larger ecosystem so that it masks the a larger ecosystem so that it masks the a larger ecosystem so that it masks the dis that any dysfunction but it's but it dis that any dysfunction but it's but it dis that any dysfunction but it's but it has this again gravitational pull so has this again gravitational pull so has this again gravitational pull so that you know it gets to bigger that you know it gets to bigger that you know it gets to bigger questions of like how are we questions of like how are we questions of like how are we supposed to live our life and I like supposed to live our life and I like supposed to live our life and I like this quote from St. Augustine you know this quote from St. Augustine you know this quote from St. Augustine you know that a life well-lived is a constant that a life well-lived is a constant that a life well-lived is a constant reordering of our loves. reordering of our loves. reordering of our loves. Yeah. Something like that. So it Yeah. Something like that. So it Yeah. Something like that. So it gets to these questions of like what gets to these questions of like what gets to these questions of like what is a good life? This is a great what is a good life? This is a great what is a good life? This is a great uh discussion point you know that you uh discussion point you know that you uh discussion point you know that you know people will come in and say I just know people will come in and say I just know people will come in and say I just want to be happy I just want to be at want to be happy I just want to be at want to be happy I just want to be at peace. First thing we have to ask them peace. First thing we have to ask them peace. First thing we have to ask them is what does that mean? We have to is what does that mean? We have to is what does that mean? We have to define it. A lot of times maybe they're define it. A lot of times maybe they're define it. A lot of times maybe they're saying that happiness is kind of the saying that happiness is kind of the saying that happiness is kind of the absence of all this bad stuff you know absence of all this bad stuff you know absence of all this bad stuff you know or that peace is you know everything or that peace is you know everything or that peace is you know everything outside of me is going okay everything outside of me is going okay everything outside of me is going okay everything is fine. you know, we've got to really is fine. you know, we've got to really is fine. you know, we've got to really explore with them what how would they explore with them what how would they explore with them what how would they know when they got there. You know, what know when they got there. You know, what know when they got there. You know, what a balanced life is going to be different a balanced life is going to be different a balanced life is going to be different for everybody. And especially like with for everybody. And especially like with for everybody. And especially like with behavioral addictions, you know, it's behavioral addictions, you know, it's behavioral addictions, you know, it's not about necessarily removing those not about necessarily removing those not about necessarily removing those forever. In fact, a lot of those we forever. In fact, a lot of those we forever. In fact, a lot of those we can't remove. Food addiction, you can't remove. Food addiction, you can't remove. Food addiction, you can't remove food. I mean, the things around remove food. I mean, the things around remove food. I mean, the things around sex addiction, you know, you're not sex addiction, you know, you're not sex addiction, you know, you're not going to I suppose someone could not going to I suppose someone could not going to I suppose someone could not have sex, but really a lot of that is have sex, but really a lot of that is have sex, but really a lot of that is about connection and relationship and about connection and relationship and about connection and relationship and love and intimacy, you know, even love and intimacy, you know, even love and intimacy, you know, even gambling. You know, people don't have to gambling. You know, people don't have to gambling. You know, people don't have to gamble, but you're dealing with gamble, but you're dealing with gamble, but you're dealing with money, you know, and you've got to touch money, you know, and you've got to touch money, you know, and you've got to touch it and spend it and be around it. Yeah. it and spend it and be around it. Yeah. it and spend it and be around it. Yeah. Buying a house is an investment. Yeah. Buying a house is an investment. Yeah. Buying a house is an investment. Yeah. or a gamble sometimes as we've or a gamble sometimes as we've or a gamble sometimes as we've seen, you know, and we've got to look at seen, you know, and we've got to look at seen, you know, and we've got to look at how we're using these things, you know, how we're using these things, you know, how we're using these things, you know, and going back to drugs, you know, you look going back to drugs, you know, you look going back to drugs, you know, you look at like we've got pain medication, at like we've got pain medication, at like we've got pain medication, you know, aside from being abused, you know, aside from being abused, you know, aside from being abused, right? We've got opioid pain medication. right? We've got opioid pain medication. right? We've got opioid pain medication. Um, and then we've got heroin. Um, and then we've got heroin. Um, and then we've got heroin. And both of them either came from or And both of them either came from or And both of them either came from or derivatives of the poppy which is a beautiful flower of the poppy which is a beautiful flower of the poppy which is a beautiful flower right so we've taken this flower and right so we've taken this flower and right so we've taken this flower and we've been able to make this these drugs we've been able to make this these drugs we've been able to make this these drugs and one of them you know of course and one of them you know of course and one of them you know of course prescription pain abuse and fentanyl prescription pain abuse and fentanyl prescription pain abuse and fentanyl that we see is you know is it can be that we see is you know is it can be that we see is you know is it can be deadly but I think an argument could be deadly but I think an argument could be deadly but I think an argument could be made that it's probably saved more lives made that it's probably saved more lives made that it's probably saved more lives than it's killed when used than it's killed when used than it's killed when used appropriately. We're able to have appropriately. We're able to have appropriately. We're able to have surgeries that we probably never would surgeries that we probably never would surgeries that we probably never would have been able to have before because of have been able to have before because of have been able to have before because of the medications that people can use. And the medications that people can use. And the medications that people can use. And then we've got people who are either then we've got people who are either then we've got people who are either abusing that or taking heroin and dying. abusing that or taking heroin and dying. abusing that or taking heroin and dying. You know, having a, you know, we started You know, having a, you know, we started You know, having a, you know, we started calling it the opioid epidemic. I think calling it the opioid epidemic. I think calling it the opioid epidemic. I think 50,000 people died. It like surpassed 50,000 people died. It like surpassed 50,000 people died. It like surpassed the number of the people in the US that the number of the people in the US that the number of the people in the US that died by car accidents. Last year it was died by car accidents. Last year it was died by car accidents. Last year it was something like a 100,000. Right. 100,000 something like a 100,000. Right. 100,000 something like a 100,000. Right. 100,000 people died at least. You know, it's people died at least. You know, it's people died at least. You know, it's more than doubled. Um, you know, now more than doubled. Um, you know, now more than doubled. Um, you know, now it's in a lot of different things. it's in a lot of different things. it's in a lot of different things. There's a lot of kids that are taking There's a lot of kids that are taking There's a lot of kids that are taking something that they think is a less something that they think is a less something that they think is a less harmful pill, like a Valium or Xanax, harmful pill, like a Valium or Xanax, harmful pill, like a Valium or Xanax, and it's got fentanyl in it, and they and it's got fentanyl in it, and they and it's got fentanyl in it, and they die. You know, it's doubled they die. You know, it's doubled they die. You know, it's doubled since we started calling it an epidemic. since we started calling it an epidemic. since we started calling it an epidemic. And of course, that 100,000 doesn't And of course, that 100,000 doesn't And of course, that 100,000 doesn't include all of the other drugs and include all of the other drugs and include all of the other drugs and alcohol and alcohol and alcohol and um but you know, it goes back to how did um but you know, it goes back to how did um but you know, it goes back to how did we use it? You know, we manipulated this we use it? You know, we manipulated this we use it? You know, we manipulated this flower in a way that we can save lives flower in a way that we can save lives flower in a way that we can save lives and kill or and kill or and kill or die. That's a more extreme example. But die. That's a more extreme example. But die. That's a more extreme example. But how are we using the things in our life? how are we using the things in our life? how are we using the things in our life? You know, are we You know, are we You know, are we using exercise as a way using exercise as a way using exercise as a way to completely, you know, uh to completely, you know, uh to completely, you know, uh to dissociate from things? If I if I take dissociate from things? If I if I take dissociate from things? If I if I take away that exercise, am I going to fall away that exercise, am I going to fall away that exercise, am I going to fall apart? Am I not going to be apart? Am I not going to be apart? Am I not going to be okay? You know, and that doesn't mean okay? You know, and that doesn't mean okay? You know, and that doesn't mean don't ever exercise again, but don't ever exercise again, but don't ever exercise again, but understand like if I were to stop for a understand like if I were to stop for a understand like if I were to stop for a week, do I fall into a deep depression? week, do I fall into a deep depression? week, do I fall into a deep depression? Not everybody is going to do that, but Not everybody is going to do that, but Not everybody is going to do that, but if somebody's oriented in the way that if somebody's oriented in the way that if somebody's oriented in the way that it is a problem, that may happen for it is a problem, that may happen for it is a problem, that may happen for them. And then it begs the question them. And then it begs the question them. And then it begs the question like, what am I using this for? What I like, what am I using this for? What I like, what am I using this for? What I think is so important about treatment think is so important about treatment think is so important about treatment for addiction and then recovery from for addiction and then recovery from for addiction and then recovery from addiction is that, you know, at first addiction is that, you know, at first addiction is that, you know, at first it's about eliminating something. It's it's about eliminating something. It's it's about eliminating something. It's about moving away from something, but about moving away from something, but about moving away from something, but that's not sustainable. Just to cut that's not sustainable. Just to cut that's not sustainable. Just to cut something out isn't because it's being something out isn't because it's being something out isn't because it's being used for something to give them that used for something to give them that used for something to give them that sense of relief or that sense of peace sense of relief or that sense of peace sense of relief or that sense of peace or that sense of connection or spiritual or that sense of connection or spiritual or that sense of connection or spiritual or otherwise. They've got to eventually or otherwise. They've got to eventually or otherwise. They've got to eventually start building towards start building towards start building towards something. You know, what what's the something. You know, what what's the something. You know, what what's the life I'm going to create? If you look at life I'm going to create? If you look at life I'm going to create? If you look at the 12 steps, the last part of the 12 steps, the last part of the 12 steps, the last part of the 12 steps says to practice these 12 steps says to practice these 12 steps says to practice these principles in all our affairs, which principles in all our affairs, which principles in all our affairs, which means go out and build a life. You know, means go out and build a life. You know, means go out and build a life. You know, don't find yourself really small. don't find yourself really small. don't find yourself really small. We we were talking beforehand there was We we were talking beforehand there was We we were talking beforehand there was a I think he was a biopysicist. I a I think he was a biopysicist. I a I think he was a biopysicist. I can't remember. Emelick, he was at can't remember. Emelick, he was at can't remember. Emelick, he was at Stanford for a bit, the end of his Stanford for a bit, the end of his Stanford for a bit, the end of his career. and he had done a lot of career. and he had done a lot of career. and he had done a lot of research on alcoholism and I wrote a research on alcoholism and I wrote a research on alcoholism and I wrote a book in the ' 50s or 60s called the book in the ' 50s or 60s called the book in the ' 50s or 60s called the disease concept of alcoholism and out of disease concept of alcoholism and out of disease concept of alcoholism and out of that book there was a curve and you can that book there was a curve and you can that book there was a curve and you can look this up it's called the gel curve I look this up it's called the gel curve I look this up it's called the gel curve I don't think he actually created the don't think he actually created the don't think he actually created the curve it was credited towards him in curve it was credited towards him in curve it was credited towards him in fact I think he even uh kind of fact I think he even uh kind of fact I think he even uh kind of dissociated himself from it but it came dissociated himself from it but it came dissociated himself from it but it came out of his works and it starts off out of his works and it starts off out of his works and it starts off with at the top and it's for alcoholism with at the top and it's for alcoholism with at the top and it's for alcoholism like where people start drinking and like where people start drinking and like where people start drinking and it's in the um crucial phase as they it's in the um crucial phase as they it's in the um crucial phase as they start drinking more. And at first when start drinking more. And at first when start drinking more. And at first when people are drinking more, you know, people are drinking more, you know, people are drinking more, you know, their tolerance increases, you know, but their tolerance increases, you know, but their tolerance increases, you know, but they start to experience some problems. they start to experience some problems. they start to experience some problems. They're hung over, they're late for They're hung over, they're late for They're hung over, they're late for work, they're having arguments with, but work, they're having arguments with, but work, they're having arguments with, but it's nothing that drastic. And as they keep nothing that drastic. And as they keep nothing that drastic. And as they keep drinking and descending down this curve, drinking and descending down this curve, drinking and descending down this curve, actually, they enter the I think it's actually, they enter the I think it's actually, they enter the I think it's called the critical phase. And that's called the critical phase. And that's called the critical phase. And that's where actually tolerance decreases, where actually tolerance decreases, where actually tolerance decreases, right? It's it's they're dependent on right? It's it's they're dependent on right? It's it's they're dependent on it. They need it just to get by. They it. They need it just to get by. They it. They need it just to get by. They need it to get to work, you know? they need it to get to work, you know? they need it to get to work, you know? they they're they can't keep the job, they they're they can't keep the job, they they're they can't keep the job, they can't keep their relationships, their uh can't keep their relationships, their uh can't keep their relationships, their uh physical body is starting to fall apart, physical body is starting to fall apart, physical body is starting to fall apart, they're getting sick because of it. they're getting sick because of it. they're getting sick because of it. There's a lot of other factors in it. There's a lot of other factors in it. There's a lot of other factors in it. And then they come down to the And then they come down to the And then they come down to the bottom of this and it's this cycle bottom of this and it's this cycle bottom of this and it's this cycle of drinking and stopping and drinking of drinking and stopping and drinking of drinking and stopping and drinking and stopping, you know, drinking until I and stopping, you know, drinking until I and stopping, you know, drinking until I can't anymore, physically sick, and then can't anymore, physically sick, and then can't anymore, physically sick, and then going back to it as soon as they can. going back to it as soon as they can. going back to it as soon as they can. when those people are able to get when those people are able to get when those people are able to get treatment and find recovery now the treatment and find recovery now the treatment and find recovery now the curve starts to go back up the recovery curve starts to go back up the recovery curve starts to go back up the recovery side of the curve and in the beginning side of the curve and in the beginning side of the curve and in the beginning you know they're not feeling that great. you know they're not feeling that great. you know they're not feeling that great. they they've lost the thing that helps they they've lost the thing that helps they they've lost the thing that helps them get through life. But if they can them get through life. But if they can them get through life. But if they can stay in a contained environment, and stay in a contained environment, and stay in a contained environment, and that contained environment could be a that contained environment could be a that contained environment could be a treatment center or a contained treatment center or a contained treatment center or a contained environment like in a 12step program, environment like in a 12step program, environment like in a 12step program, you know, where they're engaged in you know, where they're engaged in you know, where they're engaged in something. I don't mean contained by uh something. I don't mean contained by uh something. I don't mean contained by uh the walls that you're in, but in some uh the walls that you're in, but in some uh the walls that you're in, but in some sort of in a community, and they can sort of in a community, and they can sort of in a community, and they can stay away from it. Eventually they start stay away from it. Eventually they start stay away from it. Eventually they start uh seeing that they see in others that uh seeing that they see in others that uh seeing that they see in others that they can build a life that they can go they can build a life that they can go they can build a life that they can go after the things that they wanted to go after the things that they wanted to go after the things that they wanted to go after and they start finding pleasure after and they start finding pleasure after and they start finding pleasure from life rather than from the from life rather than from the from life rather than from the substance. You know they start to be substance. You know they start to be substance. You know they start to be able to handle the stressors of life. able to handle the stressors of life. able to handle the stressors of life. their tolerance for stress instead of their tolerance for stress instead of their tolerance for stress instead of their tolerance for alcohol building their tolerance for alcohol building their tolerance for alcohol building their tolerance for stress starts to their tolerance for stress starts to their tolerance for stress starts to build and then eventually they're kind build and then eventually they're kind build and then eventually they're kind of moving towards what we would call in of moving towards what we would call in of moving towards what we would call in Mazo's hierarchy of needs the Mazo's hierarchy of needs the Mazo's hierarchy of needs the self-actualization you know they're able self-actualization you know they're able self-actualization you know they're able to build a life that they never thought to build a life that they never thought to build a life that they never thought they could have before you'll hear they could have before you'll hear they could have before you'll hear people say a life beyond my wildest people say a life beyond my wildest people say a life beyond my wildest dreams you know and a lot for a lot of dreams you know and a lot for a lot of dreams you know and a lot for a lot of those people that's just that I'm able those people that's just that I'm able those people that's just that I'm able to meet anything with some sort of sense to meet anything with some sort of sense to meet anything with some sort of sense of peace and when I'm not I think of peace and when I'm not I think of peace and when I'm not I think recovery is it's not about finding a recovery is it's not about finding a recovery is it's not about finding a let's just use the word peace it's not let's just use the word peace it's not let's just use the word peace it's not about finding a sense of peace that about finding a sense of peace that about finding a sense of peace that you stay in. You know, balance is not you stay in. You know, balance is not you stay in. You know, balance is not I'm on both feet standing still. Balance I'm on both feet standing still. Balance I'm on both feet standing still. Balance is like this, right? And as we're is like this, right? And as we're is like this, right? And as we're taking risks in life as we should to taking risks in life as we should to taking risks in life as we should to really build awesome lives, sometimes really build awesome lives, sometimes really build awesome lives, sometimes we're going to feel way off kilter. But we're going to feel way off kilter. But we're going to feel way off kilter. But with the recovery process to be able to with the recovery process to be able to with the recovery process to be able to recognize when I'm out of balance sooner recognize when I'm out of balance sooner recognize when I'm out of balance sooner or out of peace sooner and return to it or out of peace sooner and return to it or out of peace sooner and return to it quicker, recover again and again, you quicker, recover again and again, you quicker, recover again and again, you know, and have the tools to know, you know, and have the tools to know, you know, and have the tools to know, you know, what are the emotional conditions know, what are the emotional conditions know, what are the emotional conditions that I might be facing on every day and that I might be facing on every day and that I might be facing on every day and what am I made of and who am I that what am I made of and who am I that what am I made of and who am I that might bring to that? So for instance, might bring to that? So for instance, might bring to that? So for instance, something I give to a lot of my clients something I give to a lot of my clients something I give to a lot of my clients is we call it like the emotional weather is we call it like the emotional weather is we call it like the emotional weather uh forecast. You know, when the first uh forecast. You know, when the first uh forecast. You know, when the first part of this is they've got to really part of this is they've got to really part of this is they've got to really know themselves and that's something know themselves and that's something know themselves and that's something that we see in 12step a lot where that we see in 12step a lot where that we see in 12step a lot where they'll we hear if you know people they'll we hear if you know people they'll we hear if you know people identify their character defects. Not identify their character defects. Not identify their character defects. Not everybody I know is familiar with everybody I know is familiar with everybody I know is familiar with 12step, but that's one of the but as 12step, but that's one of the but as 12step, but that's one of the but as part of identifying your defects, you're part of identifying your defects, you're part of identifying your defects, you're also identifying your virtues, right? also identifying your virtues, right? also identifying your virtues, right? Just like a balance sheet, you want to Just like a balance sheet, you want to Just like a balance sheet, you want to know your liabilities and your assets. know your liabilities and your assets. know your liabilities and your assets. And sometimes those things are sometimes And sometimes those things are sometimes And sometimes those things are sometimes they change. And if something they change. And if something they change. And if something that's a liability in this situation that's a liability in this situation that's a liability in this situation might be an asset in this situation, might be an asset in this situation, might be an asset in this situation, right? Like if uh uncontrolled anger and right? Like if uh uncontrolled anger and right? Like if uh uncontrolled anger and violence in my home when my kids do violence in my home when my kids do violence in my home when my kids do something wrong, and I'm not doing this, something wrong, and I'm not doing this, something wrong, and I'm not doing this, but is a liability. you know, if my but is a liability. you know, if my but is a liability. you know, if my family's attacked, it's an asset, right? family's attacked, it's an asset, right? family's attacked, it's an asset, right? So, understanding what these defects and So, understanding what these defects and So, understanding what these defects and virtue or assets and liabilities are so virtue or assets and liabilities are so virtue or assets and liabilities are so that I really know myself and that I really know myself and that I really know myself and that can be through a process of that can be through a process of that can be through a process of sharing with others. And in the 12step, sharing with others. And in the 12step, sharing with others. And in the 12step, that's how they do it. We do it in that's how they do it. We do it in that's how they do it. We do it in therapy all of the time to kind of know therapy all of the time to kind of know therapy all of the time to kind of know who I am. You know actually uh one of who I am. You know actually uh one of who I am. You know actually uh one of there's a line in one of the there's a line in one of the there's a line in one of the uh AA literature that Bill Wilson wrote uh AA literature that Bill Wilson wrote uh AA literature that Bill Wilson wrote and he gives a definition of humility and he gives a definition of humility and he gives a definition of humility and it goes something like this that and it goes something like this that and it goes something like this that humility is an honest recognition of who humility is an honest recognition of who humility is an honest recognition of who and what we've become followed by a deep and what we've become followed by a deep and what we've become followed by a deep desire to become who we can be. And it desire to become who we can be. And it desire to become who we can be. And it it's not about like that I'm all bad. it's not about like that I'm all bad. it's not about like that I'm all bad. It's just to note it to recognize It's just to note it to recognize It's just to note it to recognize who I am. If I don't know where I'm who I am. If I don't know where I'm who I am. If I don't know where I'm starting, I can't know just like finding starting, I can't know just like finding starting, I can't know just like finding directions. If I asked, you know, to get directions. If I asked, you know, to get directions. If I asked, you know, to get directions to the studio and your team directions to the studio and your team directions to the studio and your team started giving me directions from uh started giving me directions from uh started giving me directions from uh over the canyon, but I was, you know, uh over the canyon, but I was, you know, uh over the canyon, but I was, you know, south of here. They're going to give me south of here. They're going to give me south of here. They're going to give me the directions to turn left on this road the directions to turn left on this road the directions to turn left on this road and right on this, and I'm going to I'm and right on this, and I'm going to I'm and right on this, and I'm going to I'm not going to know how to get there. I'm not going to know how to get there. I'm not going to know how to get there. I'm not I'm going to be disoriented. I'm not I'm going to be disoriented. I'm not I'm going to be disoriented. I'm going to feel lost. I got to It starts going to feel lost. I got to It starts going to feel lost. I got to It starts with really knowing where I am, who and with really knowing where I am, who and with really knowing where I am, who and who and what I am. And from there, then who and what I am. And from there, then who and what I am. And from there, then we can start to build a life. So one of we can start to build a life. So one of we can start to build a life. So one of the things I give people a lot is once the things I give people a lot is once the things I give people a lot is once they kind of understand these assets and they kind of understand these assets and they kind of understand these assets and liabilities of theirs, you know, and liabilities of theirs, you know, and liabilities of theirs, you know, to look at each day ahead and say, to look at each day ahead and say, to look at each day ahead and say, you know, first we start off with you know, first we start off with you know, first we start off with gratitude, you know, it kind of gives a gratitude, you know, it kind of gives a gratitude, you know, it kind of gives a mindset and gratitude just isn't about mindset and gratitude just isn't about mindset and gratitude just isn't about being thankful for things. I really being thankful for things. I really being thankful for things. I really believe gratitude is meeting what is as believe gratitude is meeting what is as believe gratitude is meeting what is as it is. you know that uh I always when I it is. you know that uh I always when I it is. you know that uh I always when I give people this and when I practice it give people this and when I practice it give people this and when I practice it myself, I try at least to be one of the myself, I try at least to be one of the myself, I try at least to be one of the things I'm grateful for to be something things I'm grateful for to be something things I'm grateful for to be something that I'm challenged by and not just to that I'm challenged by and not just to that I'm challenged by and not just to say I'm going to learn a lesson from say I'm going to learn a lesson from say I'm going to learn a lesson from this, but I might not know what that this, but I might not know what that this, but I might not know what that is, but to really express gratitude for is, but to really express gratitude for is, but to really express gratitude for some challenge I'm having. So, some challenge I'm having. So, some challenge I'm having. So, that's kind of a mindset. And then the that's kind of a mindset. And then the that's kind of a mindset. And then the next thing is just laying out your plans next thing is just laying out your plans next thing is just laying out your plans for the day. and not like a detailed for the day. and not like a detailed for the day. and not like a detailed calendar, but like, you know, I'm gonna calendar, but like, you know, I'm gonna calendar, but like, you know, I'm gonna wake, you know, take the kids to school, wake, you know, take the kids to school, wake, you know, take the kids to school, go to work, travel, you know, have a go to work, travel, you know, have a go to work, travel, you know, have a business dinner tonight, right? And then business dinner tonight, right? And then business dinner tonight, right? And then so I kind of know what's happening that so I kind of know what's happening that so I kind of know what's happening that day and then from there, uh, look at day and then from there, uh, look at day and then from there, uh, look at what are my what's my emotional state what are my what's my emotional state what are my what's my emotional state currently? What am I experiencing now? currently? What am I experiencing now? currently? What am I experiencing now? Especially if it's like fears, Especially if it's like fears, Especially if it's like fears, resentments, anger, guilt, shame. It resentments, anger, guilt, shame. It resentments, anger, guilt, shame. It could be something else. It could just could be something else. It could just could be something else. It could just be like I'm feeling I feel really solid be like I'm feeling I feel really solid be like I'm feeling I feel really solid today. But when I can take the what's today. But when I can take the what's today. But when I can take the what's going to happen today and what I'm going to happen today and what I'm going to happen today and what I'm already experiencing, I can look at what already experiencing, I can look at what already experiencing, I can look at what I'm doing today and think, you know, I'm doing today and think, you know, I'm doing today and think, you know, there are some character liabilities or there are some character liabilities or there are some character liabilities or defects that might come up. Like if I defects that might come up. Like if I defects that might come up. Like if I have to travel today and I've got to have to travel today and I've got to have to travel today and I've got to take three flights instead of one, I can take three flights instead of one, I can take three flights instead of one, I can know that if I know myself, I might say know that if I know myself, I might say know that if I know myself, I might say I could I have the ability to become I could I have the ability to become I could I have the ability to become impatient, controlling, and look at my day to controlling, and look at my day to controlling, and look at my day to say almost predict what are the say almost predict what are the say almost predict what are the emotional disturbances that can that can emotional disturbances that can that can emotional disturbances that can that can happen that day and then coupled with happen that day and then coupled with happen that day and then coupled with the state that I'm in. If I'm already the state that I'm in. If I'm already the state that I'm in. If I'm already upset about something else, I've got a upset about something else, I've got a upset about something else, I've got a higher likelihood of going into these higher likelihood of going into these higher likelihood of going into these reactive patterns that I don't reactive patterns that I don't reactive patterns that I don't necessarily want to go into. And so, you necessarily want to go into. And so, you necessarily want to go into. And so, you know, much like going on a trip where I know, much like going on a trip where I know, much like going on a trip where I would look and see what the weather's would look and see what the weather's would look and see what the weather's going to be. You know, if it's going to going to be. You know, if it's going to going to be. You know, if it's going to be looks like it's going to be rainy the be looks like it's going to be rainy the be looks like it's going to be rainy the whole time I'm there, I'm going to pack whole time I'm there, I'm going to pack whole time I'm there, I'm going to pack a rain coat. Now, that doesn't mean I'm a rain coat. Now, that doesn't mean I'm a rain coat. Now, that doesn't mean I'm not going to get wet, but once I start not going to get wet, but once I start not going to get wet, but once I start getting wet, I can go get my rain cat getting wet, I can go get my rain cat getting wet, I can go get my rain cat and put it on. Same thing in this. and put it on. Same thing in this. and put it on. Same thing in this. You know, the last part of it is to look You know, the last part of it is to look You know, the last part of it is to look for what I'm going to watch for because for what I'm going to watch for because for what I'm going to watch for because of my plans and my emotional state. Now, of my plans and my emotional state. Now, of my plans and my emotional state. Now, I know that I have to watch for being I know that I have to watch for being I know that I have to watch for being like maybe short or controlling. I want like maybe short or controlling. I want like maybe short or controlling. I want to watch for these character defects or to watch for these character defects or to watch for these character defects or liabilities. And then what do I want to liabilities. And then what do I want to liabilities. And then what do I want to strive for? I'm going to strive for strive for? I'm going to strive for strive for? I'm going to strive for being patient, tolerant, kind. Now, just being patient, tolerant, kind. Now, just being patient, tolerant, kind. Now, just because I write this down, just like the because I write this down, just like the because I write this down, just like the rain jacket, doesn't mean I'm not going rain jacket, doesn't mean I'm not going rain jacket, doesn't mean I'm not going to experience these things. But when I to experience these things. But when I to experience these things. But when I can look at like a day as an example, I can look at like a day as an example, I can look at like a day as an example, I can break it down and in a in a chunk can break it down and in a in a chunk can break it down and in a in a chunk where, you know, I'm not going to be where, you know, I'm not going to be where, you know, I'm not going to be shocked by I'm being impatient. And as shocked by I'm being impatient. And as shocked by I'm being impatient. And as soon as I get impatient, I can remember, soon as I get impatient, I can remember, soon as I get impatient, I can remember, oh, this is what I'm looking this is oh, this is what I'm looking this is oh, this is what I'm looking this is what I want to watch out for today. What what I want to watch out for today. What what I want to watch out for today. What do I need to and I wanted to strive for do I need to and I wanted to strive for do I need to and I wanted to strive for being tolerant and patient. So then I being tolerant and patient. So then I being tolerant and patient. So then I can, you know, use one of the tools that can, you know, use one of the tools that can, you know, use one of the tools that I might have that I've laid out. You I might have that I've laid out. You I might have that I've laid out. You know, it might just be if I'm in the know, it might just be if I'm in the know, it might just be if I'm in the airport, walk away, take a breath, you airport, walk away, take a breath, you airport, walk away, take a breath, you know, and recognize and remind know, and recognize and remind know, and recognize and remind myself this is what I'm striving for myself this is what I'm striving for myself this is what I'm striving for today. And in this exercise, we're today. And in this exercise, we're today. And in this exercise, we're putting out in front of us what we might putting out in front of us what we might putting out in front of us what we might be experiencing based on what we know be experiencing based on what we know be experiencing based on what we know about ourselves and what we've learned about ourselves and what we've learned about ourselves and what we've learned about ourselves. And when we can do about ourselves. And when we can do about ourselves. And when we can do that, we, you know, we can start living that, we, you know, we can start living that, we, you know, we can start living each day a little bit better. or at each day a little bit better. or at each day a little bit better. or at least I find this with my clients that least I find this with my clients that least I find this with my clients that they can chunk it down and say, you they can chunk it down and say, you they can chunk it down and say, you know, they're not surprised by these know, they're not surprised by these know, they're not surprised by these emotional reactions and you emotional reactions and you emotional reactions and you know, like I said earlier, we want to know, like I said earlier, we want to know, like I said earlier, we want to help people I try to help people learn help people I try to help people learn help people I try to help people learn how to feel bad, you know, to how to feel bad, you know, to how to feel bad, you know, to recognize that, okay, I'm feeling recognize that, okay, I'm feeling recognize that, okay, I'm feeling disturbed. I'm in a reaction. Let me disturbed. I'm in a reaction. Let me disturbed. I'm in a reaction. Let me lean into it rather than run away from lean into it rather than run away from lean into it rather than run away from it. And we run away from it in different it. And we run away from it in different it. And we run away from it in different ways. I might snapping at the lady at ways. I might snapping at the lady at ways. I might snapping at the lady at the counter or uh you know might be the counter or uh you know might be the counter or uh you know might be someone that now I just totally someone that now I just totally someone that now I just totally withdraw and don't say anything. Yeah. withdraw and don't say anything. Yeah. withdraw and don't say anything. Yeah. Numbing out is very common nowadays. Numbing out is very common nowadays. Numbing out is very common nowadays. Yeah. I just want to repeat these Yeah. I just want to repeat these Yeah. I just want to repeat these different categories. Um a small list of different categories. Um a small list of different categories. Um a small list of gratitudes um including perhaps some things that um including perhaps some things that um including perhaps some things that um we're grateful that challenge us or we're grateful that challenge us or we're grateful that challenge us or things that we've received or whatever things that we've received or whatever things that we've received or whatever it happens to be. A quick list of it happens to be. A quick list of it happens to be. A quick list of gratitudes plan for the day. what the gratitudes plan for the day. what the gratitudes plan for the day. what the internal emotional weather is like how internal emotional weather is like how internal emotional weather is like how am I feeling irritated rested what it am I feeling irritated rested what it am I feeling irritated rested what it could be three or four things what to could be three or four things what to could be three or four things what to watch for and what to strive for I do watch for and what to strive for I do watch for and what to strive for I do think it's an extremely useful obviously think it's an extremely useful obviously think it's an extremely useful obviously zero cost minimal time zero cost minimal time zero cost minimal time investment protocol for lack of a better investment protocol for lack of a better investment protocol for lack of a better word that word that word that um everyone not just people who struggle um everyone not just people who struggle um everyone not just people who struggle with addiction but everyone can benefit with addiction but everyone can benefit with addiction but everyone can benefit from because I think we tend to be so from because I think we tend to be so from because I think we tend to be so conscious of like what to look for, what conscious of like what to look for, what conscious of like what to look for, what to strive for, coming out of a morning to strive for, coming out of a morning to strive for, coming out of a morning journaling or a great night's sleep. But journaling or a great night's sleep. But journaling or a great night's sleep. But then, you know, it's amazing how by 3 then, you know, it's amazing how by 3 then, you know, it's amazing how by 3 p.m. somebody cuts us off in traffic or, p.m. somebody cuts us off in traffic or, p.m. somebody cuts us off in traffic or, you know, or we're being bombarded with you know, or we're being bombarded with you know, or we're being bombarded with too many things and all of a sudden too many things and all of a sudden too many things and all of a sudden we're not necessarily unpeled, but we're not necessarily unpeled, but we're not necessarily unpeled, but we're not our best self. Do you we're not our best self. Do you we're not our best self. Do you think there's value in sharing your list think there's value in sharing your list think there's value in sharing your list with somebody else? connection with somebody else? connection with somebody else? connection with others is so important, especially when others is so important, especially when others is so important, especially when I share something like this that's I share something like this that's I share something like this that's vulnerable with them because it's not vulnerable with them because it's not vulnerable with them because it's not just about holding me accountable, but just about holding me accountable, but just about holding me accountable, but now I'm expressing it in a now I'm expressing it in a now I'm expressing it in a way that others see it and we can have way that others see it and we can have way that others see it and we can have communication with them about, you know, communication with them about, you know, communication with them about, you know, having them share it back with you, too. having them share it back with you, too. having them share it back with you, too. I have like 10 guys that I share this I have like 10 guys that I share this I have like 10 guys that I share this with every day, you know, and not that with every day, you know, and not that with every day, you know, and not that the way that I do things is the way that the way that I do things is the way that the way that I do things is the way that everybody should, but I ask other people everybody should, but I ask other people everybody should, but I ask other people that I give this to share it because, that I give this to share it because, that I give this to share it because, you know, you're now expressing you know, you're now expressing you know, you're now expressing it. And expressing something kind of brings And expressing something kind of brings And expressing something kind of brings it more into existence than if I'm just it more into existence than if I'm just it more into existence than if I'm just doing it myself internally. And we've doing it myself internally. And we've doing it myself internally. And we've got to put these things in front of us got to put these things in front of us got to put these things in front of us cuz we will forget very quickly, you cuz we will forget very quickly, you cuz we will forget very quickly, you know, or you like you said, coming out know, or you like you said, coming out know, or you like you said, coming out of a morning journaling or meditation of a morning journaling or meditation of a morning journaling or meditation session feels great. I think most people session feels great. I think most people session feels great. I think most people decide to make a change and then, you decide to make a change and then, you decide to make a change and then, you know, on one day and then they don't know, on one day and then they don't know, on one day and then they don't think about it again in the way that think about it again in the way that think about it again in the way that they thought about it for months. Like they thought about it for months. Like they thought about it for months. Like it happens every year on New Year's. it happens every year on New Year's. it happens every year on New Year's. They're not putting it out in front of They're not putting it out in front of They're not putting it out in front of them every day to be a reminder of what them every day to be a reminder of what them every day to be a reminder of what I'm going after, what's important to me. I'm going after, what's important to me. I'm going after, what's important to me. And the brain is very different at And the brain is very different at And the brain is very different at different times of day and at night. You different times of day and at night. You different times of day and at night. You know, one thing that I subscribe to that know, one thing that I subscribe to that know, one thing that I subscribe to that is separate from this conversation, but is separate from this conversation, but is separate from this conversation, but perhaps relevant is I don't believe any perhaps relevant is I don't believe any perhaps relevant is I don't believe any thoughts that occur between 2 am and thoughts that occur between 2 am and thoughts that occur between 2 am and 5:00 a.m. But I just don't whatever 5:00 a.m. But I just don't whatever 5:00 a.m. But I just don't whatever comes up if I happen to wake up whatever comes up if I happen to wake up whatever comes up if I happen to wake up in the middle of the night and have a I in the middle of the night and have a I in the middle of the night and have a I just don't I've chosen to not believe I just don't I've chosen to not believe I just don't I've chosen to not believe those thoughts. I might write something those thoughts. I might write something those thoughts. I might write something down. I might have an insight that I'm down. I might have an insight that I'm down. I might have an insight that I'm interested in um or something that interested in um or something that interested in um or something that terrifies me or whatever, but I just terrifies me or whatever, but I just terrifies me or whatever, but I just don't believe those thoughts because don't believe those thoughts because don't believe those thoughts because I've had the experience thousands of I've had the experience thousands of I've had the experience thousands of times of then going back to sleep, times of then going back to sleep, times of then going back to sleep, waking up in the morning being like, waking up in the morning being like, waking up in the morning being like, "That's ridiculous. It doesn't it "That's ridiculous. It doesn't it "That's ridiculous. It doesn't it doesn't that doesn't hold any water doesn't that doesn't hold any water doesn't that doesn't hold any water anymore. I think we're so vulnerable in anymore. I think we're so vulnerable in anymore. I think we're so vulnerable in the middle of the night. Our forebrain the middle of the night. Our forebrain the middle of the night. Our forebrain shut down. We can't strategize. All our shut down. We can't strategize. All our shut down. We can't strategize. All our safety mechanisms are you know safety mechanisms are you know safety mechanisms are you know at their at their lowest and those at their at their lowest and those at their at their lowest and those thoughts just they don't hold meaning. thoughts just they don't hold meaning. thoughts just they don't hold meaning. Now I'm not to say that's not to say Now I'm not to say that's not to say Now I'm not to say that's not to say that some night owls might not have some that some night owls might not have some that some night owls might not have some brilliant insights in the middle of the brilliant insights in the middle of the brilliant insights in the middle of the night. So this is just relates to me and night. So this is just relates to me and night. So this is just relates to me and my schedule. But I do think that um we my schedule. But I do think that um we my schedule. But I do think that um we can make a decision to behave one way can make a decision to behave one way can make a decision to behave one way and do things at 8:00 a.m. and by 400 and do things at 8:00 a.m. and by 400 and do things at 8:00 a.m. and by 400 p.m. As a neuroscientist, I can honestly p.m. As a neuroscientist, I can honestly p.m. As a neuroscientist, I can honestly say that your brain is not the same say that your brain is not the same say that your brain is not the same brain at 4 p.m. that it was at 8 a.m. brain at 4 p.m. that it was at 8 a.m. brain at 4 p.m. that it was at 8 a.m. It's still you, but it's functioning so It's still you, but it's functioning so It's still you, but it's functioning so differently. What's important, how it differently. What's important, how it differently. What's important, how it orders priorities, how it interprets orders priorities, how it interprets orders priorities, how it interprets data. It's a it's like a it's not like a data. It's a it's like a it's not like a data. It's a it's like a it's not like a computer. It's it's a dynamic machine. computer. It's it's a dynamic machine. computer. It's it's a dynamic machine. And at different times of day, you're And at different times of day, you're And at different times of day, you're working with a working with a working with a different set of hardware. different set of hardware. different set of hardware. Literally, certain circuits are more Literally, certain circuits are more Literally, certain circuits are more active than others. So, I don't believe active than others. So, I don't believe active than others. So, I don't believe that um we are capable of that um we are capable of that um we are capable of self-regulating nearly as well as we self-regulating nearly as well as we self-regulating nearly as well as we could, certainly not perfectly, if we could, certainly not perfectly, if we could, certainly not perfectly, if we don't have a reminder of our best self, don't have a reminder of our best self, don't have a reminder of our best self, our aspirational self that we carry our aspirational self that we carry our aspirational self that we carry forward. Whether or not it comes through forward. Whether or not it comes through forward. Whether or not it comes through other people or enforcement or ideally other people or enforcement or ideally other people or enforcement or ideally comes from inside us. But the comes from inside us. But the comes from inside us. But the expectation that we are going to expectation that we are going to expectation that we are going to spontaneously and impulsively be our spontaneously and impulsively be our spontaneously and impulsively be our best self is one of the biggest uh best self is one of the biggest uh best self is one of the biggest uh failures I think of education and failures I think of education and failures I think of education and psychology and medicine and evidenced by psychology and medicine and evidenced by psychology and medicine and evidenced by the fact that I have many colleagues who the fact that I have many colleagues who the fact that I have many colleagues who are scientists and physicians who have are scientists and physicians who have are scientists and physicians who have terrible addictions. Some are sober, some are addictions. Some are sober, some are addictions. Some are sober, some are not. These are brilliant people who have not. These are brilliant people who have not. These are brilliant people who have all the knowledge in the world about the all the knowledge in the world about the all the knowledge in the world about the inner workings of the mechanisms that inner workings of the mechanisms that inner workings of the mechanisms that make people addicted um etc. Anyway, I make people addicted um etc. Anyway, I make people addicted um etc. Anyway, I just I'm editorializing there a bit, I just I'm editorializing there a bit, I just I'm editorializing there a bit, but I feel very passionate about these but I feel very passionate about these but I feel very passionate about these zerocost uh tools, but I have to say zerocost uh tools, but I have to say zerocost uh tools, but I have to say these tools can make a huge difference. these tools can make a huge difference. these tools can make a huge difference. And um what do you call this list? What is um what do you call this list? What is um what do you call this list? What is it the plan for the day? What what is it the plan for the day? What what is it the plan for the day? What what is this list? uh just like an emotional this list? uh just like an emotional this list? uh just like an emotional weather forecast, you know? I mean, call weather forecast, you know? I mean, call weather forecast, you know? I mean, call it whatever you want, but I think it whatever you want, but I think it whatever you want, but I think it can be part of a daily inventory, too, can be part of a daily inventory, too, can be part of a daily inventory, too, where at night you could look at and see where at night you could look at and see where at night you could look at and see how you did, you know? I mean, I how you did, you know? I mean, I how you did, you know? I mean, I think you just talked about being your think you just talked about being your think you just talked about being your best self. Like, it's a way to kind your best self. Like, it's a way to kind your best self. Like, it's a way to kind of des, you know, define what our best of des, you know, define what our best of des, you know, define what our best self is that day, you know, because what self is that day, you know, because what self is that day, you know, because what our best self is going to change our best self is going to change our best self is going to change depending on the circumstances we're in. depending on the circumstances we're in. depending on the circumstances we're in. You know, I I've run into problems You know, I I've run into problems You know, I I've run into problems before where, you know, in my own life before where, you know, in my own life before where, you know, in my own life where, you know, it's like the weekend where, you know, it's like the weekend where, you know, it's like the weekend and I'm really looking forward to I'm and I'm really looking forward to I'm and I'm really looking forward to I'm like the weekend's going to be and I like the weekend's going to be and I like the weekend's going to be and I don't let's say I don't do this exercise don't let's say I don't do this exercise don't let's say I don't do this exercise cuz it's a it's a Saturday and I it's cuz it's a it's a Saturday and I it's cuz it's a it's a Saturday and I it's going to be, you know, I'm home and it's going to be, you know, I'm home and it's going to be, you know, I'm home and it's going to be an amazing I live with four going to be an amazing I live with four going to be an amazing I live with four other people, you know, two of three of other people, you know, two of three of other people, you know, two of three of which are children. they might have which are children. they might have which are children. they might have other plans, you know, and or someone other plans, you know, and or someone other plans, you know, and or someone gets sick and we can't go to the do gets sick and we can't go to the do gets sick and we can't go to the do the thing that we were going to do. the thing that we were going to do. the thing that we were going to do. And and I can find myself, you know, And and I can find myself, you know, And and I can find myself, you know, really grumpy and right in those really grumpy and right in those really grumpy and right in those character defects or liabilities. I also character defects or liabilities. I also character defects or liabilities. I also think being your best self isn't never think being your best self isn't never think being your best self isn't never engaging in those. It's not never engaging in those. It's not never engaging in those. It's not never getting angry, right? I remember a getting angry, right? I remember a getting angry, right? I remember a teacher I had was talking about and I teacher I had was talking about and I teacher I had was talking about and I can't remember the he was talking about can't remember the he was talking about can't remember the he was talking about some Indian yoga master you know that some Indian yoga master you know that some Indian yoga master you know that they the student asked them like do they the student asked them like do they the student asked them like do the do the masters ever get angry and he the do the masters ever get angry and he the do the masters ever get angry and he said of course but when they get angry said of course but when they get angry said of course but when they get angry it's like writing on water it's there it's like writing on water it's there it's like writing on water it's there and then it's gone you know they're not and then it's gone you know they're not and then it's gone you know they're not holding on to it if you try to write on holding on to it if you try to write on holding on to it if you try to write on water those letters are going to water those letters are going to water those letters are going to disappear right after you write them you disappear right after you write them you disappear right after you write them you know that there's there are emotional know that there's there are emotional know that there's there are emotional disturbances that we're going to have disturbances that we're going to have disturbances that we're going to have and It's part of life. We can't ignore and It's part of life. We can't ignore and It's part of life. We can't ignore them. We should embrace them and lean them. We should embrace them and lean them. We should embrace them and lean into them. I mean, I think a the a real into them. I mean, I think a the a real into them. I mean, I think a the a real secret to having a really fulfilling secret to having a really fulfilling secret to having a really fulfilling life is being able to life is being able to life is being able to embrace all aspects of oursel, the embrace all aspects of oursel, the embrace all aspects of oursel, the light and the light and the light and the shadow because we can't just try to run shadow because we can't just try to run shadow because we can't just try to run from the shadow and go to the light. from the shadow and go to the light. from the shadow and go to the light. It's just it's they they're It's just it's they they're It's just it's they they're handinand. In fact, they don't exist handinand. In fact, they don't exist handinand. In fact, they don't exist without the other. Well, because they're without the other. Well, because they're without the other. Well, because they're both inside of us. And they're both inside of us. And they're both inside of us. And they're both inside of us and they both have their inside of us and they both have their inside of us and they both have their purpose. What is the purpose of the shadow in What is the purpose of the shadow in What is the purpose of the shadow in your in your mind? And for folks that your in your mind? And for folks that your in your mind? And for folks that don't know, I mean the shadow, we're don't know, I mean the shadow, we're don't know, I mean the shadow, we're using Yungian language here, but and using Yungian language here, but and using Yungian language here, but and there probably will be some folks there probably will be some folks there probably will be some folks listening that say and are thinking listening that say and are thinking listening that say and are thinking themselves, well, I've never suffered themselves, well, I've never suffered themselves, well, I've never suffered from an addiction, etc. But what we're from an addiction, etc. But what we're from an addiction, etc. But what we're really talking about here with this, can really talking about here with this, can really talking about here with this, can we call it an emotional weather map? we call it an emotional weather map? we call it an emotional weather map? Sure, that's great. Because I like the Sure, that's great. Because I like the Sure, that's great. Because I like the idea I like the idea of a map and the idea I like the idea of a map and the idea I like the idea of a map and the forecast component because it's not just forecast component because it's not just forecast component because it's not just how do I feel right now? It's how do I how do I feel right now? It's how do I how do I feel right now? It's how do I feel right now? What's coming? And how feel right now? What's coming? And how feel right now? What's coming? And how am I going to prepare? and there's am I going to prepare? and there's am I going to prepare? and there's some goal setting in it, but you're not some goal setting in it, but you're not some goal setting in it, but you're not actually writing out your specific actually writing out your specific actually writing out your specific goals. Just, you know, what am I goals. Just, you know, what am I goals. Just, you know, what am I striving for is I suppose a goal. striving for is I suppose a goal. striving for is I suppose a goal. Um, but what we're really saying is Um, but what we're really saying is Um, but what we're really saying is anyone that's ever gotten anxious, anyone that's ever gotten anxious, anyone that's ever gotten anxious, anyone that's ever gotten stressed, anyone that's ever gotten stressed, anyone that's ever gotten stressed, anyone that's ever gotten angry, whether anyone that's ever gotten angry, whether anyone that's ever gotten angry, whether or not you yell or not, right? I mean, or not you yell or not, right? I mean, or not you yell or not, right? I mean, what you're talking about is a is a what you're talking about is a is a what you're talking about is a is a road map for the being able to navigate road map for the being able to navigate road map for the being able to navigate the experience of being human, right? the experience of being human, right? the experience of being human, right? Because the stri what we're striving for Because the stri what we're striving for Because the stri what we're striving for is not our like specific goals. I'm not is not our like specific goals. I'm not is not our like specific goals. I'm not striving for like success in this striving for like success in this striving for like success in this meeting. I'm not striving for making meeting. I'm not striving for making meeting. I'm not striving for making this money today. I'm striving for ways this money today. I'm striving for ways this money today. I'm striving for ways of being, you know, how I'm going to be of being, you know, how I'm going to be of being, you know, how I'm going to be that day in the face of the stressors, that day in the face of the stressors, that day in the face of the stressors, whether that meeting goes well or not, whether that meeting goes well or not, whether that meeting goes well or not, whether I make the money or I don't, whether I make the money or I don't, whether I make the money or I don't, whether I get the answer that I wanted whether I get the answer that I wanted whether I get the answer that I wanted or I don't, that I'm striving for this or I don't, that I'm striving for this or I don't, that I'm striving for this way of being. There's a line that I way of being. There's a line that I way of being. There's a line that I heard from a country singer once that I heard from a country singer once that I heard from a country singer once that I think he heard in a 12step meeting think he heard in a 12step meeting think he heard in a 12step meeting that said, you know, peace is not uh that said, you know, peace is not uh that said, you know, peace is not uh finding calmer seas, it's building a finding calmer seas, it's building a finding calmer seas, it's building a better boat. You know, that you know, better boat. You know, that you know, better boat. You know, that you know, how are we going to navigate the storm? how are we going to navigate the storm? how are we going to navigate the storm? Not how are we going to avoid the Not how are we going to avoid the Not how are we going to avoid the storms. I'd like to take a quick break storms. I'd like to take a quick break storms. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, and acknowledge one of our sponsors, and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only forever chemicals. function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function functionhealth.com/huberman. Function functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of over currently has a wait list of over currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're offering 250,000 people, but they're offering 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman podcast early access to Hubberman podcast early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. You alluded to this access to Function. You alluded to this access to Function. You alluded to this earlier when talking about balance as a earlier when talking about balance as a earlier when talking about balance as a dynamic process, not a static process. dynamic process, not a static process. dynamic process, not a static process. That part of peace is knowing that when That part of peace is knowing that when That part of peace is knowing that when distress comes, you'll be able to distress comes, you'll be able to distress comes, you'll be able to tolerate it. Yeah. As opposed to there's tolerate it. Yeah. As opposed to there's tolerate it. Yeah. As opposed to there's no distress. And I know people like this no distress. And I know people like this no distress. And I know people like this that are constantly trying to move that are constantly trying to move that are constantly trying to move through the channels of life, create through the channels of life, create through the channels of life, create their own little estuaries around things their own little estuaries around things their own little estuaries around things so that there's never any disruption. so that there's never any disruption. so that there's never any disruption. Yeah. We want to be able to tolerate Yeah. We want to be able to tolerate Yeah. We want to be able to tolerate that distress enough to make choice and that distress enough to make choice and that distress enough to make choice and respond rather than react to whatever it respond rather than react to whatever it respond rather than react to whatever it is. You know, it doesn't mean that we're is. You know, it doesn't mean that we're is. You know, it doesn't mean that we're not going to navigate out of the storm. not going to navigate out of the storm. not going to navigate out of the storm. I think of it I think of it like I think of it I think of it like I think of it I think of it like this in uh if we go back into the I this in uh if we go back into the I this in uh if we go back into the I don't know 17 or 1800s when the only way don't know 17 or 1800s when the only way don't know 17 or 1800s when the only way to get from England to get from England to get from England to America was to navigate or to sail in to America was to navigate or to sail in to America was to navigate or to sail in a wooden sailboat, right? A sail ship, a wooden sailboat, right? A sail ship, a wooden sailboat, right? A sail ship, whatever it was called. And let's say we whatever it was called. And let's say we whatever it was called. And let's say we took the most experienced sailor with took the most experienced sailor with took the most experienced sailor with the best ship. But this time, rather the best ship. But this time, rather the best ship. But this time, rather than using his skills of navigation and than using his skills of navigation and than using his skills of navigation and sailing, he said, "The seas are calm and sailing, he said, "The seas are calm and sailing, he said, "The seas are calm and the weather's good, I must be going the weather's good, I must be going the weather's good, I must be going the right way. But if the seas are rough and right way. But if the seas are rough and right way. But if the seas are rough and the weather's bad, I must be going the weather's bad, I must be going the weather's bad, I must be going the wrong way." And every time the seas were wrong way." And every time the seas were wrong way." And every time the seas were calm, the weather's nice, he just kept calm, the weather's nice, he just kept calm, the weather's nice, he just kept going in the direction he was. But every going in the direction he was. But every going in the direction he was. But every time he came across waves and rain, he'd time he came across waves and rain, he'd time he came across waves and rain, he'd turn. Is he ever going to get there? turn. Is he ever going to get there? turn. Is he ever going to get there? Potentially, let's say it's calm the Potentially, let's say it's calm the Potentially, let's say it's calm the whole way. Or he might end up navigating whole way. Or he might end up navigating whole way. Or he might end up navigating all the way down around the South all the way down around the South all the way down around the South America and then coming back up. Neither America and then coming back up. Neither America and then coming back up. Neither one of those is the answer. The answer one of those is the answer. The answer one of those is the answer. The answer is that he when he meets the is that he when he meets the is that he when he meets the storm, he can use his skills of storm, he can use his skills of storm, he can use his skills of navigation as a sailor to and navigation as a sailor to and navigation as a sailor to and understanding the weather and his understanding the weather and his understanding the weather and his experience to say, "Okay, this is experience to say, "Okay, this is experience to say, "Okay, this is something I navigate through. This is something I navigate through. This is something I navigate through. This is something I navigate around." But he something I navigate around." But he something I navigate around." But he doesn't just react based on the external doesn't just react based on the external doesn't just react based on the external conditions. And we react constantly to our external And we react constantly to our external And we react constantly to our external conditions based on what we're conditions based on what we're conditions based on what we're perceiving is going on. You know, I'll perceiving is going on. You know, I'll perceiving is going on. You know, I'll preface this by saying I think I believe preface this by saying I think I believe preface this by saying I think I believe one of our biggest, if not our biggest one of our biggest, if not our biggest one of our biggest, if not our biggest challenge as human beings and our challenge as human beings and our challenge as human beings and our psychology is that we confuse discomfort psychology is that we confuse discomfort psychology is that we confuse discomfort with threat and respond to discomfort as with threat and respond to discomfort as with threat and respond to discomfort as if it's threat. You know, and this goes if it's threat. You know, and this goes if it's threat. You know, and this goes back I can use the uh diagnostic back I can use the uh diagnostic back I can use the uh diagnostic criteria for PTSD. Not that everybody criteria for PTSD. Not that everybody criteria for PTSD. Not that everybody that experiences this has PTSD, but when that experiences this has PTSD, but when that experiences this has PTSD, but when you look at the diagnostic criteria you look at the diagnostic criteria you look at the diagnostic criteria in the DSM5, which is the fifth criteria in the DSM5, which is the fifth criteria in the DSM5, which is the fifth version of the it's the most recent version of the it's the most recent version of the it's the most recent version of the diagnostic manual, it version of the diagnostic manual, it version of the diagnostic manual, it says that the person was exposed to um says that the person was exposed to um says that the person was exposed to um it's like exposed to death uh threaten it's like exposed to death uh threaten it's like exposed to death uh threaten actual or threatened death or actual or threatened death or actual or threatened death or actual or threatened violence or actual or threatened violence or actual or threatened violence or actual or threatened sexual violence. In the DSM4, threatened sexual violence. In the DSM4, threatened sexual violence. In the DSM4, it said real or perceived. And what that it said real or perceived. And what that it said real or perceived. And what that means is, you know, we can have a means is, you know, we can have a means is, you know, we can have a similar or exact reaction to something similar or exact reaction to something similar or exact reaction to something that is actually happening like you're that is actually happening like you're that is actually happening like you're attacking me. Hopefully, you're not attacking me. Hopefully, you're not attacking me. Hopefully, you're not going to attack me, but like you were as going to attack me, but like you were as going to attack me, but like you were as if you threatened to attack me. You if you threatened to attack me. You if you threatened to attack me. You know, if I believe that I'm in danger, know, if I believe that I'm in danger, know, if I believe that I'm in danger, then I can have the same I'm going to then I can have the same I'm going to then I can have the same I'm going to have the same fight orflight response or have the same fight orflight response or have the same fight orflight response or the same reaction in my body as if I am the same reaction in my body as if I am the same reaction in my body as if I am actually in danger. It's interesting actually in danger. It's interesting actually in danger. It's interesting that our I think our legal system that our I think our legal system that our I think our legal system recognizes this in that uh you can be recognizes this in that uh you can be recognizes this in that uh you can be arrested for assault or battery. Battery arrested for assault or battery. Battery arrested for assault or battery. Battery is you hit me. Assault is you threatened is you hit me. Assault is you threatened is you hit me. Assault is you threatened to hit me or threatened to kill me. We to hit me or threatened to kill me. We to hit me or threatened to kill me. We we actually in a way recognize this idea we actually in a way recognize this idea we actually in a way recognize this idea of perception in our legal system. It's of perception in our legal system. It's of perception in our legal system. It's actually it's also I believe what the actually it's also I believe what the actually it's also I believe what the forgive me for saying it in this way, forgive me for saying it in this way, forgive me for saying it in this way, but the quote unquote success of but the quote unquote success of but the quote unquote success of terrorism is it's not that this event terrorism is it's not that this event terrorism is it's not that this event happens. It's that we leave that event happens. It's that we leave that event happens. It's that we leave that event thinking it's not that those buildings thinking it's not that those buildings thinking it's not that those buildings came down. It's that we think we believe came down. It's that we think we believe came down. It's that we think we believe that all of the buildings are going to that all of the buildings are going to that all of the buildings are going to come down, right? It's it's come down, right? It's it's come down, right? It's it's terror. I think that because we were terror. I think that because we were terror. I think that because we were talking about addiction and now we're talking about addiction and now we're talking about addiction and now we're talking about perception of threat and talking about perception of threat and talking about perception of threat and distress. I want to make sure that we distress. I want to make sure that we distress. I want to make sure that we tie those things back to one another uh tie those things back to one another uh tie those things back to one another uh one another. No, I think this is a very one another. No, I think this is a very one another. No, I think this is a very important conversation because what important conversation because what important conversation because what we're, you know, at the heart we're, you know, at the heart we're, you know, at the heart of addiction, but also at the heart of a of addiction, but also at the heart of a of addiction, but also at the heart of a challenged life, challenged in the ways challenged life, challenged in the ways challenged life, challenged in the ways that life shouldn't be challenging, is that life shouldn't be challenging, is that life shouldn't be challenging, is this lack of distress tolerance. Yeah. this lack of distress tolerance. Yeah. this lack of distress tolerance. Yeah. And I have a question about distress And I have a question about distress And I have a question about distress tolerance specifically. What can we do tolerance specifically. What can we do tolerance specifically. What can we do to increase our distress tolerance? Like to increase our distress tolerance? Like to increase our distress tolerance? Like what practices Maybe we just have to what practices Maybe we just have to what practices Maybe we just have to experience distress to know how to experience distress to know how to experience distress to know how to navigate distress. we we're going to navigate distress. we we're going to navigate distress. we we're going to experience the stress. We experience it experience the stress. We experience it experience the stress. We experience it all the time. And I think it's and all the time. And I think it's and all the time. And I think it's and you may be able to articulate this and you may be able to articulate this and you may be able to articulate this even better than I can. But, you know, I even better than I can. But, you know, I even better than I can. But, you know, I think we need to look at stress, right? think we need to look at stress, right? think we need to look at stress, right? Not all stress is bad. We we need Not all stress is bad. We we need Not all stress is bad. We we need stress. I need stress to move around in stress. I need stress to move around in stress. I need stress to move around in this chair. I need I need to I need to this chair. I need I need to I need to this chair. I need I need to I need to be able to um uh to walk around. My my be able to um uh to walk around. My my be able to um uh to walk around. My my muscles need to tense and I need that muscles need to tense and I need that muscles need to tense and I need that stress. I think was it Han Sier's work stress. I think was it Han Sier's work stress. I think was it Han Sier's work around ustress and distress? We're around ustress and distress? We're around ustress and distress? We're going to experience distress and it's going to experience distress and it's going to experience distress and it's not about avoiding distress. It's, you not about avoiding distress. It's, you not about avoiding distress. It's, you know, how are we going to walk through know, how are we going to walk through know, how are we going to walk through that distress? And so I like to break that distress? And so I like to break that distress? And so I like to break practices down into a couple different practices down into a couple different practices down into a couple different ways. So proactive and reactive. ways. So proactive and reactive. ways. So proactive and reactive. Proactive are going to be things that we Proactive are going to be things that we Proactive are going to be things that we schedule. You know, I'm going to do you schedule. You know, I'm going to do you schedule. You know, I'm going to do you talked about yoga nidra. We can talk talked about yoga nidra. We can talk talked about yoga nidra. We can talk about that a little bit more. You call about that a little bit more. You call about that a little bit more. You call the non-sleep, deep rest, other forms of the non-sleep, deep rest, other forms of the non-sleep, deep rest, other forms of mindfulness and meditation that actually mindfulness and meditation that actually mindfulness and meditation that actually allow us to raise capacity in our allow us to raise capacity in our allow us to raise capacity in our nervous system. um uh going to therapy, nervous system. um uh going to therapy, nervous system. um uh going to therapy, coaching, being involved in a community, coaching, being involved in a community, coaching, being involved in a community, doing physical exercise. These are doing physical exercise. These are doing physical exercise. These are things that we're going to schedule things that we're going to schedule things that we're going to schedule going into the cold plunge which does going into the cold plunge which does going into the cold plunge which does allow us to experience something and allow us to experience something and allow us to experience something and stay a little bit longer and it gives us stay a little bit longer and it gives us stay a little bit longer and it gives us you know it's so it's we have one at you know it's so it's we have one at you know it's so it's we have one at home and when friends come over to use home and when friends come over to use home and when friends come over to use it it's so funny because like the first it it's so funny because like the first it it's so funny because like the first time they're going to do it and I know time they're going to do it and I know time they're going to do it and I know you've had a lot of people we actually I you've had a lot of people we actually I you've had a lot of people we actually I was at your home a couple years ago and was at your home a couple years ago and was at your home a couple years ago and there was a guy who was doing it for the there was a guy who was doing it for the there was a guy who was doing it for the first time and he he's like a big I first time and he he's like a big I first time and he he's like a big I don't remember this but he's like a big don't remember this but he's like a big don't remember this but he's like a big athletic guy and he was freaking out athletic guy and he was freaking out athletic guy and he was freaking out getting into terrified right and it's getting into terrified right and it's getting into terrified right and it's just cold water. There's it can't I mean just cold water. There's it can't I mean just cold water. There's it can't I mean it could hurt you if you're in there for it could hurt you if you're in there for it could hurt you if you're in there for however long to get hypothermia, but however long to get hypothermia, but however long to get hypothermia, but it's not going to hurt you. So having it's not going to hurt you. So having it's not going to hurt you. So having practices like that allow us to practices like that allow us to practices like that allow us to move through that level of fear can move through that level of fear can move through that level of fear can translate to fear or distress can translate to fear or distress can translate to fear or distress can translate when it comes in real time translate when it comes in real time translate when it comes in real time for something that we that I know I can for something that we that I know I can for something that we that I know I can walk through this. Yeah. Because walk through this. Yeah. Because walk through this. Yeah. Because adrenaline is ubiquitous in stressful adrenaline is ubiquitous in stressful adrenaline is ubiquitous in stressful circumstances, which is just a bunch of circumstances, which is just a bunch of circumstances, which is just a bunch of science nerd speak for the stress science nerd speak for the stress science nerd speak for the stress response is always an increase in response is always an increase in response is always an increase in autonomic arousal or alertness, a autonomic arousal or alertness, a autonomic arousal or alertness, a shrinking of the visual field, an shrinking of the visual field, an shrinking of the visual field, an increase in heart rate, a tendency to increase in heart rate, a tendency to increase in heart rate, a tendency to move. People will say, "But I freeze." move. People will say, "But I freeze." move. People will say, "But I freeze." Actually, the freezing response, this is Actually, the freezing response, this is Actually, the freezing response, this is kind of interesting. My lab studied kind of interesting. My lab studied kind of interesting. My lab studied this. Lindsay Cle published a paper in this. Lindsay Cle published a paper in this. Lindsay Cle published a paper in Nature about this um in 2018. She was a Nature about this um in 2018. She was a Nature about this um in 2018. She was a graduate student in my lab. The freezing graduate student in my lab. The freezing graduate student in my lab. The freezing response is an active behavior. Oh yeah. response is an active behavior. Oh yeah. response is an active behavior. Oh yeah. Trying to hide from an intruder in Trying to hide from an intruder in Trying to hide from an intruder in your home in the closet, you're trying your home in the closet, you're trying your home in the closet, you're trying not to move. So people think, oh, you not to move. So people think, oh, you not to move. So people think, oh, you know, people freeze under stress. No, know, people freeze under stress. No, know, people freeze under stress. No, the freezing response is an active the freezing response is an active the freezing response is an active response. You know, the adrenaline dump, response. You know, the adrenaline dump, response. You know, the adrenaline dump, as it's sometimes called, is what as it's sometimes called, is what as it's sometimes called, is what essentially creates the freeze response. essentially creates the freeze response. essentially creates the freeze response. It's why people can't remember things It's why people can't remember things It's why people can't remember things when they get up on stage if they have a when they get up on stage if they have a when they get up on stage if they have a fear of public speaking. Um, and I was fear of public speaking. Um, and I was fear of public speaking. Um, and I was going to I forgot to mention in the cold going to I forgot to mention in the cold going to I forgot to mention in the cold plunge, cold water is a highly reliable plunge, cold water is a highly reliable plunge, cold water is a highly reliable way to elicit an adrenaline response. way to elicit an adrenaline response. way to elicit an adrenaline response. It's just a great training for It's just a great training for It's just a great training for this feels uncomfortable. I want to get this feels uncomfortable. I want to get this feels uncomfortable. I want to get out, but I'm going to learn to control out, but I'm going to learn to control out, but I'm going to learn to control my thinking in this uncomfortable my thinking in this uncomfortable my thinking in this uncomfortable circumstance. Yeah. So, that would fit circumstance. Yeah. So, that would fit circumstance. Yeah. So, that would fit into the proactive, right? So that's into the proactive, right? So that's into the proactive, right? So that's something that you can proactively something that you can proactively something that you can proactively start to be able to manage that start to be able to manage that start to be able to manage that adrenaline as you're as you're telling adrenaline as you're as you're telling adrenaline as you're as you're telling me in the body, right? You're we're me in the body, right? You're we're me in the body, right? You're we're able to manage those feelings cuz what able to manage those feelings cuz what able to manage those feelings cuz what does it come down to is a it's a these does it come down to is a it's a these does it come down to is a it's a these sensations in our body that we're sensations in our body that we're sensations in our body that we're experiencing that feel really experiencing that feel really experiencing that feel really uncomfortable and we might be able to uncomfortable and we might be able to uncomfortable and we might be able to sense them a little earlier, right, if sense them a little earlier, right, if sense them a little earlier, right, if we have some training. I just want to we have some training. I just want to we have some training. I just want to throw in one little science tidbit as throw in one little science tidbit as throw in one little science tidbit as long as we're talking about using cold long as we're talking about using cold long as we're talking about using cold as a way to manage um distress tolerance as a way to manage um distress tolerance as a way to manage um distress tolerance is that the first 15 to 20 is that the first 15 to 20 is that the first 15 to 20 seconds after the adrenaline response seconds after the adrenaline response seconds after the adrenaline response hits and it hits very fast your hits and it hits very fast your hits and it hits very fast your forebrain which is involved in all your forebrain which is involved in all your forebrain which is involved in all your contextual decision- making and clean contextual decision- making and clean contextual decision- making and clean clear strategies of what best to do is clear strategies of what best to do is clear strategies of what best to do is essentially shut down for about 20 essentially shut down for about 20 essentially shut down for about 20 seconds. If you can make it 20 seconds, seconds. If you can make it 20 seconds, seconds. If you can make it 20 seconds, you have a far better chance of not you have a far better chance of not you have a far better chance of not doing something really stupid and doing something really stupid and doing something really stupid and doing something that's very adaptive. Right something that's very adaptive. Right something that's very adaptive. Right now, there may be circumstances where now, there may be circumstances where now, there may be circumstances where you don't have 20 seconds. But if under stress and riding out that But if under stress and riding out that But if under stress and riding out that 20 seconds is uh generally going to be a 20 seconds is uh generally going to be a 20 seconds is uh generally going to be a very adaptive approach because then your very adaptive approach because then your very adaptive approach because then your forebrain comes back quote unquote forebrain comes back quote unquote forebrain comes back quote unquote online and you can really start to make online and you can really start to make online and you can really start to make strategic decisions based on those strategic decisions based on those strategic decisions based on those particular circumstances. And so that's particular circumstances. And so that's particular circumstances. And so that's what's happening when we get uh what's happening when we get uh what's happening when we get uh experienced some people say get experienced some people say get experienced some people say get triggered by something that's uh triggered by something that's uh triggered by something that's uh uncomfortable for us, right? uh you uncomfortable for us, right? uh you uncomfortable for us, right? uh you really uh you get a text message really uh you get a text message really uh you get a text message from your boss or your partner that says from your boss or your partner that says from your boss or your partner that says we need to talk later, right? A lot of we need to talk later, right? A lot of we need to talk later, right? A lot of people, I don't know about you, but when people, I don't know about you, but when people, I don't know about you, but when I get we need to talk later, it's not my I get we need to talk later, it's not my I get we need to talk later, it's not my favorite text in the world to get, favorite text in the world to get, favorite text in the world to get, right? So, someone might get that text right? So, someone might get that text right? So, someone might get that text and then they immediately go into like and then they immediately go into like and then they immediately go into like their perception or their beliefs or their perception or their beliefs or their perception or their beliefs or their kind of narrative about what that their kind of narrative about what that their kind of narrative about what that means. I'm going to be rejected. This is means. I'm going to be rejected. This is means. I'm going to be rejected. This is going to be disappointing. It's going to going to be disappointing. It's going to going to be disappointing. It's going to be really hard. And those perceptions or be really hard. And those perceptions or be really hard. And those perceptions or beliefs are coming out of their past. So beliefs are coming out of their past. So beliefs are coming out of their past. So now sitting there looking at a text now sitting there looking at a text now sitting there looking at a text message which is really just a neutral message which is really just a neutral message which is really just a neutral it's all events are neutral. We it's all events are neutral. We it's all events are neutral. We bring the meaning to them and we want to bring the meaning to them and we want to bring the meaning to them and we want to bring meaning to them but it's just bring meaning to them but it's just bring meaning to them but it's just words on a screen and we don't even words on a screen and we don't even words on a screen and we don't even know what it means yet. You're looking know what it means yet. You're looking know what it means yet. You're looking at those and you're not even in the at those and you're not even in the at those and you're not even in the present that more. You're in the past present that more. You're in the past present that more. You're in the past and we're never really out of the and we're never really out of the and we're never really out of the present. People say get present. That's present. People say get present. That's present. People say get present. That's the only place we live. It's what where the only place we live. It's what where the only place we live. It's what where are we oriented? past, present, or are we oriented? past, present, or are we oriented? past, present, or future. Right in this moment, now that future. Right in this moment, now that future. Right in this moment, now that I'm going into this narrative from all I'm going into this narrative from all I'm going into this narrative from all the other times that I was, let's say the other times that I was, let's say the other times that I was, let's say I'm making up that I'm being rejected or I'm making up that I'm being rejected or I'm making up that I'm being rejected or I'm not going to get what I want. Now, I'm not going to get what I want. Now, I'm not going to get what I want. Now, I'm oriented to the past. So, I'm we I'm oriented to the past. So, I'm we I'm oriented to the past. So, I'm we could say I'm disoriented in that moment could say I'm disoriented in that moment could say I'm disoriented in that moment or to the future. You're anticipating or to the future. You're anticipating or to the future. You're anticipating what might be said, what's going to what might be said, what's going to what might be said, what's going to happen. You're out of the moment, but I happen. You're out of the moment, but I happen. You're out of the moment, but I would say would say would say that the anticipation is still something that the anticipation is still something that the anticipation is still something that's coming out of what we've that's coming out of what we've that's coming out of what we've experienced before, right? And then from experienced before, right? And then from experienced before, right? And then from there, we go into an automatic reaction. there, we go into an automatic reaction. there, we go into an automatic reaction. And it's like a fight orflight response. And it's like a fight orflight response. And it's like a fight orflight response. It might not seem like that because we It might not seem like that because we It might not seem like that because we don't we might not be thinking I'm going don't we might not be thinking I'm going don't we might not be thinking I'm going to die from this. But if you know we to die from this. But if you know we to die from this. But if you know we might be thinking I'm not going to be might be thinking I'm not going to be might be thinking I'm not going to be okay. And what is I'm not going to be okay. And what is I'm not going to be okay. And what is I'm not going to be okay? That gets carried out and it's okay? That gets carried out and it's okay? That gets carried out and it's triggered in the body. I would say in triggered in the body. I would say in triggered in the body. I would say in the same way as I'm at threat. I'm at the same way as I'm at threat. I'm at the same way as I'm at threat. I'm at I'm in danger. And this is where we're I'm in danger. And this is where we're I'm in danger. And this is where we're confusing discomfort because even if I confusing discomfort because even if I confusing discomfort because even if I am going to be not going to get the am going to be not going to get the am going to be not going to get the answer I want or I'm going to be answer I want or I'm going to be answer I want or I'm going to be abandoned, it's not abandoned, it's not abandoned, it's not life-threatening. It's not actually life-threatening. It's not actually life-threatening. It's not actually threatening. It's the it's perceived threatening. It's the it's perceived threatening. It's the it's perceived threat, but I respond to that perceived threat, but I respond to that perceived threat, but I respond to that perceived threat as if it's actual threat. And I threat as if it's actual threat. And I threat as if it's actual threat. And I might respond by kind of going after the might respond by kind of going after the might respond by kind of going after the person like I need to know right now, person like I need to know right now, person like I need to know right now, being obsessive about it. I might being obsessive about it. I might being obsessive about it. I might respond by withdrawing completely and respond by withdrawing completely and respond by withdrawing completely and hiding from it. But it and hiding from it. But it and hiding from it. But it creates this cycle of kind of uh an creates this cycle of kind of uh an creates this cycle of kind of uh an automatic reaction to things that automatic reaction to things that automatic reaction to things that doesn't allow me to build tolerance for doesn't allow me to build tolerance for doesn't allow me to build tolerance for that stressor. Right? The the that stressor. Right? The the that stressor. Right? The the solution to that is first be aware that solution to that is first be aware that solution to that is first be aware that that's happening. And once you're that's happening. And once you're that's happening. And once you're aware that happens, and it happens aware that happens, and it happens aware that happens, and it happens to us all the time. Once I recognize to us all the time. Once I recognize to us all the time. Once I recognize that I'm in this cycle below to that I'm in this cycle below to that I'm in this cycle below to find a way to stop to intervene on that find a way to stop to intervene on that find a way to stop to intervene on that to take a break from it. It might be to take a break from it. It might be to take a break from it. It might be just those 20 seconds. It might be uh just those 20 seconds. It might be uh just those 20 seconds. It might be uh something that uh it might be taking a something that uh it might be taking a something that uh it might be taking a few breaths. It might be walking away few breaths. It might be walking away few breaths. It might be walking away from it. Can I interject something from it. Can I interject something from it. Can I interject something there? Because one thing that um stemmed there? Because one thing that um stemmed there? Because one thing that um stemmed out of a prior conversation we had is I out of a prior conversation we had is I out of a prior conversation we had is I think you know these aspirational think you know these aspirational think you know these aspirational um responses of okay like the um responses of okay like the um responses of okay like the stressor hits I'm going to take a I'm stressor hits I'm going to take a I'm stressor hits I'm going to take a I'm going to create the gap between stimulus going to create the gap between stimulus going to create the gap between stimulus and response that you know was it Victor and response that you know was it Victor and response that you know was it Victor Frankle or something like that referred Frankle or something like that referred Frankle or something like that referred to sounds wonderful but in real time to sounds wonderful but in real time to sounds wonderful but in real time everything's very hard everything's very hard everything's very hard everything's different and so uh you know what can we different and so uh you know what can we different and so uh you know what can we do to prepare what are the things I like do to prepare what are the things I like do to prepare what are the things I like this notion of proactive tools that this notion of proactive tools that this notion of proactive tools that we can schedule. Um coal plunge being we can schedule. Um coal plunge being we can schedule. Um coal plunge being one of them. We'll talk about yoga nidra one of them. We'll talk about yoga nidra one of them. We'll talk about yoga nidra and some other things. But um but one of and some other things. But um but one of and some other things. But um but one of the things that I've learned is that the things that I've learned is that the things that I've learned is that there are sensations in the body that there are sensations in the body that there are sensations in the body that come about and it will be different for come about and it will be different for come about and it will be different for different people. But there are different people. But there are different people. But there are sensations in my body that come about sensations in my body that come about sensations in my body that come about very fast because the adrenaline very fast because the adrenaline very fast because the adrenaline response is fast. And the more that I response is fast. And the more that I response is fast. And the more that I pay attention to those, the more I'm pay attention to those, the more I'm pay attention to those, the more I'm able to pick up on them at earlier able to pick up on them at earlier able to pick up on them at earlier stages of the stress response. Kind stages of the stress response. Kind stages of the stress response. Kind of like seeing a big wave coming from of like seeing a big wave coming from of like seeing a big wave coming from further out. And the yogis talked further out. And the yogis talked further out. And the yogis talked about this. I learned about this also about this. I learned about this also about this. I learned about this also from you that like to in meditation, from you that like to in meditation, from you that like to in meditation, we can start to see the quote, it's we can start to see the quote, it's we can start to see the quote, it's mystical language, but that like the mystical language, but that like the mystical language, but that like the subtle ripples of our perception. subtle ripples of our perception. subtle ripples of our perception. Whereas when we're going through life Whereas when we're going through life Whereas when we're going through life and we're just kind of around, it's like and we're just kind of around, it's like and we're just kind of around, it's like being on a train and we're just seeing being on a train and we're just seeing being on a train and we're just seeing stuff go by all the time. The concept is stuff go by all the time. The concept is stuff go by all the time. The concept is stilling leads to seeing. I love is stilling leads to seeing. I love is stilling leads to seeing. I love that. The more that we can still the that. The more that we can still the that. The more that we can still the mind, the easier we can see what's mind, the easier we can see what's mind, the easier we can see what's actually happening versus what we actually happening versus what we actually happening versus what we perceive is perceive is perceive is happening. So what you say is so true happening. So what you say is so true happening. So what you say is so true that it is hard if the first step is to that it is hard if the first step is to that it is hard if the first step is to after we recognize that this is to after we recognize that this is to after we recognize that this is something happening is to stop when something happening is to stop when something happening is to stop when we're in the middle of response. How do we're in the middle of response. How do we're in the middle of response. How do we stop? we stop? we stop? um something that I work with the people um something that I work with the people um something that I work with the people and I actually heard you talk about in a and I actually heard you talk about in a and I actually heard you talk about in a in a different way that I really in a different way that I really in a different way that I really appreciated in uh one of your essentials appreciated in uh one of your essentials appreciated in uh one of your essentials podcast where you know in that moment podcast where you know in that moment podcast where you know in that moment when we're in that reaction you know the when we're in that reaction you know the when we're in that reaction you know the sympathetic nervous system the sympathetic nervous system the sympathetic nervous system has been has been has been activated the solution though is not to activated the solution though is not to activated the solution though is not to deactivate the sympathetic it's to deactivate the sympathetic it's to deactivate the sympathetic it's to activate the activate the activate the parasympathetic. So, our practices and parasympathetic. So, our practices and parasympathetic. So, our practices and tools that I think are the most tools that I think are the most tools that I think are the most beneficial is how do we activate the beneficial is how do we activate the beneficial is how do we activate the parasympathetic? A a great question to ask ourselves once A a great question to ask ourselves once A a great question to ask ourselves once we recognize that we're in some sort of we recognize that we're in some sort of we recognize that we're in some sort of stress response. I like to tell people to ask, response. I like to tell people to ask, response. I like to tell people to ask, is am I or is anybody around me in is am I or is anybody around me in is am I or is anybody around me in immediate physical immediate physical immediate physical danger? And if the answer is no, first danger? And if the answer is no, first danger? And if the answer is no, first off, if I can ask that question, it's off, if I can ask that question, it's off, if I can ask that question, it's probably the answer is no. But most of probably the answer is no. But most of probably the answer is no. But most of the things that we experience every day the things that we experience every day the things that we experience every day are not life-threatening. Actually, are not life-threatening. Actually, are not life-threatening. Actually, probably the thing that we experience probably the thing that we experience probably the thing that we experience every day that's most life-threatening every day that's most life-threatening every day that's most life-threatening that doesn't bother most of us is that doesn't bother most of us is that doesn't bother most of us is driving in a car, right? I mean, we're h driving in a car, right? I mean, we're h driving in a car, right? I mean, we're h hurtling down the road and just trusting hurtling down the road and just trusting hurtling down the road and just trusting that someone's not going to cross over that someone's not going to cross over that someone's not going to cross over that other line. But that won't scare that other line. But that won't scare that other line. But that won't scare us. But, you know, uh getting someone us. But, you know, uh getting someone us. But, you know, uh getting someone that you're in a committed that you're in a committed that you're in a committed relationship with or that you're relationship with or that you're relationship with or that you're emotionally attached to that says emotionally attached to that says emotionally attached to that says something you don't like might throw you something you don't like might throw you something you don't like might throw you into a spiral. I mean, it speaks to into a spiral. I mean, it speaks to into a spiral. I mean, it speaks to the unbelievably powerful aspect of the unbelievably powerful aspect of the unbelievably powerful aspect of human connection. Yeah. I mean, likewise human connection. Yeah. I mean, likewise human connection. Yeah. I mean, likewise with the earlier example of the kid in with the earlier example of the kid in with the earlier example of the kid in video games, we think about this kid and video games, we think about this kid and video games, we think about this kid and the video game as like the only the video game as like the only the video game as like the only players in the interaction. But to take players in the interaction. But to take players in the interaction. But to take a video game away from a kid is to also a video game away from a kid is to also a video game away from a kid is to also remove him from his social context. We remove him from his social context. We remove him from his social context. We know that social isolation is one of the know that social isolation is one of the know that social isolation is one of the most um potent stressors for any most um potent stressors for any most um potent stressors for any mammal, especially humans. I mean, from mammal, especially humans. I mean, from mammal, especially humans. I mean, from what I've read, and you know, tribes what I've read, and you know, tribes what I've read, and you know, tribes would basically shame someone out of it would basically shame someone out of it would basically shame someone out of it if they did something really terrible. if they did something really terrible. if they did something really terrible. You know, they would send them out of You know, they would send them out of You know, they would send them out of the tribe and that was like the tribe and that was like the tribe and that was like death. You know, they only survived death. You know, they only survived death. You know, they only survived together. Now we can live alone because together. Now we can live alone because together. Now we can live alone because of you know technology and human of you know technology and human of you know technology and human advancement but like ser like live advancement but like ser like live advancement but like ser like live physically alone but you know we're not physically alone but you know we're not physically alone but you know we're not at the top of the food chain really you at the top of the food chain really you at the top of the food chain really you know if we were out in the in the jungle know if we were out in the in the jungle know if we were out in the in the jungle or back when we were uh nomadic and we or back when we were uh nomadic and we or back when we were uh nomadic and we still have that within us that we need still have that within us that we need still have that within us that we need that connection. We need that. So we're that connection. We need that. So we're that connection. We need that. So we're talking about distress tolerance. we talking about distress tolerance. we talking about distress tolerance. we have a an emotional weather map tool have a an emotional weather map tool have a an emotional weather map tool that can prepare us. There are things that can prepare us. There are things that can prepare us. There are things that are proactive like cold plunge or that are proactive like cold plunge or that are proactive like cold plunge or meditation um in the moment we meditation um in the moment we meditation um in the moment we can hopefully create more of a gap and can hopefully create more of a gap and can hopefully create more of a gap and of course we were talking about this and of course we were talking about this and of course we were talking about this in the context of addiction but as you in the context of addiction but as you in the context of addiction but as you were saying with the behavior or the were saying with the behavior or the were saying with the behavior or the substance is the medicine against substance is the medicine against substance is the medicine against discomfort. Can you go back to that discomfort. Can you go back to that discomfort. Can you go back to that theme just a little bit to really hammer theme just a little bit to really hammer theme just a little bit to really hammer that home that when somebody comes to that home that when somebody comes to that home that when somebody comes to you initially you're saying okay like you initially you're saying okay like you initially you're saying okay like what are you using how often are you what are you using how often are you what are you using how often are you using how's this impacting your life using how's this impacting your life using how's this impacting your life trying to get them to see all that but trying to get them to see all that but trying to get them to see all that but once they move past that are you trying once they move past that are you trying once they move past that are you trying to get them to see like what they're to get them to see like what they're to get them to see like what they're really afraid of um let me frame this a really afraid of um let me frame this a really afraid of um let me frame this a little differently many years ago you little differently many years ago you little differently many years ago you said it's kind of incredible we're said it's kind of incredible we're said it's kind of incredible we're having an academic discussion and you having an academic discussion and you having an academic discussion and you said it's kind of incredible if we can said it's kind of incredible if we can said it's kind of incredible if we can tolerate discomfort for one second then tolerate discomfort for one second then tolerate discomfort for one second then we can tolerate ate it for 2 seconds. If we can tolerate ate it for 2 seconds. If we can tolerate ate it for 2 seconds. If we can take discomfort for 2 seconds, we can take discomfort for 2 seconds, we can take discomfort for 2 seconds, we can do it for 5 seconds. Once you start can do it for 5 seconds. Once you start can do it for 5 seconds. Once you start to realize that all you have to do is to realize that all you have to do is to realize that all you have to do is experience discomfort as a series of experience discomfort as a series of experience discomfort as a series of moments, suddenly you realize that you moments, suddenly you realize that you moments, suddenly you realize that you have an immense capacity to manage have an immense capacity to manage have an immense capacity to manage discomfort. And I was like, I sat with discomfort. And I was like, I sat with discomfort. And I was like, I sat with that for a long time. Why do you think that for a long time. Why do you think that for a long time. Why do you think it's so hard for us to do that? Even it's so hard for us to do that? Even it's so hard for us to do that? Even though in theory that's exactly how it though in theory that's exactly how it though in theory that's exactly how it works, I think this is where we get works, I think this is where we get works, I think this is where we get hijacked by the part of our nervous hijacked by the part of our nervous hijacked by the part of our nervous system that is kind of binary and system that is kind of binary and system that is kind of binary and looking at it's life or death. You know, looking at it's life or death. You know, looking at it's life or death. You know, if we perceive this as danger, it's if we perceive this as danger, it's if we perceive this as danger, it's going to respond as danger. We don't going to respond as danger. We don't going to respond as danger. We don't want that part of the nervous system and want that part of the nervous system and want that part of the nervous system and we don't want it having discernment. We we don't want it having discernment. We we don't want it having discernment. We want to really when we're actually faced want to really when we're actually faced want to really when we're actually faced with, you know, I say if you and I were with, you know, I say if you and I were with, you know, I say if you and I were walking across the road here and a and a walking across the road here and a and a walking across the road here and a and a car is about to hit us and you see it, I car is about to hit us and you see it, I car is about to hit us and you see it, I don't want you to stop, breathe, don't want you to stop, breathe, don't want you to stop, breathe, meditate, you know, have compassion for meditate, you know, have compassion for meditate, you know, have compassion for the driver. I want you to, you know, the driver. I want you to, you know, the driver. I want you to, you know, react immediately, push me out of the react immediately, push me out of the react immediately, push me out of the way, even if we get hurt and break a way, even if we get hurt and break a way, even if we get hurt and break a leg. I want to we need to live. You leg. I want to we need to live. You leg. I want to we need to live. You know, the problem happens when I, you know, the problem happens when I, you know, the problem happens when I, you know, go home and I say something to my know, go home and I say something to my know, go home and I say something to my wife and she disagrees with me and I wife and she disagrees with me and I wife and she disagrees with me and I react to her like she's a car about to react to her like she's a car about to react to her like she's a car about to hit me. You know, it becomes an hit me. You know, it becomes an hit me. You know, it becomes an appropriate response at an inappropriate appropriate response at an inappropriate appropriate response at an inappropriate time. We don't want to lose that. And so time. We don't want to lose that. And so time. We don't want to lose that. And so it becomes so hard because we're in this it becomes so hard because we're in this it becomes so hard because we're in this kind of I believe this fight in our in kind of I believe this fight in our in kind of I believe this fight in our in our nervous system to say one part of it our nervous system to say one part of it our nervous system to say one part of it saying you need to act or you're not saying you need to act or you're not saying you need to act or you're not going to be okay and the other part going to be okay and the other part going to be okay and the other part saying I don't want to keep doing this. saying I don't want to keep doing this. saying I don't want to keep doing this. In your mind, you know, I know that I'm In your mind, you know, I know that I'm In your mind, you know, I know that I'm in this room or in your lab with virtual in this room or in your lab with virtual in this room or in your lab with virtual reality goggles reality goggles reality goggles on, but that one part of my body thinks on, but that one part of my body thinks on, but that one part of my body thinks I'm falling when really I'm watching a I'm falling when really I'm watching a I'm falling when really I'm watching a video game. video game. video game. So maybe the best we can do is prepare. So maybe the best we can do is prepare. So maybe the best we can do is prepare. These proactive tools seem increasingly These proactive tools seem increasingly These proactive tools seem increasingly important to me. important to me. important to me. Um can we talk about yoga nidra? Um I Um can we talk about yoga nidra? Um I Um can we talk about yoga nidra? Um I talked about non-sleep deep rest a lot talked about non-sleep deep rest a lot talked about non-sleep deep rest a lot on this podcast. Yes. I decided to take on this podcast. Yes. I decided to take on this podcast. Yes. I decided to take yoga nidra which is a thousands of years yoga nidra which is a thousands of years yoga nidra which is a thousands of years old practice and rename it non-sleep old practice and rename it non-sleep old practice and rename it non-sleep deep rest. Um because I wanted more deep rest. Um because I wanted more deep rest. Um because I wanted more people to you for doing that. I mean, I people to you for doing that. I mean, I people to you for doing that. I mean, I I've taken some heat, but I wanted more I've taken some heat, but I wanted more I've taken some heat, but I wanted more people to do it. And I, you know, it's a people to do it. And I, you know, it's a people to do it. And I, you know, it's a zerocost tool that I think is very zerocost tool that I think is very zerocost tool that I think is very valuable. I learned it from you. I came valuable. I learned it from you. I came valuable. I learned it from you. I came I you know, I went out to uh where you I you know, I went out to uh where you I you know, I went out to uh where you work and observed that this is the first work and observed that this is the first work and observed that this is the first thing that people do every morning when thing that people do every morning when thing that people do every morning when trying to get sober. This is the first trying to get sober. This is the first trying to get sober. This is the first thing that people do every that you have thing that people do every that you have thing that people do every that you have them do every morning when they're them do every morning when they're them do every morning when they're trying to identify and overcome their trying to identify and overcome their trying to identify and overcome their traumas, including full-blown PTSD. And traumas, including full-blown PTSD. And traumas, including full-blown PTSD. And I don't want to share some of the I don't want to share some of the I don't want to share some of the stories that people shared out there, stories that people shared out there, stories that people shared out there, but a couple of them were very intense. but a couple of them were very intense. but a couple of them were very intense. I mean, when I'm talking about PTSD, I'm I mean, when I'm talking about PTSD, I'm I mean, when I'm talking about PTSD, I'm not talking about like had a bad not talking about like had a bad not talking about like had a bad semester in school. I'm talking about semester in school. I'm talking about semester in school. I'm talking about people who were co-sleeping with their people who were co-sleeping with their people who were co-sleeping with their kid and the kid died. Yeah. And it was kid and the kid died. Yeah. And it was kid and the kid died. Yeah. And it was like it was a very intense thing to like it was a very intense thing to like it was a very intense thing to hear those stories. And it was also a hear those stories. And it was also a hear those stories. And it was also a beautiful thing to see people's beautiful thing to see people's beautiful thing to see people's transition through their traumas in some transition through their traumas in some transition through their traumas in some cases their addictions or both. And cases their addictions or both. And cases their addictions or both. And every day started with an hour of Nidra. every day started with an hour of Nidra. every day started with an hour of Nidra. What is it about Nidra? How did you What is it about Nidra? How did you What is it about Nidra? How did you discover Nidra? And how did this come discover Nidra? And how did this come discover Nidra? And how did this come about? Because I think it's an about? Because I think it's an about? Because I think it's an extremely important tool for a extremely important tool for a extremely important tool for a number of reasons, but how did you start number of reasons, but how did you start number of reasons, but how did you start incorporating this into trauma and incorporating this into trauma and incorporating this into trauma and addiction treatment? I was working at a addiction treatment? I was working at a addiction treatment? I was working at a place in um central Florida and near place in um central Florida and near place in um central Florida and near there it was a treatment center and not there it was a treatment center and not there it was a treatment center and not far from there happened to be a far from there happened to be a far from there happened to be a an ashram um started by a old Indian guy an ashram um started by a old Indian guy an ashram um started by a old Indian guy who had come over from India in the ' who had come over from India in the ' who had come over from India in the ' 50s or 60s he's in his 90s now and is 50s or 60s he's in his 90s now and is 50s or 60s he's in his 90s now and is kind of credited as one of the people to kind of credited as one of the people to kind of credited as one of the people to bring uh yoga to the west one of bring uh yoga to the west one of bring uh yoga to the west one of many um uh it was the Om yoga institute many um uh it was the Om yoga institute many um uh it was the Om yoga institute and uh they um uh they were running some and uh they um uh they were running some and uh they um uh they were running some workshops and I ended up doing a workshops and I ended up doing a workshops and I ended up doing a training there that opened a door for me training there that opened a door for me training there that opened a door for me to start doing some other things. I I'd to start doing some other things. I I'd to start doing some other things. I I'd been practicing breath work and this was been practicing breath work and this was been practicing breath work and this was all part of my own journey and then I all part of my own journey and then I all part of my own journey and then I got introduced to yoga nidra and um got introduced to yoga nidra and um got introduced to yoga nidra and um it was just a very powerful tool and in it was just a very powerful tool and in it was just a very powerful tool and in these workshops that I was in I saw some these workshops that I was in I saw some these workshops that I was in I saw some pretty amazing things happen for the pretty amazing things happen for the pretty amazing things happen for the people that were taking trainings. We people that were taking trainings. We people that were taking trainings. We were there um you know for I remember we were there um you know for I remember we were there um you know for I remember we were we were there for uh it was a were we were there for uh it was a were we were there for uh it was a 10-day training and you could take it as 10-day training and you could take it as 10-day training and you could take it as 10 days or you could take 5 days and 10 days or you could take 5 days and 10 days or you could take 5 days and then come back for 5 days and there was then come back for 5 days and there was then come back for 5 days and there was a woman who had been there for a 5day a woman who had been there for a 5day a woman who had been there for a 5day and was coming back and when she was and was coming back and when she was and was coming back and when she was there at the first part she had she was there at the first part she had she was there at the first part she had she was a single mom she had two boys I they a single mom she had two boys I they a single mom she had two boys I they were probably under 12 and she was were probably under 12 and she was were probably under 12 and she was completely stressed by them like completely stressed by them like completely stressed by them like completely stressed. She was uh could completely stressed. She was uh could completely stressed. She was uh could not almost handle being a mom and she not almost handle being a mom and she not almost handle being a mom and she practiced this. She decided to come to practiced this. She decided to come to practiced this. She decided to come to this training and then she went home and this training and then she went home and this training and then she went home and it was several months in between and it was several months in between and it was several months in between and when she came back I remember in the when she came back I remember in the when she came back I remember in the opening like group she shared that she'd opening like group she shared that she'd opening like group she shared that she'd gone home and had not changed anything. gone home and had not changed anything. gone home and had not changed anything. The only thing she did was practice yoga The only thing she did was practice yoga The only thing she did was practice yoga nidra uh I think twice a day in the nidra uh I think twice a day in the nidra uh I think twice a day in the morning and the evening and she's like morning and the evening and she's like morning and the evening and she's like my boys my boys my boys changed and I actually don't think the changed and I actually don't think the changed and I actually don't think the boys probably changed at all but she was boys probably changed at all but she was boys probably changed at all but she was someone who was filled with anxiety and someone who was filled with anxiety and someone who was filled with anxiety and stress and the kids were picking up and stress and the kids were picking up and stress and the kids were picking up on that and she wasn't able to tolerate on that and she wasn't able to tolerate on that and she wasn't able to tolerate the discomfort or distress of her the discomfort or distress of her the discomfort or distress of her children or boys just being boys. I children or boys just being boys. I children or boys just being boys. I don't even think they were really don't even think they were really don't even think they were really probably behaving more than you know an probably behaving more than you know an probably behaving more than you know an 8 and 10year-old does differently but 8 and 10year-old does differently but 8 and 10year-old does differently but she couldn't handle it and now she was she couldn't handle it and now she was she couldn't handle it and now she was able to kind of build this uh distress able to kind of build this uh distress able to kind of build this uh distress tolerance by practicing this tolerance by practicing this tolerance by practicing this meditation you know and nidra means meditation you know and nidra means meditation you know and nidra means sleep. So it's a sleep-based meditation. sleep. So it's a sleep-based meditation. sleep. So it's a sleep-based meditation. Yeah. Do you want to just briefly Yeah. Do you want to just briefly Yeah. Do you want to just briefly describe what it looks like? Generally describe what it looks like? Generally describe what it looks like? Generally what it looks like is first a person what it looks like is first a person what it looks like is first a person lays down and ideally they'd be laying lays down and ideally they'd be laying lays down and ideally they'd be laying on their back unless they can't lay on their back unless they can't lay on their back unless they can't lay on their back but you lay on your on their back but you lay on your on their back but you lay on your back and get in a very comfortable back and get in a very comfortable back and get in a very comfortable position. the it's a guided practice and position. the it's a guided practice and position. the it's a guided practice and one of the reasons it's guided is one of the reasons it's guided is one of the reasons it's guided is uh it it's kind of becomes a uh it it's kind of becomes a uh it it's kind of becomes a technique that disappears the technique that disappears the technique that disappears the technique and what I mean by that is if you're and what I mean by that is if you're and what I mean by that is if you're sitting doing meditation and you're sitting doing meditation and you're sitting doing meditation and you're doing something where you have to focus doing something where you have to focus doing something where you have to focus on a mantra or which on a mantra or which on a mantra or which is not this is not an uh exclusion of is not this is not an uh exclusion of is not this is not an uh exclusion of that I mean people so but when you're that I mean people so but when you're that I mean people so but when you're doing that you kind of have to focus on doing that you kind of have to focus on doing that you kind of have to focus on that mantra so sometimes having to focus that mantra so sometimes having to focus that mantra so sometimes having to focus on something can bring you out of it on something can bring you out of it on something can bring you out of it and in those practices, bringing you out and in those practices, bringing you out and in those practices, bringing you out of it is beneficial, too, because you of it is beneficial, too, because you of it is beneficial, too, because you want to be brought out of it and then want to be brought out of it and then want to be brought out of it and then you can find ways to get back into it. you can find ways to get back into it. you can find ways to get back into it. It being the meditative It being the meditative It being the meditative experience. So, you're experience. So, you're experience. So, you're laying down and there's generally um a laying down and there's generally um a laying down and there's generally um a series of kind of I'll say physical series of kind of I'll say physical series of kind of I'll say physical movements. It's not like yoga doing movements. It's not like yoga doing movements. It's not like yoga doing stretching. It might be something like stretching. It might be something like stretching. It might be something like tensing and relaxing your muscles. It tensing and relaxing your muscles. It tensing and relaxing your muscles. It might be something like massaging your might be something like massaging your might be something like massaging your face as you're being guided through this face as you're being guided through this face as you're being guided through this to kind of just relax the body. And to kind of just relax the body. And to kind of just relax the body. And after a certain point and in a lot of after a certain point and in a lot of after a certain point and in a lot of the teachings that when I do it or the teachings that when I do it or the teachings that when I do it or I've been taught there's a certain point I've been taught there's a certain point I've been taught there's a certain point at which all movement stops and you just at which all movement stops and you just at which all movement stops and you just want to follow the you just you're just want to follow the you just you're just want to follow the you just you're just instructed to follow the instructed to follow the instructed to follow the person's voice. In yoga nidra we or person's voice. In yoga nidra we or person's voice. In yoga nidra we or nidra we set an intention like an nidra we set an intention like an nidra we set an intention like an intention might be like I'm at peace intention might be like I'm at peace intention might be like I'm at peace with myself as I am and the world as it with myself as I am and the world as it with myself as I am and the world as it is. something like that something that is. something like that something that is. something like that something that you want to bring in or a state that you want to bring in or a state that you want to bring in or a state that you want to experience. I know that you want to experience. I know that you want to experience. I know that you distinguish I believe you distinguish I believe you distinguish I believe you distinguish non-sleep deep breaths as like yoga non-sleep deep breaths as like yoga non-sleep deep breaths as like yoga nidra without intention generally nidra without intention generally nidra without intention generally without intentions or mystical language. without intentions or mystical language. without intentions or mystical language. Right. It involves the um the I think Right. It involves the um the I think Right. It involves the um the I think the most critical part of non-sleep deep the most critical part of non-sleep deep the most critical part of non-sleep deep rest and yoga nidra that to me the rest and yoga nidra that to me the rest and yoga nidra that to me the overlap in the ven diagram is includes overlap in the ven diagram is includes overlap in the ven diagram is includes um self-directed relaxation the ability um self-directed relaxation the ability um self-directed relaxation the ability to do that which of course the to do that which of course the to do that which of course the incorporation of long exhale breathing incorporation of long exhale breathing incorporation of long exhale breathing will facilitate that because it pushes will facilitate that because it pushes will facilitate that because it pushes down on that uh side of the seessaw that down on that uh side of the seessaw that down on that uh side of the seessaw that is the parasympathetic nervous system is the parasympathetic nervous system is the parasympathetic nervous system and really gets it engaged regardless of and really gets it engaged regardless of and really gets it engaged regardless of how stressed you are as you pointed out how stressed you are as you pointed out how stressed you are as you pointed out getting that parasympathetic nervous getting that parasympathetic nervous getting that parasympathetic nervous system that system that system that um the idea that people's mind can be um the idea that people's mind can be um the idea that people's mind can be active but their body is still I think active but their body is still I think active but their body is still I think is a very powerful state. You're not is a very powerful state. You're not is a very powerful state. You're not trying to fall asleep. So the end goal trying to fall asleep. So the end goal trying to fall asleep. So the end goal is in reach for everyone. Yep. It isn't is in reach for everyone. Yep. It isn't is in reach for everyone. Yep. It isn't like you're going to fall asleep. It's like you're going to fall asleep. It's like you're going to fall asleep. It's like actually you're going to not fall like actually you're going to not fall like actually you're going to not fall asleep. If you fall asleep it's okay. asleep. If you fall asleep it's okay. asleep. If you fall asleep it's okay. And actually sometimes people think And actually sometimes people think And actually sometimes people think they're asleep but when I'm guiding them they're asleep but when I'm guiding them they're asleep but when I'm guiding them and I'll give a direction like you and I'll give a direction like you and I'll give a direction like you know to roll over on their right on know to roll over on their right on know to roll over on their right on their side at the end and they do it but their side at the end and they do it but their side at the end and they do it but they thought they were asleep. So they thought they were asleep. So they thought they were asleep. So they were where they what we believe is were where they what we believe is were where they what we believe is happening in that is they're in the happening in that is they're in the happening in that is they're in the brain states of sleep while still the brain states of sleep while still the brain states of sleep while still being awake once they're in that relaxed being awake once they're in that relaxed being awake once they're in that relaxed space after doing some movement in the space after doing some movement in the space after doing some movement in the beginning or the space to be relaxed and beginning or the space to be relaxed and beginning or the space to be relaxed and still I should say still versus relaxed still I should say still versus relaxed still I should say still versus relaxed still physically um is through breath still physically um is through breath still physically um is through breath different breath exercises specifically different breath exercises specifically different breath exercises specifically ones that have long exhales right that's ones that have long exhales right that's ones that have long exhales right that's like you said it activates the like you said it activates the like you said it activates the parasympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system and guiding them through their body in some guiding them through their body in some guiding them through their body in some way. So it might be there's one called way. So it might be there's one called way. So it might be there's one called 61 points where you identify all these 61 points where you identify all these 61 points where you identify all these different points in the body starting different points in the body starting different points in the body starting with the forehead down to the pit of with the forehead down to the pit of with the forehead down to the pit of the throat and then at all different the throat and then at all different the throat and then at all different parts from your shoulder down to your parts from your shoulder down to your parts from your shoulder down to your fingers and then all the way down to fingers and then all the way down to fingers and then all the way down to your toes. And people being able to kind your toes. And people being able to kind your toes. And people being able to kind of move their awareness in their body of move their awareness in their body of move their awareness in their body kind of gets them away from that kind of gets them away from that kind of gets them away from that thinking and doing into the more feeling thinking and doing into the more feeling thinking and doing into the more feeling and being. They're putting their and being. They're putting their and being. They're putting their awareness on their body rather than awareness on their body rather than awareness on their body rather than everything external. One of the great strengths of external. One of the great strengths of external. One of the great strengths of doing nidra or NSDR as it were is doing nidra or NSDR as it were is doing nidra or NSDR as it were is that we take ourselves out of the that we take ourselves out of the that we take ourselves out of the prediction mode and we can experience prediction mode and we can experience prediction mode and we can experience life unfold in real time moments. It life unfold in real time moments. It life unfold in real time moments. It sounds so mystical but actually it was sounds so mystical but actually it was sounds so mystical but actually it was Josh Weightskin who was on this podcast Josh Weightskin who was on this podcast Josh Weightskin who was on this podcast the former chess prodigy um martial the former chess prodigy um martial the former chess prodigy um martial arts champion etc. on the Joe Rogan arts champion etc. on the Joe Rogan arts champion etc. on the Joe Rogan podcast he said something that I wanted podcast he said something that I wanted podcast he said something that I wanted to share with you which felt appropriate to share with you which felt appropriate to share with you which felt appropriate now which was he said there are two ways now which was he said there are two ways now which was he said there are two ways to go through life. One is to go through life. One is to go through life. One is metaphorically speaking as a passenger metaphorically speaking as a passenger metaphorically speaking as a passenger in the dining car on a train that's in the dining car on a train that's in the dining car on a train that's going 80 miles hour and you're going 80 miles hour and you're going 80 miles hour and you're experiencing what's in that train and experiencing what's in that train and experiencing what's in that train and you're seeing things go by. That's the you're seeing things go by. That's the you're seeing things go by. That's the non-concious lower way to experience non-concious lower way to experience non-concious lower way to experience life. Lesser way to experience life. Lesser way to experience life. Lesser way to experience life. Where you want to be is strapped to the Where you want to be is strapped to the Where you want to be is strapped to the front of that train safely experiencing front of that train safely experiencing front of that train safely experiencing space and time as they're happening, space and time as they're happening, space and time as they're happening, flowing by you and through flowing by you and through flowing by you and through you as a series of moments. And I really you as a series of moments. And I really you as a series of moments. And I really think I credit Nidra and NSDR with an think I credit Nidra and NSDR with an think I credit Nidra and NSDR with an ability to see life unfold as an ability to see life unfold as an ability to see life unfold as an observer and still have the ability to observer and still have the ability to observer and still have the ability to participate. So you're not like participate. So you're not like participate. So you're not like dissociated. You're not stepped back. dissociated. You're not stepped back. dissociated. You're not stepped back. You're not ahead of yourself. You're not ahead of yourself. You're not ahead of yourself. You're like right where you need to be, right? like right where you need to be, right? like right where you need to be, right? Does that capture it? I believe so. I Does that capture it? I believe so. I Does that capture it? I believe so. I might take that the train example a might take that the train example a might take that the train example a little bit different direction where I little bit different direction where I little bit different direction where I always will say it's like you know always will say it's like you know always will say it's like you know you're either on the back of the bus and you're either on the back of the bus and you're either on the back of the bus and you're being driven around or you're being driven around or you're being driven around or you're driving the bus. You know, it's not that driving the bus. You know, it's not that driving the bus. You know, it's not that you're just on, and he may not have been you're just on, and he may not have been you're just on, and he may not have been saying this, but just not on these rails saying this, but just not on these rails saying this, but just not on these rails experiencing it like this, that you have experiencing it like this, that you have experiencing it like this, that you have uh control, autonomy, and have the uh control, autonomy, and have the uh control, autonomy, and have the ability to be authentic. And authentic ability to be authentic. And authentic ability to be authentic. And authentic in a way, not authenticity gets kind of in a way, not authenticity gets kind of in a way, not authenticity gets kind of thrown around and people like, I just I thrown around and people like, I just I thrown around and people like, I just I just am who I am. Well, most times when just am who I am. Well, most times when just am who I am. Well, most times when people are doing that, they're just people are doing that, they're just people are doing that, they're just acting however they're feeling in the acting however they're feeling in the acting however they're feeling in the moment. They're not who they are. moment. They're not who they are. moment. They're not who they are. They're who they were or they're, you They're who they were or they're, you They're who they were or they're, you know, they're acting out their know, they're acting out their know, they're acting out their past experiences. Authenticity in the past experiences. Authenticity in the past experiences. Authenticity in the way that I'm talking is more like uh way that I'm talking is more like uh way that I'm talking is more like uh like off is the same in author, right? like off is the same in author, right? like off is the same in author, right? It's like authorship that you become the It's like authorship that you become the It's like authorship that you become the author of your life. You know that author of your life. You know that author of your life. You know that you're able to write the story going you're able to write the story going you're able to write the story going forward because a lot of what we're forward because a lot of what we're forward because a lot of what we're doing before that is just plagiarizing doing before that is just plagiarizing doing before that is just plagiarizing from our past, stuck in the cycles of from our past, stuck in the cycles of from our past, stuck in the cycles of our uh kind of programmed reactive our uh kind of programmed reactive our uh kind of programmed reactive patterns that came out of the ways that patterns that came out of the ways that patterns that came out of the ways that we were shaped. and things like nidra we were shaped. and things like nidra we were shaped. and things like nidra where we can start to activate the where we can start to activate the where we can start to activate the parasympathetic nervous system again parasympathetic nervous system again parasympathetic nervous system again distinct from deactivating the distinct from deactivating the distinct from deactivating the sympathetic and be able to pause and be sympathetic and be able to pause and be sympathetic and be able to pause and be able to look at kind of choice you know able to look at kind of choice you know able to look at kind of choice you know in that cycle I was talking about in that cycle I was talking about in that cycle I was talking about earlier where we're being reactive the earlier where we're being reactive the earlier where we're being reactive the first thing is to stop well how do we first thing is to stop well how do we first thing is to stop well how do we stop it's by building these stop it's by building these stop it's by building these abilities to have this distress abilities to have this distress abilities to have this distress tolerance even if it's for a few seconds tolerance even if it's for a few seconds tolerance even if it's for a few seconds and take a moment to be able to get and take a moment to be able to get and take a moment to be able to get present And look, and what I mean by present And look, and what I mean by present And look, and what I mean by that is get look at what's actually that is get look at what's actually that is get look at what's actually happening. This isn't every time someone happening. This isn't every time someone happening. This isn't every time someone sent me a text message and uh or every sent me a text message and uh or every sent me a text message and uh or every time someone's ever abandoned me or time someone's ever abandoned me or time someone's ever abandoned me or disappointed me or every time I've been disappointed me or every time I've been disappointed me or every time I've been afraid. It's just this one moment where afraid. It's just this one moment where afraid. It's just this one moment where I get a text that says we need to talk I get a text that says we need to talk I get a text that says we need to talk later. And from that now that can break later. And from that now that can break later. And from that now that can break the cycle enough that I instead of the cycle enough that I instead of the cycle enough that I instead of automatic reaction, I'm in choice and automatic reaction, I'm in choice and automatic reaction, I'm in choice and I'm making a choice out of kind of all I'm making a choice out of kind of all I'm making a choice out of kind of all options of how I'm going to handle this. options of how I'm going to handle this. options of how I'm going to handle this. Now, it might still mean that I go, Now, it might still mean that I go, Now, it might still mean that I go, "Could we talk about it now?" in a text "Could we talk about it now?" in a text "Could we talk about it now?" in a text response, but that would be very response, but that would be very response, but that would be very distinct from kind of sending 20 text distinct from kind of sending 20 text distinct from kind of sending 20 text messages in rapid ree succession saying, messages in rapid ree succession saying, messages in rapid ree succession saying, "What do you need? Why are you doing "What do you need? Why are you doing "What do you need? Why are you doing this? Am I in trouble?" You know, this? Am I in trouble?" You know, this? Am I in trouble?" You know, whatever it is we're saying, but you've whatever it is we're saying, but you've whatever it is we're saying, but you've been able to move to the front of been able to move to the front of been able to move to the front of the bus and now you're driving it, the bus and now you're driving it, the bus and now you're driving it, right? you're moving kind of out of um right? you're moving kind of out of um right? you're moving kind of out of um uh you're being at instead of being at uh you're being at instead of being at uh you're being at instead of being at the effect of life, you're being at the effect of life, you're being at the effect of life, you're being at cause. I feel like most people learn how cause. I feel like most people learn how cause. I feel like most people learn how to control their body, but most people to control their body, but most people to control their body, but most people don't know how to control their mind. don't know how to control their mind. don't know how to control their mind. Meaning they don't know how to control Meaning they don't know how to control Meaning they don't know how to control their thinking. Yeah. And there's a their thinking. Yeah. And there's a their thinking. Yeah. And there's a great line in a Indian text. It's called great line in a Indian text. It's called great line in a Indian text. It's called the uh atmaagita I think it is where it the uh atmaagita I think it is where it the uh atmaagita I think it is where it says something like the end of says something like the end of says something like the end of the is it's like man thinks his enemy the is it's like man thinks his enemy the is it's like man thinks his enemy is out there but really his unc the is out there but really his unc the is out there but really his unc the man's uncontrolled mind is his only true man's uncontrolled mind is his only true man's uncontrolled mind is his only true foe. I don't know if we need to garner foe. I don't know if we need to garner foe. I don't know if we need to garner complete control over the mind. I think complete control over the mind. I think complete control over the mind. I think the way to do that is to be able to kind the way to do that is to be able to kind the way to do that is to be able to kind of find ways to relax back from what the of find ways to relax back from what the of find ways to relax back from what the mind is doing and saying and the you mind is doing and saying and the you mind is doing and saying and the you know like you said ignoring the thoughts know like you said ignoring the thoughts know like you said ignoring the thoughts between two and five. You know I think between two and five. You know I think between two and five. You know I think there's a lot of thoughts that we have there's a lot of thoughts that we have there's a lot of thoughts that we have that we can ignore. you know, our that we can ignore. you know, our that we can ignore. you know, our thoughts are not fact. It's this input thoughts are not fact. It's this input thoughts are not fact. It's this input or that I'm getting. And we tend to grab or that I'm getting. And we tend to grab or that I'm getting. And we tend to grab on to the thoughts that I think that on to the thoughts that I think that on to the thoughts that I think that we've had before that have helped us we've had before that have helped us we've had before that have helped us survive situations even if the way that survive situations even if the way that survive situations even if the way that we've survived those situations is to we've survived those situations is to we've survived those situations is to cause destruction. You know, we know how cause destruction. You know, we know how cause destruction. You know, we know how to live. You know, example would be to live. You know, example would be to live. You know, example would be someone who's in an abusive relationship someone who's in an abusive relationship someone who's in an abusive relationship again and again, right? That person, again and again, right? That person, again and again, right? That person, I've never met that person uh that said, I've never met that person uh that said, I've never met that person uh that said, "I can't wait to get in the next "I can't wait to get in the next "I can't wait to get in the next relationship." ship. So, it's abusive. relationship." ship. So, it's abusive. relationship." ship. So, it's abusive. You know, it could be a man or a woman. You know, it could be a man or a woman. You know, it could be a man or a woman. In this case, let's say it's a woman. In this case, let's say it's a woman. In this case, let's say it's a woman. You know, maybe the only men that she You know, maybe the only men that she You know, maybe the only men that she was around growing up were controlling was around growing up were controlling was around growing up were controlling or abusive. And she had some experiences or abusive. And she had some experiences or abusive. And she had some experiences with men who were very similar. And then with men who were very similar. And then with men who were very similar. And then that's the environment or the waters that's the environment or the waters that's the environment or the waters that she started to swim in. She knows that she started to swim in. She knows that she started to swim in. She knows how to survive that kind of man or if how to survive that kind of man or if how to survive that kind of man or if you're a man, that kind of woman. And you're a man, that kind of woman. And you're a man, that kind of woman. And when they would find even if they when they would find even if they when they would find even if they want that relationship that's loving, want that relationship that's loving, want that relationship that's loving, caring, kind, and patient, no conflict caring, kind, and patient, no conflict caring, kind, and patient, no conflict or not that type of conflict. Even or not that type of conflict. Even or not that type of conflict. Even though they want that, when they get though they want that, when they get though they want that, when they get into it, it doesn't make sense because into it, it doesn't make sense because into it, it doesn't make sense because they've never done it before. They're they've never done it before. They're they've never done it before. They're still going to be potentially relating still going to be potentially relating still going to be potentially relating to that person with these past reactive to that person with these past reactive to that person with these past reactive patterns. You know, I always say this patterns. You know, I always say this patterns. You know, I always say this when my wife and I have, you know, if when my wife and I have, you know, if when my wife and I have, you know, if you're in a relation, I we have a great you're in a relation, I we have a great you're in a relation, I we have a great marriage and great marriage also marriage and great marriage also marriage and great marriage also includes disagreement and argument, includes disagreement and argument, includes disagreement and argument, right? It also includes love and right? It also includes love and right? It also includes love and connection and all of that stuff. And connection and all of that stuff. And connection and all of that stuff. And when we're in an argument, it's almost when we're in an argument, it's almost when we're in an argument, it's almost like I'm not talking to her and she's like I'm not talking to her and she's like I'm not talking to her and she's not talking to me. It's like my past is not talking to me. It's like my past is not talking to me. It's like my past is talking to her past and her past is talking to her past and her past is talking to her past and her past is talking to my past. When we can stop and talking to my past. When we can stop and talking to my past. When we can stop and get out of that cycle for just a moment, get out of that cycle for just a moment, get out of that cycle for just a moment, then we can make a choice that will move then we can make a choice that will move then we can make a choice that will move us toward the direction that we want to us toward the direction that we want to us toward the direction that we want to move. And that choice can seem move. And that choice can seem move. And that choice can seem risky because if we haven't done it risky because if we haven't done it risky because if we haven't done it before, it goes against every or before, it goes against every or before, it goes against every or let's say that choice might go let's say that choice might go let's say that choice might go against everything that we've developed against everything that we've developed against everything that we've developed in order to survive the situations that in order to survive the situations that in order to survive the situations that we've come out of. So now instead of we've come out of. So now instead of we've come out of. So now instead of arguing I'm going to be arguing I'm going to be arguing I'm going to be vulnerable, that's going to feel very vulnerable, that's going to feel very vulnerable, that's going to feel very scary. Yeah, Lori Gotautlib, a scary. Yeah, Lori Gotautlib, a scary. Yeah, Lori Gotautlib, a psychologist, was on this podcast and psychologist, was on this podcast and psychologist, was on this podcast and saying, and I totally subscribe to this, saying, and I totally subscribe to this, saying, and I totally subscribe to this, that people are more willing to stay in that people are more willing to stay in that people are more willing to stay in a bad situation often. Um, something a bad situation often. Um, something a bad situation often. Um, something that's not adaptive for them because that's not adaptive for them because that's not adaptive for them because it's familiar versus stepping into it's familiar versus stepping into it's familiar versus stepping into something that could be better for them. something that could be better for them. something that could be better for them. Yeah. Clearly better for them. And they Yeah. Clearly better for them. And they Yeah. Clearly better for them. And they can understand that cognitively, but can understand that cognitively, but can understand that cognitively, but they somehow cling to what's familiar. they somehow cling to what's familiar. they somehow cling to what's familiar. They I think that's just the way our They I think that's just the way our They I think that's just the way our nervous system is wired. Like you said, nervous system is wired. Like you said, nervous system is wired. Like you said, you know, staying in the battles, you know, staying in the battles, you know, staying in the battles, repeating the battles that are familiar repeating the battles that are familiar repeating the battles that are familiar to us that we know how to win. We just to us that we know how to win. We just to us that we know how to win. We just instead of authoring something new, instead of authoring something new, instead of authoring something new, we're plagiarizing from our past just we're plagiarizing from our past just we're plagiarizing from our past just again and again. Yeah, I love that again and again. Yeah, I love that again and again. Yeah, I love that phrase plagiarizing from the past even phrase plagiarizing from the past even phrase plagiarizing from the past even though it's something to avoid. How though it's something to avoid. How though it's something to avoid. How often should people do nidra at or where often should people do nidra at or where often should people do nidra at or where NSDR and at when what time of day? Um I NSDR and at when what time of day? Um I NSDR and at when what time of day? Um I think I think I've told you this before, think I think I've told you this before, think I think I've told you this before, right? The first probably the best time right? The first probably the best time right? The first probably the best time is to do something in the morning and in is to do something in the morning and in is to do something in the morning and in the late afternoon. Uh second best time the late afternoon. Uh second best time the late afternoon. Uh second best time would be in the evening and third best would be in the evening and third best would be in the evening and third best time would be anytime you can. So it time would be anytime you can. So it time would be anytime you can. So it it's not easy, you know, it could be it's not easy, you know, it could be it's not easy, you know, it could be anywhere from 20 to 35 minutes, right? anywhere from 20 to 35 minutes, right? anywhere from 20 to 35 minutes, right? So it's not easy for people to find that So it's not easy for people to find that So it's not easy for people to find that based on uh find that time based on the based on uh find that time based on the based on uh find that time based on the schedules they have, but you know, set a schedules they have, but you know, set a schedules they have, but you know, set a set a time that you're going to do it. set a time that you're going to do it. set a time that you're going to do it. You know, when we schedule and have You know, when we schedule and have You know, when we schedule and have proactive tools, we don't know if we're proactive tools, we don't know if we're proactive tools, we don't know if we're going to need them in that moment. What going to need them in that moment. What going to need them in that moment. What it means is regardless of whether I need it means is regardless of whether I need it means is regardless of whether I need it or not, I'm going to do it. You know, it or not, I'm going to do it. You know, it or not, I'm going to do it. You know, it's kind of like I tell people with it's kind of like I tell people with it's kind of like I tell people with therapy all in about therapy and therapy all in about therapy and therapy all in about therapy and coaching all the time. Uh if the second coaching all the time. Uh if the second coaching all the time. Uh if the second best time to get therapy is when you're best time to get therapy is when you're best time to get therapy is when you're in crisis. The best time is when you're in crisis. The best time is when you're in crisis. The best time is when you're not. That's when you can we can grow. So not. That's when you can we can grow. So not. That's when you can we can grow. So scheduling proactively will allow us to scheduling proactively will allow us to scheduling proactively will allow us to either um maybe solve a crisis that we're in or um maybe solve a crisis that we're in or um maybe solve a crisis that we're in or help us have the tolerance in that help us have the tolerance in that help us have the tolerance in that moment. like I wake up stressed and I'm moment. like I wake up stressed and I'm moment. like I wake up stressed and I'm able to then do this practice and able to then do this practice and able to then do this practice and then I'm not stressed or I wake up not then I'm not stressed or I wake up not then I'm not stressed or I wake up not stressed and I'm able to do this and it stressed and I'm able to do this and it stressed and I'm able to do this and it helps to build the ability for me to helps to build the ability for me to helps to build the ability for me to kind of drop back into that state kind of drop back into that state kind of drop back into that state because that's what I think as we because that's what I think as we because that's what I think as we practice things like yoga nidra um we're practice things like yoga nidra um we're practice things like yoga nidra um we're able to more quickly move from a able to more quickly move from a able to more quickly move from a disregulated state to a regulated state. disregulated state to a regulated state. disregulated state to a regulated state. I don't know if you've had that I don't know if you've had that I don't know if you've had that experience. Definitely. I think of um experience. Definitely. I think of um experience. Definitely. I think of um stress and alertness and calm, all of it stress and alertness and calm, all of it stress and alertness and calm, all of it as the autonomic nervous system, right? as the autonomic nervous system, right? as the autonomic nervous system, right? Parasympathetic being calm, calmer Parasympathetic being calm, calmer Parasympathetic being calm, calmer states, sympathetic being more activated states, sympathetic being more activated states, sympathetic being more activated states. Um and I think of it like a states. Um and I think of it like a states. Um and I think of it like a seessaw. And I think, you know, when seessaw. And I think, you know, when seessaw. And I think, you know, when we're asleep, we're mostly we're asleep, we're mostly we're asleep, we're mostly parasympathetic. When we're very parasympathetic. When we're very parasympathetic. When we're very stressed, we're mostly symp. So, stressed, we're mostly symp. So, stressed, we're mostly symp. So, it's the balance. And but the way I it's the balance. And but the way I it's the balance. And but the way I think about things like think about things like think about things like nidra is as a person on that seessaw nidra is as a person on that seessaw nidra is as a person on that seessaw you're you are that person and you're you are that person and you're you are that person and you're learning to press on one side and when learning to press on one side and when learning to press on one side and when you're stressed the hinge of that you're stressed the hinge of that you're stressed the hinge of that seessaw is very tight. So it's hard to seessaw is very tight. So it's hard to seessaw is very tight. So it's hard to activate the person that much more than activate the person that much more than activate the person that much more than when like you come out of sleep you're when like you come out of sleep you're when like you come out of sleep you're still a little bit relaxed perhaps um still a little bit relaxed perhaps um still a little bit relaxed perhaps um and then it's easier to push on that. So and then it's easier to push on that. So and then it's easier to push on that. So you might find that learning nidra is you might find that learning nidra is you might find that learning nidra is easier then. Um there's always value to easier then. Um there's always value to easier then. Um there's always value to uh learning how to work both sides of to uh learning how to work both sides of to uh learning how to work both sides of the seessaw. And actually sometimes we the seessaw. And actually sometimes we the seessaw. And actually sometimes we need to know how to ramp up the level of need to know how to ramp up the level of need to know how to ramp up the level of stress as in the case with the coal stress as in the case with the coal stress as in the case with the coal plunge. We're deliberately activating plunge. We're deliberately activating plunge. We're deliberately activating the sympathetic nervous system and we're the sympathetic nervous system and we're the sympathetic nervous system and we're saying aha but I'm doing it as this kind saying aha but I'm doing it as this kind saying aha but I'm doing it as this kind of person surfing on the seessaw and so of person surfing on the seessaw and so of person surfing on the seessaw and so I know how to balance here so that when I know how to balance here so that when I know how to balance here so that when I'm there again I recognize this place I'm there again I recognize this place I'm there again I recognize this place you know. Uh so that's kind of how I you know. Uh so that's kind of how I you know. Uh so that's kind of how I think about it. Yeah. And and also I think about it. Yeah. And and also I think about it. Yeah. And and also I have found in practicing you're going to have found in practicing you're going to have found in practicing you're going to draw your non-sleep deep breaths that it draw your non-sleep deep breaths that it draw your non-sleep deep breaths that it makes other practices easier that like makes other practices easier that like makes other practices easier that like when I want to do a five minute when I want to do a five minute when I want to do a five minute meditation you know and one of the meditation you know and one of the meditation you know and one of the things that I think is super things that I think is super things that I think is super valuable for people is to set aside valuable for people is to set aside valuable for people is to set aside you know proactively schedule these you know proactively schedule these you know proactively schedule these times that you're going to do longer times that you're going to do longer times that you're going to do longer periods of rest or of practice but periods of rest or of practice but periods of rest or of practice but also recognize that you don't you know also recognize that you don't you know also recognize that you don't you know there might be things that you can do there might be things that you can do there might be things that you can do for a minute or two minutes. So, this is for a minute or two minutes. So, this is for a minute or two minutes. So, this is what Pavl Satsulin, who is a, you know, what Pavl Satsulin, who is a, you know, what Pavl Satsulin, who is a, you know, world-class strength coach, who was on world-class strength coach, who was on world-class strength coach, who was on this podcast, talks about greasing the this podcast, talks about greasing the this podcast, talks about greasing the groove. You know, you want to get good groove. You know, you want to get good groove. You know, you want to get good at pull-ups, do two pull-ups every time at pull-ups, do two pull-ups every time at pull-ups, do two pull-ups every time you walk through the doorway from a you walk through the doorway from a you walk through the doorway from a pull-up bar. I think metaphorically pull-up bar. I think metaphorically pull-up bar. I think metaphorically speaking, the, you know, like the speaking, the, you know, like the speaking, the, you know, like the workout in the gym, people think of that workout in the gym, people think of that workout in the gym, people think of that as the end point, but actually, you as the end point, but actually, you as the end point, but actually, you know, we used to do physical labor as a know, we used to do physical labor as a know, we used to do physical labor as a species, right? So, I look at the species, right? So, I look at the species, right? So, I look at the workout in the gym as the ability to workout in the gym as the ability to workout in the gym as the ability to lift boxes on moving day, to move lift boxes on moving day, to move lift boxes on moving day, to move furniture without getting hurt. I love furniture without getting hurt. I love furniture without getting hurt. I love going to the gym, but it's not an end in going to the gym, but it's not an end in going to the gym, but it's not an end in of itself. Same thing like a long run is of itself. Same thing like a long run is of itself. Same thing like a long run is the ability to go hiking with friends the ability to go hiking with friends the ability to go hiking with friends without having to train for it and not without having to train for it and not without having to train for it and not worrying about, you know, gassing out worrying about, you know, gassing out worrying about, you know, gassing out half, you know, halfway through. So, I half, you know, halfway through. So, I half, you know, halfway through. So, I think that these practices are think that these practices are think that these practices are preparation for real life stress. preparation for real life stress. preparation for real life stress. They're the gym for your mind. They're the gym for your mind. They're the gym for your mind. They're the gym for your mind. And we don't talk the gym for your mind. And we don't talk the gym for your mind. And we don't talk enough about emotional fitness and the enough about emotional fitness and the enough about emotional fitness and the world is clearly metabolically ill with world is clearly metabolically ill with world is clearly metabolically ill with obesity, diabetes, etc. But we are also obesity, diabetes, etc. But we are also obesity, diabetes, etc. But we are also dealing with a massive mental health dealing with a massive mental health dealing with a massive mental health crisis that I do believe stems primarily crisis that I do believe stems primarily crisis that I do believe stems primarily from an inability to regulate this from an inability to regulate this from an inability to regulate this autonomic nervous system thing because autonomic nervous system thing because autonomic nervous system thing because we can say well sleep's the foundation we can say well sleep's the foundation we can say well sleep's the foundation of mental health which it is and of mental health which it is and of mental health which it is and physical health a lot of people have physical health a lot of people have physical health a lot of people have trouble sleeping how to get better at trouble sleeping how to get better at trouble sleeping how to get better at sleeping get better at relaxing how to sleeping get better at relaxing how to sleeping get better at relaxing how to get better at relaxing yoga nidra and get better at relaxing yoga nidra and get better at relaxing yoga nidra and SDR and then you know so I feel like the SDR and then you know so I feel like the SDR and then you know so I feel like the tools exist and I'm so grateful that you tools exist and I'm so grateful that you tools exist and I'm so grateful that you pointed me in the directions of these pointed me in the directions of these pointed me in the directions of these tools and it can be very simple you know tools and it can be very simple you know tools and it can be very simple you know one of The teachers used to say that the one of The teachers used to say that the one of The teachers used to say that the breath is the mind made visible and the breath is the mind made visible and the breath is the mind made visible and if you want to change your mind change if you want to change your mind change if you want to change your mind change your breath I mean of course do a yoga your breath I mean of course do a yoga your breath I mean of course do a yoga nidra it might take 30 minutes right but nidra it might take 30 minutes right but nidra it might take 30 minutes right but if you're in a moment where you're if you're in a moment where you're if you're in a moment where you're feeling really feeling really feeling really activated change your breath activated change your breath activated change your breath specifically like a long deep a long specifically like a long deep a long specifically like a long deep a long exhale I love that breath is the mind exhale I love that breath is the mind exhale I love that breath is the mind made visible it's beautiful uh and made visible it's beautiful uh and made visible it's beautiful uh and so true that was desai I should give him so true that was desai I should give him so true that was desai I should give him credit okay wonderful it's the quickest credit okay wonderful it's the quickest credit okay wonderful it's the quickest way to move us to create an way to move us to create an way to move us to create an activation of the of the parasympic activation of the of the parasympic activation of the of the parasympic nervous system quickest way you know and nervous system quickest way you know and nervous system quickest way you know and it this is where uh you know people will it this is where uh you know people will it this is where uh you know people will think meditation is so hard breath work think meditation is so hard breath work think meditation is so hard breath work which there's many different forms of which there's many different forms of which there's many different forms of breath work are hard which they can breath work are hard which they can breath work are hard which they can be I suppose you know hard in the be I suppose you know hard in the be I suppose you know hard in the way that we've got to find the time and way that we've got to find the time and way that we've got to find the time and it can be uncomfortable but it you know it can be uncomfortable but it you know it can be uncomfortable but it you know I'll tell people take a minute and I'll tell people take a minute and I'll tell people take a minute and breathe and if you if even a minute breathe and if you if even a minute breathe and if you if even a minute sounds long take seven breaths. Like, sounds long take seven breaths. Like, sounds long take seven breaths. Like, who can't take seven who can't take seven who can't take seven breaths at any point in the day? You're breaths at any point in the day? You're breaths at any point in the day? You're going to do it anyway, right? We never going to do it anyway, right? We never going to do it anyway, right? We never aren't breathing. But if we can bring aren't breathing. But if we can bring aren't breathing. But if we can bring our attention to that and you can our attention to that and you can our attention to that and you can schedule that like, you know, I'm going schedule that like, you know, I'm going schedule that like, you know, I'm going to do that before I get out of the car to do that before I get out of the car to do that before I get out of the car to go to the office. I'm going to do it to go to the office. I'm going to do it to go to the office. I'm going to do it before I go to lunch, after a meeting, before I go to lunch, after a meeting, before I go to lunch, after a meeting, before a meeting. Or you can just say before a meeting. Or you can just say before a meeting. Or you can just say anytime that I'm feeling like this, I anytime that I'm feeling like this, I anytime that I'm feeling like this, I can I can take seven breaths. It might can I can take seven breaths. It might can I can take seven breaths. It might be end up being two minutes like a TV be end up being two minutes like a TV be end up being two minutes like a TV commercial. And those things add up and commercial. And those things add up and commercial. And those things add up and they build on each other. And the they build on each other. And the they build on each other. And the more that we practice those, the more that we practice those, the more that we practice those, the more that we do raise that capacity to that we do raise that capacity to that we do raise that capacity to experience distress. First, it helps us experience distress. First, it helps us experience distress. First, it helps us activate that part of the system and activate that part of the system and activate that part of the system and teaches us like a like a like your teaches us like a like a like your teaches us like a like a like your analogy in the gym, but we also start analogy in the gym, but we also start analogy in the gym, but we also start building a habit around doing something building a habit around doing something building a habit around doing something like this so that we can weather like this so that we can weather like this so that we can weather whatever storm's coming and we start to whatever storm's coming and we start to whatever storm's coming and we start to orient toward it. orient toward it. orient toward it. I'd like to take a brief break and I'd like to take a brief break and I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that offers hundreds of guided meditation offers hundreds of guided meditation offers hundreds of guided meditation programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga nidra sessions, and more. I started nidra sessions, and more. I started nidra sessions, and more. I started practicing meditation when I was about practicing meditation when I was about practicing meditation when I was about 15 years old. And it made a profound 15 years old. And it made a profound 15 years old. And it made a profound impact on my life. And by now, there are impact on my life. And by now, there are impact on my life. And by now, there are thousands of quality peer-reviewed thousands of quality peer-reviewed thousands of quality peer-reviewed studies that emphasize how useful studies that emphasize how useful studies that emphasize how useful mindfulness meditation can be for mindfulness meditation can be for mindfulness meditation can be for improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different meditations to choose from. And those meditations to choose from. And those meditations to choose from. And those meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up with your meditation practice, both from with your meditation practice, both from with your meditation practice, both from the perspective of novelty. You never the perspective of novelty. You never the perspective of novelty. You never get tired of those meditations. There's get tired of those meditations. There's get tired of those meditations. There's always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the effectiveness of meditation. And you can effectiveness of meditation. And you can effectiveness of meditation. And you can always fit meditation into your schedule always fit meditation into your schedule always fit meditation into your schedule even if you only have two or three even if you only have two or three even if you only have two or three minutes per day in which to meditate. I minutes per day in which to meditate. I minutes per day in which to meditate. I also really like doing yoga nidra or also really like doing yoga nidra or also really like doing yoga nidra or what is sometimes called non-sleep deep what is sometimes called non-sleep deep what is sometimes called non-sleep deep rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because it is a great way to restore mental and it is a great way to restore mental and it is a great way to restore mental and physical vigor without the tiredness physical vigor without the tiredness physical vigor without the tiredness that some people experience when they that some people experience when they that some people experience when they wake up from a conventional nap. If wake up from a conventional nap. If wake up from a conventional nap. If you'd like to try the Waking Up app, you'd like to try the Waking Up app, you'd like to try the Waking Up app, please go to please go to please go to wakingup.com/huberman where you can wakingup.com/huberman where you can wakingup.com/huberman where you can access a free 30-day trial. Again, access a free 30-day trial. Again, access a free 30-day trial. Again, that's wakingup.com/huberman to access a free wakingup.com/huberman to access a free wakingup.com/huberman to access a free 30-day trial. People are probably 30-day trial. People are probably 30-day trial. People are probably starting to realize that overcoming starting to realize that overcoming starting to realize that overcoming addiction is about more than just white addiction is about more than just white addiction is about more than just white knuckling it. It's about more than just knuckling it. It's about more than just knuckling it. It's about more than just going to meetings, although that can be going to meetings, although that can be going to meetings, although that can be very useful. It's about having a road very useful. It's about having a road very useful. It's about having a road map of the day, having a plan, knowing map of the day, having a plan, knowing map of the day, having a plan, knowing what weather patterns to look out for what weather patterns to look out for what weather patterns to look out for internally and externally. It's about internally and externally. It's about internally and externally. It's about having a way having a way having a way to deal with distress, having a way to deal with distress, having a way to deal with distress, having a way to calm down. Let's talk a little bit more about down. Let's talk a little bit more about down. Let's talk a little bit more about specific addictions. specific addictions. specific addictions. Maybe I'll mention a couple different Maybe I'll mention a couple different Maybe I'll mention a couple different categories of addiction and maybe you categories of addiction and maybe you categories of addiction and maybe you could reflect on some of the unique could reflect on some of the unique could reflect on some of the unique features of that in your experience. features of that in your experience. features of that in your experience. not necessarily neurobiologically but in not necessarily neurobiologically but in not necessarily neurobiologically but in terms of strategies for confronting in terms of strategies for confronting in terms of strategies for confronting in oneself that those things right like oneself that those things right like oneself that those things right like strategies for trying to overcome the strategies for trying to overcome the strategies for trying to overcome the because I hear from thousands of people because I hear from thousands of people because I hear from thousands of people really about different uh addictions in really about different uh addictions in really about different uh addictions in themselves and people close to them themselves and people close to them themselves and people close to them so um let's start with alcohol so um let's start with alcohol so um let's start with alcohol um what is unique about alcohol um what is unique about alcohol um what is unique about alcohol addiction that uh people should know and addiction that uh people should know and addiction that uh people should know and this doesn't these don't these could be this doesn't these don't these could be this doesn't these don't these could be extensive answers they don't have to be, extensive answers they don't have to be, extensive answers they don't have to be, but that could be helpful to them. but that could be helpful to them. but that could be helpful to them. You know, alcohol is a is an interesting You know, alcohol is a is an interesting You know, alcohol is a is an interesting one. A lot I think alcohol and most one. A lot I think alcohol and most one. A lot I think alcohol and most drugs have a lot of drugs have a lot of drugs have a lot of similarities. Um although alcohol tends similarities. Um although alcohol tends similarities. Um although alcohol tends to be the one that is the most like to be the one that is the most like to be the one that is the most like socially acceptable. I mean, drinking is socially acceptable. I mean, drinking is socially acceptable. I mean, drinking is part of our culture, you know, and if part of our culture, you know, and if part of our culture, you know, and if you don't do it, you catch some flak you don't do it, you catch some flak you don't do it, you catch some flak sometimes. Oh, yeah. I mean, I think sometimes. Oh, yeah. I mean, I think sometimes. Oh, yeah. I mean, I think some of that's been changing and some of some of that's been changing and some of some of that's been changing and some of it thanks to you. I mean, I can't tell it thanks to you. I mean, I can't tell it thanks to you. I mean, I can't tell you how many people that have ended up you how many people that have ended up you how many people that have ended up I've ended up talking to because they I've ended up talking to because they I've ended up talking to because they listen to your podcast on alcohol, you listen to your podcast on alcohol, you listen to your podcast on alcohol, you know, um, just from a health standpoint. know, um, just from a health standpoint. know, um, just from a health standpoint. So, people are starting to look at that. So, people are starting to look at that. So, people are starting to look at that. It's it's become, you know, it's less It's it's become, you know, it's less It's it's become, you know, it's less like the Mad Men 50s people drinking at like the Mad Men 50s people drinking at like the Mad Men 50s people drinking at lunch, but it's still very much part at lunch, but it's still very much part at lunch, but it's still very much part of the culture and everything. H happy of the culture and everything. H happy of the culture and everything. H happy hour, happy day, you know? I mean, look hour, happy day, you know? I mean, look hour, happy day, you know? I mean, look at the You ever been to one of these at the You ever been to one of these at the You ever been to one of these retirement communities like in where retirement communities like in where retirement communities like in where people are retired and just drinking all people are retired and just drinking all people are retired and just drinking all the time or Oh, yeah. There's a real the time or Oh, yeah. There's a real the time or Oh, yeah. There's a real stigma to not being able to drink for stigma to not being able to drink for stigma to not being able to drink for people. You know, I you know, I people. You know, I you know, I people. You know, I you know, I don't mind sharing. I've been sober don't mind sharing. I've been sober don't mind sharing. I've been sober for quite some time. And that was a that for quite some time. And that was a that for quite some time. And that was a that was a challenging thing. Like the first was a challenging thing. Like the first was a challenging thing. Like the first wedding I went to or the first uh you wedding I went to or the first uh you wedding I went to or the first uh you know, work event that I went to, I know, work event that I went to, I know, work event that I went to, I didn't know how to talk about it with didn't know how to talk about it with didn't know how to talk about it with people. Now I it it's no big deal. I people. Now I it it's no big deal. I people. Now I it it's no big deal. I don't it doesn't bother me at all. Um don't it doesn't bother me at all. Um don't it doesn't bother me at all. Um and if it does, you know, sometimes I and if it does, you know, sometimes I and if it does, you know, sometimes I don't like to be around people who are don't like to be around people who are don't like to be around people who are just getting wasted, but I you know, so just getting wasted, but I you know, so just getting wasted, but I you know, so I'll leave the wedding at 10:00 instead I'll leave the wedding at 10:00 instead I'll leave the wedding at 10:00 instead of two. You know, most of the people of two. You know, most of the people of two. You know, most of the people thought I was there till 2, but I left thought I was there till 2, but I left thought I was there till 2, but I left it I left at 10:00 cuz they're it I left at 10:00 cuz they're it I left at 10:00 cuz they're doing whatever they're doing. But um it doing whatever they're doing. But um it doing whatever they're doing. But um it it's very challenging cuz you know it's very challenging cuz you know it's very challenging cuz you know having a glass of wine at dinner or uh having a glass of wine at dinner or uh having a glass of wine at dinner or uh you know a beer after work or you know you know a beer after work or you know you know a beer after work or you know thinking about you know people there's thinking about you know people there's thinking about you know people there's like a it was always a thing like the like a it was always a thing like the like a it was always a thing like the first time a dad and a son share the first time a dad and a son share the first time a dad and a son share the share a beer like there's a lot of share a beer like there's a lot of share a beer like there's a lot of romanticizing around it and I alcohol I romanticizing around it and I alcohol I romanticizing around it and I alcohol I don't I don't I don't think alcohol is don't I don't I don't think alcohol is don't I don't I don't think alcohol is evil. I mean, I think listening to what evil. I mean, I think listening to what evil. I mean, I think listening to what you've talked about it, it is poison, you've talked about it, it is poison, you've talked about it, it is poison, but I don't like anything else in but I don't like anything else in but I don't like anything else in moderation, I don't think it's going to moderation, I don't think it's going to moderation, I don't think it's going to it's a terrible problem. I'm not it's a terrible problem. I'm not it's a terrible problem. I'm not anti-alcohol, but you know, what is it anti-alcohol, but you know, what is it anti-alcohol, but you know, what is it what is it doing to you and what are you what is it doing to you and what are you what is it doing to you and what are you using it for? using it for? using it for? Um I so I think what the good side of Um I so I think what the good side of Um I so I think what the good side of that being part of the culture is when that being part of the culture is when that being part of the culture is when people can find a community like a people can find a community like a people can find a community like a 12step community or some other sort of 12step community or some other sort of 12step community or some other sort of peer community where people aren't peer community where people aren't peer community where people aren't drinking it can you know that is really drinking it can you know that is really drinking it can you know that is really what helps them a lot. You know they're what helps them a lot. You know they're what helps them a lot. You know they're not alone in this. And you know I think not alone in this. And you know I think not alone in this. And you know I think the movies and TV do a terrible job the movies and TV do a terrible job the movies and TV do a terrible job representing what 12step meetings are representing what 12step meetings are representing what 12step meetings are like. You know, it's usually like they like. You know, it's usually like they like. You know, it's usually like they show a circle in a church basement and show a circle in a church basement and show a circle in a church basement and everybody's talking about how they can't everybody's talking about how they can't everybody's talking about how they can't drink that day. Um, I'm sure you've seen drink that day. Um, I'm sure you've seen drink that day. Um, I'm sure you've seen that in television, right? And in that in television, right? And in that in television, right? And in reality, of course, that happens reality, of course, that happens reality, of course, that happens sometimes, but most people are there really trying but most people are there really trying but most people are there really trying to use their that program as a design to use their that program as a design to use their that program as a design for living and to build really amazing for living and to build really amazing for living and to build really amazing lives. When you look at the 12 steps, lives. When you look at the 12 steps, lives. When you look at the 12 steps, when it comes to alcohol, alcohol is when it comes to alcohol, alcohol is when it comes to alcohol, alcohol is only mentioned in the first one. only mentioned in the first one. only mentioned in the first one. Everything else is about how you live Everything else is about how you live Everything else is about how you live your life. your life. your life. You know that first step is about You know that first step is about You know that first step is about admitting we were powerless and that our admitting we were powerless and that our admitting we were powerless and that our lives have become unmanageable. And lives have become unmanageable. And lives have become unmanageable. And powerlessness is actually an awesome powerlessness is actually an awesome powerlessness is actually an awesome concept. I mean people will look at concept. I mean people will look at concept. I mean people will look at powerlessness and think that means I'm powerlessness and think that means I'm powerlessness and think that means I'm weak. That means I can't control my weak. That means I can't control my weak. That means I can't control my life. But really defining where you're life. But really defining where you're life. But really defining where you're powerless is the first step in powerless is the first step in powerless is the first step in finding great power. Because if I'm if I finding great power. Because if I'm if I finding great power. Because if I'm if I just keep going out every day and I just keep going out every day and I just keep going out every day and I start fighting a battle that I'm going start fighting a battle that I'm going start fighting a battle that I'm going to lose every single day, and even if it to lose every single day, and even if it to lose every single day, and even if it was an addiction, like every day I just was an addiction, like every day I just was an addiction, like every day I just go out and I am am, you know, taking on go out and I am am, you know, taking on go out and I am am, you know, taking on the five biggest guys on the block the five biggest guys on the block the five biggest guys on the block when I'm a kid, right? I'm going to lose when I'm a kid, right? I'm going to lose when I'm a kid, right? I'm going to lose that every day. I'm not going to start that every day. I'm not going to start that every day. I'm not going to start winning until I realize I can't beat winning until I realize I can't beat winning until I realize I can't beat them in the way that I'm doing it. So, them in the way that I'm doing it. So, them in the way that I'm doing it. So, go do something go do something go do something else. You know, powerless. When we else. You know, powerless. When we else. You know, powerless. When we identify where we're powerless, then we identify where we're powerless, then we identify where we're powerless, then we can go find great power. And that's can go find great power. And that's can go find great power. And that's where the concept of higher power where the concept of higher power where the concept of higher power comes in. And higher power to a lot of comes in. And higher power to a lot of comes in. And higher power to a lot of people is God and whatever their concept people is God and whatever their concept people is God and whatever their concept of it. Sometimes higher power is just of it. Sometimes higher power is just of it. Sometimes higher power is just the group of people and the community. the group of people and the community. the group of people and the community. You know, I will see that anywhere You know, I will see that anywhere You know, I will see that anywhere from the relationship with God to like from the relationship with God to like from the relationship with God to like me and you talking is a is a higher me and you talking is a is a higher me and you talking is a is a higher power. Two heads are better than one. power. Two heads are better than one. power. Two heads are better than one. You know, I'm going to be able to You know, I'm going to be able to You know, I'm going to be able to reflect to you and you're going to be reflect to you and you're going to be reflect to you and you're going to be able to reflect back. I'm going to share able to reflect back. I'm going to share able to reflect back. I'm going to share with you and you can reflect back to me with you and you can reflect back to me with you and you can reflect back to me and help me see things differently and help me see things differently and help me see things differently and shift a perspective because a lot of our shift a perspective because a lot of our shift a perspective because a lot of our healing is just a perception change. healing is just a perception change. healing is just a perception change. Like I'm just going to see things a Like I'm just going to see things a Like I'm just going to see things a little bit differently than I did little bit differently than I did little bit differently than I did before. So that community and the before. So that community and the before. So that community and the ability for them to be in service to ability for them to be in service to ability for them to be in service to each other and help each other is a I each other and help each other is a I each other and help each other is a I think that's the antithesis of I'm part think that's the antithesis of I'm part think that's the antithesis of I'm part of this drinking of this drinking of this drinking culture and I that's not only unique culture and I that's not only unique culture and I that's not only unique to alcohol, but because there's such to alcohol, but because there's such to alcohol, but because there's such that you know there's not usually like a that you know there's not usually like a that you know there's not usually like a socially acceptable like you don't see socially acceptable like you don't see socially acceptable like you don't see crack advertised on television, right? crack advertised on television, right? crack advertised on television, right? You see alcohol and it's in it's in You see alcohol and it's in it's in You see alcohol and it's in it's in everything. Now, we do see gambling in everything. Now, we do see gambling in everything. Now, we do see gambling in on television quite a bit, which is on television quite a bit, which is on television quite a bit, which is incredible. Let's talk about gambling. I incredible. Let's talk about gambling. I incredible. Let's talk about gambling. I like the way, by the way, that you I like the way, by the way, that you I like the way, by the way, that you frame um uh alcohol. It's being offered frame um uh alcohol. It's being offered frame um uh alcohol. It's being offered to us all the time after a certain age. to us all the time after a certain age. to us all the time after a certain age. And uh so it, you know, it's a And uh so it, you know, it's a And uh so it, you know, it's a challenging one for people that uh are challenging one for people that uh are challenging one for people that uh are challenged with alcohol addiction or challenged with alcohol addiction or challenged with alcohol addiction or alcohol use disorder. Um and 12step, I alcohol use disorder. Um and 12step, I alcohol use disorder. Um and 12step, I think, is right. It's free. It's in think, is right. It's free. It's in think, is right. It's free. It's in every city. It's um powerful um program every city. It's um powerful um program every city. It's um powerful um program certainly that there are data I should certainly that there are data I should certainly that there are data I should just mention this you know I think just mention this you know I think just mention this you know I think people will hear oh it's a cult etc uh people will hear oh it's a cult etc uh people will hear oh it's a cult etc uh there was a study actually that run at there was a study actually that run at there was a study actually that run at Stanford um some years ago we'll provide a link um some years ago we'll provide a link um some years ago we'll provide a link to the coverage of that study and the to the coverage of that study and the to the coverage of that study and the study which took a very objective look study which took a very objective look study which took a very objective look at 12step for the treatment of at 12step for the treatment of at 12step for the treatment of alcoholism and other uh substance uh alcoholism and other uh substance uh alcoholism and other uh substance uh addictions um and actually the addictions um and actually the addictions um and actually the investigators the people that ran the investigators the people that ran the investigators the people that ran the study were very skeptical going into And study were very skeptical going into And study were very skeptical going into And um the results were pretty um the results were pretty um the results were pretty remarkable and they changed remarkable and they changed remarkable and they changed their uh initial perception coming out their uh initial perception coming out their uh initial perception coming out of it that it can be very effective of it that it can be very effective of it that it can be very effective for people especially given that it's for people especially given that it's for people especially given that it's you know you can do it when you travel you know you can do it when you travel you know you can do it when you travel you go to meetings in other cities and you go to meetings in other cities and you go to meetings in other cities and as you mentioned it's not uh it's as you mentioned it's not uh it's as you mentioned it's not uh it's not the depressing picture that people not the depressing picture that people not the depressing picture that people think of a bunch of people whose lives think of a bunch of people whose lives think of a bunch of people whose lives are destitute in a basement. Sometimes are destitute in a basement. Sometimes are destitute in a basement. Sometimes people are coming in with some hard people are coming in with some hard people are coming in with some hard stuff but um there's often a lot of stuff but um there's often a lot of stuff but um there's often a lot of humor. There's a lot of common challenge humor. There's a lot of common challenge humor. There's a lot of common challenge that it's very it's very um there's that it's very it's very um there's that it's very it's very um there's a there's a lightness there that might a there's a lightness there that might a there's a lightness there that might a lot of people might not anticipate. lot of people might not anticipate. lot of people might not anticipate. People taking on life, not hiding from People taking on life, not hiding from People taking on life, not hiding from it. Yeah. Love that. Um gambling, it. Yeah. Love that. Um gambling, it. Yeah. Love that. Um gambling, not everybody that gamblings has a not everybody that gamblings has a not everybody that gamblings has a gambling problem just like everything gambling problem just like everything gambling problem just like everything else. Um but when it does become else. Um but when it does become else. Um but when it does become problematic, it's a it's a very problematic, it's a it's a very problematic, it's a it's a very challenging disorder to treat. I mean, challenging disorder to treat. I mean, challenging disorder to treat. I mean, it's uh I don't know where the study came uh I don't know where the study came uh I don't know where the study came out of, but at one point I had seen some out of, but at one point I had seen some out of, but at one point I had seen some research that said uh that the highest research that said uh that the highest research that said uh that the highest rates of suicide were among gambling rates of suicide were among gambling rates of suicide were among gambling addicts. And what I've seen with that is it's And what I've seen with that is it's And what I've seen with that is it's like the their whole world starts to get like the their whole world starts to get like the their whole world starts to get really small. Um you know, it's weird really small. Um you know, it's weird really small. Um you know, it's weird because in the way that I look at it, because in the way that I look at it, because in the way that I look at it, it's really the only addiction if it's really the only addiction if it's really the only addiction if it's an addiction for that person, it's an addiction for that person, it's an addiction for that person, right? Not everybody that gambles is right? Not everybody that gambles is right? Not everybody that gambles is gamb. But the ones that are addicted, it gamb. But the ones that are addicted, it gamb. But the ones that are addicted, it seems to me to be the only addiction seems to me to be the only addiction seems to me to be the only addiction that the next hit can solve all your that the next hit can solve all your that the next hit can solve all your problems. So you're down $300,000, you problems. So you're down $300,000, you problems. So you're down $300,000, you could bet that and win it. I don't think could bet that and win it. I don't think could bet that and win it. I don't think anybody thinks like really thinks I mean anybody thinks like really thinks I mean anybody thinks like really thinks I mean in the moment they're probably out of in the moment they're probably out of in the moment they're probably out of their mind, but they don't think, you their mind, but they don't think, you their mind, but they don't think, you know, if I shoot this next if I take if know, if I shoot this next if I take if know, if I shoot this next if I take if I if I shoot heroin, my life is going to I if I shoot heroin, my life is going to I if I shoot heroin, my life is going to get better in the long run. They might get better in the long run. They might get better in the long run. They might be thinking it's going to get better be thinking it's going to get better be thinking it's going to get better right now because I'm not going to get right now because I'm not going to get right now because I'm not going to get sick. I'm going to feel good or whatever sick. I'm going to feel good or whatever sick. I'm going to feel good or whatever it is for them. But they don't they're it is for them. But they don't they're it is for them. But they don't they're not thinking that this is going to solve not thinking that this is going to solve not thinking that this is going to solve their problems. They know it's not. And their problems. They know it's not. And their problems. They know it's not. And so it fortifies what you were so it fortifies what you were so it fortifies what you were talking we were talking about before is talking we were talking about before is talking we were talking about before is continuing to go after the hot fudge continuing to go after the hot fudge continuing to go after the hot fudge Sunday except they can they can get it, Sunday except they can they can get it, Sunday except they can they can get it, you know. And it's interesting because you know. And it's interesting because you know. And it's interesting because I've talked to different people and I've talked to different people and I've talked to different people and sometimes that the hit isn't in the sometimes that the hit isn't in the sometimes that the hit isn't in the winning, sometimes the hit is in the winning, sometimes the hit is in the winning, sometimes the hit is in the losing for them really. I've had people losing for them really. I've had people losing for them really. I've had people tell me that. I don't I don't really tell me that. I don't I don't really tell me that. I don't I don't really understand that, but I think then they understand that, but I think then they understand that, but I think then they have to go back after it again. I mean, have to go back after it again. I mean, have to go back after it again. I mean, I believe them, you know, they're the I believe them, you know, they're the I believe them, you know, they're the ones suffering from it, but wow. And, ones suffering from it, but wow. And, ones suffering from it, but wow. And, you know, it's becoming a real problem you know, it's becoming a real problem you know, it's becoming a real problem with kids. You know, there's a lot of with kids. You know, there's a lot of with kids. You know, there's a lot of sites to gamble on now. Um, you know, a sites to gamble on now. Um, you know, a sites to gamble on now. Um, you know, a lot of they can bet on a lot of crypto lot of they can bet on a lot of crypto lot of they can bet on a lot of crypto sites. You can bet on anything. There's sites. You can bet on anything. There's sites. You can bet on anything. There's and kids are playing in these online and kids are playing in these online and kids are playing in these online casinos that are probably operated casinos that are probably operated casinos that are probably operated overseas that are not regulated at all. overseas that are not regulated at all. overseas that are not regulated at all. And you know, casinos that are regulated And you know, casinos that are regulated And you know, casinos that are regulated become very wealthy, winning on a very become very wealthy, winning on a very become very wealthy, winning on a very small margin. I'm sure these casinos small margin. I'm sure these casinos small margin. I'm sure these casinos don't ever lose, right? They're making don't ever lose, right? They're making don't ever lose, right? They're making it up. it up. it up. Um, it's in our face all the time. It Um, it's in our face all the time. It Um, it's in our face all the time. It was uh I was reading Willie Mays died was uh I was reading Willie Mays died was uh I was reading Willie Mays died recently as a baseball player um San recently as a baseball player um San recently as a baseball player um San Francisco Giant Francisco Giant Francisco Giant uh before we were around. But he uh was uh before we were around. But he uh was uh before we were around. But he uh was banned from banned from banned from baseball for life. I think they ended up baseball for life. I think they ended up baseball for life. I think they ended up letting him back in because he took a letting him back in because he took a letting him back in because he took a contract from I think it was BS. He contract from I think it was BS. He contract from I think it was BS. He wasn't betting on sports. So this is in wasn't betting on sports. So this is in wasn't betting on sports. So this is in the 80s. He took a contract because he the 80s. He took a contract because he the 80s. He took a contract because he would go there would go there would go there and meet with their uh high rollers once and meet with their uh high rollers once and meet with their uh high rollers once a year for like a week just play golf a year for like a week just play golf a year for like a week just play golf with them, hang out with them. It wasn't with them, hang out with them. It wasn't with them, hang out with them. It wasn't he wasn't betting on baseball and he got he wasn't betting on baseball and he got he wasn't betting on baseball and he got banned from baseball. Now you watch a banned from baseball. Now you watch a banned from baseball. Now you watch a baseball game or go to a baseball game or go to a baseball game or go to a baseball stadium and different betting sites are stadium and different betting sites are stadium and different betting sites are uh different betting sites are mentioned uh different betting sites are mentioned uh different betting sites are mentioned all over the place. You watch any all over the place. You watch any all over the place. You watch any sporting event and it's out there sporting event and it's out there sporting event and it's out there and that's not the only thing people and that's not the only thing people and that's not the only thing people are gambling on, but I don't know if you are gambling on, but I don't know if you are gambling on, but I don't know if you watch sports right now with the watch sports right now with the watch sports right now with the basketball on or you know the Super Bowl basketball on or you know the Super Bowl basketball on or you know the Super Bowl was on. I mean it showing people with was on. I mean it showing people with was on. I mean it showing people with a phone showing that they're winning, a phone showing that they're winning, a phone showing that they're winning, you know, hundred there's a celebrity on you know, hundred there's a celebrity on you know, hundred there's a celebrity on there winning there winning there winning $186,000 I think the number was, you $186,000 I think the number was, you $186,000 I think the number was, you know, and then couple that know, and then couple that know, and then couple that with kids that are pretty susceptible with kids that are pretty susceptible with kids that are pretty susceptible already looking at those unicorn type already looking at those unicorn type already looking at those unicorn type people that are making millions on people that are making millions on people that are making millions on YouTube playing video games or poker YouTube playing video games or poker YouTube playing video games or poker players. Yeah, professional poker players. Yeah, professional poker players. Yeah, professional poker players or even ones that aren't players or even ones that aren't players or even ones that aren't gambling that, you know, they're out gambling that, you know, they're out gambling that, you know, they're out there and they became a creator and there and they became a creator and there and they became a creator and they're making millions of dollars a they're making millions of dollars a they're making millions of dollars a year by having people follow them like year by having people follow them like year by having people follow them like that this there's a way to make a that this there's a way to make a that this there's a way to make a you know that their significance is you know that their significance is you know that their significance is going to come from making a lot of money going to come from making a lot of money going to come from making a lot of money really fast, you know, and then they see really fast, you know, and then they see really fast, you know, and then they see this way to do it without having to work this way to do it without having to work this way to do it without having to work or anything like that and it's or anything like that and it's or anything like that and it's rigged to lose. I mean, they're rigged to lose. I mean, they're rigged to lose. I mean, they're going to lose. Dopamine without effort. going to lose. Dopamine without effort. going to lose. Dopamine without effort. Yeah, that's the danger. I was, you Yeah, that's the danger. I was, you Yeah, that's the danger. I was, you know, I've said it many times on this know, I've said it many times on this know, I've said it many times on this podcast elsewhere, too. It's like podcast elsewhere, too. It's like podcast elsewhere, too. It's like any high rapid inflection in dopamine any high rapid inflection in dopamine any high rapid inflection in dopamine that doesn't require that doesn't require that doesn't require effort. Aside from being a kid and your effort. Aside from being a kid and your effort. Aside from being a kid and your parents get you an ice cream or it's parents get you an ice cream or it's parents get you an ice cream or it's your birthday, all you were all you did your birthday, all you were all you did your birthday, all you were all you did is you were born. It's and to get those is you were born. It's and to get those is you were born. It's and to get those presents and you deserve that. It's your presents and you deserve that. It's your presents and you deserve that. It's your birthday. Great. But in life, like birthday. Great. But in life, like birthday. Great. But in life, like dopamine that doesn't require effort to dopamine that doesn't require effort to dopamine that doesn't require effort to obtain is um is the slipperiest slope. obtain is um is the slipperiest slope. obtain is um is the slipperiest slope. Yeah. And the gambling is not for the Yeah. And the gambling is not for the Yeah. And the gambling is not for the kids. Isn't just and adults, but kids. Isn't just and adults, but kids. Isn't just and adults, but it's not just on betting on like what we it's not just on betting on like what we it's not just on betting on like what we think we might traditionally think of think we might traditionally think of think we might traditionally think of betting on a sporting event or something betting on a sporting event or something betting on a sporting event or something like that. It's, you know, we see it in like that. It's, you know, we see it in like that. It's, you know, we see it in cryptocurrencies. Not that cryp this is cryptocurrencies. Not that cryp this is cryptocurrencies. Not that cryp this is nothing against cryptocurrencies, but nothing against cryptocurrencies, but nothing against cryptocurrencies, but people going into it without any people going into it without any people going into it without any knowledge or any sort of sophistication knowledge or any sort of sophistication knowledge or any sort of sophistication and just putting all their money in it and just putting all their money in it and just putting all their money in it and you know up and down. We see it, we and you know up and down. We see it, we and you know up and down. We see it, we see more sophisticated people doing it see more sophisticated people doing it see more sophisticated people doing it as adults on uh in real estate as adults on uh in real estate as adults on uh in real estate investments or stock market stock market investments or stock market stock market investments or stock market stock market or owners of company taking big bets on or owners of company taking big bets on or owners of company taking big bets on things and it doesn't mean that things and it doesn't mean that things and it doesn't mean that there's aren't people that are taking there's aren't people that are taking there's aren't people that are taking calculated risks. I'm talking about calculated risks. I'm talking about calculated risks. I'm talking about people who are like day trading when people who are like day trading when people who are like day trading when they you know and there are people that they you know and there are people that they you know and there are people that day trade and do great but then there's day trade and do great but then there's day trade and do great but then there's a lot of people that see this person day a lot of people that see this person day a lot of people that see this person day traded in great and then they do it traded in great and then they do it traded in great and then they do it and don't do so great right it their and don't do so great right it their and don't do so great right it their lives collapse. So, are you seeing their lives collapse. So, are you seeing their lives collapse. So, are you seeing more people coming to you with gambling more people coming to you with gambling more people coming to you with gambling addiction? Yes. Um, it's not always then addiction? Yes. Um, it's not always then addiction? Yes. Um, it's not always then the primary thing though. There's a lot the primary thing though. There's a lot the primary thing though. There's a lot of people that are uh coming in with of people that are uh coming in with of people that are uh coming in with substance abuse or substance use or substance abuse or substance use or substance abuse or substance use or alcohol, you know, alcoholism and we alcohol, you know, alcoholism and we alcohol, you know, alcoholism and we find out that they're also doing that. find out that they're also doing that. find out that they're also doing that. The thing is people addicted to gambling The thing is people addicted to gambling The thing is people addicted to gambling aren't always seeking treatment. You aren't always seeking treatment. You aren't always seeking treatment. You know, by the time that they are ready know, by the time that they are ready know, by the time that they are ready to, they might not have the money for to, they might not have the money for to, they might not have the money for it. you know, they might not have the it. you know, they might not have the it. you know, they might not have the job with the insurance and you know, job with the insurance and you know, job with the insurance and you know, if we are talking about insurance and if we are talking about insurance and if we are talking about insurance and treatment centers, there's not really a treatment centers, there's not really a treatment centers, there's not really a benefit for long-term gambling a benefit for long-term gambling a benefit for long-term gambling treatment. You know, you have to kind of treatment. You know, you have to kind of treatment. You know, you have to kind of look at the anxiety and depression look at the anxiety and depression look at the anxiety and depression around it. And sometimes they get put in around it. And sometimes they get put in around it. And sometimes they get put in with people who are just who are with people who are just who are with people who are just who are suffering from anxiety and depression suffering from anxiety and depression suffering from anxiety and depression and we're not really focusing on the and we're not really focusing on the and we're not really focusing on the specific gambling issue. We also see specific gambling issue. We also see specific gambling issue. We also see people that, you know, they stop people that, you know, they stop people that, you know, they stop drinking and they're able to stay sober drinking and they're able to stay sober drinking and they're able to stay sober that way and they haven't really that way and they haven't really that way and they haven't really organized and ordered their life in a organized and ordered their life in a organized and ordered their life in a way that they're building towards way that they're building towards way that they're building towards something and that energy from the something and that energy from the something and that energy from the addiction of alcohol or drugs goes to addiction of alcohol or drugs goes to addiction of alcohol or drugs goes to gambling. Yeah, I was going to ask you gambling. Yeah, I was going to ask you gambling. Yeah, I was going to ask you about that. Uh we'll talk about a few about that. Uh we'll talk about a few about that. Uh we'll talk about a few other um patterns of addiction and types other um patterns of addiction and types other um patterns of addiction and types of addiction, excuse me. Um, but types of addiction, excuse me. Um, but types of addiction, excuse me. Um, but this idea that when you remove the quote this idea that when you remove the quote this idea that when you remove the quote unquote medicine, there's a lot of unquote medicine, there's a lot of unquote medicine, there's a lot of distress and discomfort that comes up distress and discomfort that comes up distress and discomfort that comes up for people. And some people are able to for people. And some people are able to for people. And some people are able to white knuckle it as it's called. Um, white knuckle it as it's called. Um, white knuckle it as it's called. Um, some people can develop tools to try and some people can develop tools to try and some people can develop tools to try and work with that distress, become more work with that distress, become more work with that distress, become more distress tolerant. Um, some people will distress tolerant. Um, some people will distress tolerant. Um, some people will transmute distress sometimes. Yeah, it transmute distress sometimes. Yeah, it transmute distress sometimes. Yeah, it goes into running ultramarathons, which goes into running ultramarathons, which goes into running ultramarathons, which doesn't necessarily mean that it's an doesn't necessarily mean that it's an doesn't necessarily mean that it's an addiction, but um I've seen and we know addiction, but um I've seen and we know addiction, but um I've seen and we know some people who uh got sober and stayed some people who uh got sober and stayed some people who uh got sober and stayed sober basically by running a lot. Yeah. sober basically by running a lot. Yeah. sober basically by running a lot. Yeah. A lot. A lot. You know, do you think A lot. A lot. You know, do you think A lot. A lot. You know, do you think that increased like V2 max allows that increased like V2 max allows that increased like V2 max allows for ability to handle distress better? for ability to handle distress better? for ability to handle distress better? Sure. I think that running can calm the Sure. I think that running can calm the Sure. I think that running can calm the mind over time. runners who run a lot, mind over time. runners who run a lot, mind over time. runners who run a lot, most of them are pretty tired or a most of them are pretty tired or a most of them are pretty tired or a little bit tired, right? Um, and maybe little bit tired, right? Um, and maybe little bit tired, right? Um, and maybe that's part of the solution. You know, that's part of the solution. You know, that's part of the solution. You know, if you have a dog that needs a lot of if you have a dog that needs a lot of if you have a dog that needs a lot of physical movement, you put into a small physical movement, you put into a small physical movement, you put into a small space and it doesn't get that a chance space and it doesn't get that a chance space and it doesn't get that a chance to run around. I mean, you see this in to run around. I mean, you see this in to run around. I mean, you see this in zoos and animals develop these what zoos and animals develop these what zoos and animals develop these what called stereotopies like you see the called stereotopies like you see the called stereotopies like you see the lion that's cutting a literally a trench lion that's cutting a literally a trench lion that's cutting a literally a trench in the dirt. It's really sad to see. you in the dirt. It's really sad to see. you in the dirt. It's really sad to see. you know, that animal is designed to roam. know, that animal is designed to roam. know, that animal is designed to roam. And you give an animal the opportunity And you give an animal the opportunity And you give an animal the opportunity to expend this energy that's stored up to expend this energy that's stored up to expend this energy that's stored up in its mitochondria and it and it in its mitochondria and it and it in its mitochondria and it and it does and it can relax and it can sleep. does and it can relax and it can sleep. does and it can relax and it can sleep. I mean, they still have to do the work I mean, they still have to do the work I mean, they still have to do the work of getting sober. Um, these people, but of getting sober. Um, these people, but of getting sober. Um, these people, but you know, moving your body through space you know, moving your body through space you know, moving your body through space is a way of transmuting energy out is a way of transmuting energy out is a way of transmuting energy out of the body. So, you come home, you're of the body. So, you come home, you're of the body. So, you come home, you're like relax, you eat a meal, it's like relax, you eat a meal, it's like relax, you eat a meal, it's like there's a calming effect to endurance there's a calming effect to endurance there's a calming effect to endurance activities. For me, nothing changes my activities. For me, nothing changes my activities. For me, nothing changes my mind, my mood and nervous system better mind, my mood and nervous system better mind, my mood and nervous system better than even a 20-minute run. I mean, I than even a 20-minute run. I mean, I than even a 20-minute run. I mean, I think they're also getting the benefits think they're also getting the benefits think they're also getting the benefits if you're walking or running, you're if you're walking or running, you're if you're walking or running, you're getting the benefits or similar benefits getting the benefits or similar benefits getting the benefits or similar benefits to what people get from EMDR. I mean, to what people get from EMDR. I mean, to what people get from EMDR. I mean, just the natural movements of the eye. just the natural movements of the eye. just the natural movements of the eye. In fact, EMDR, which is eye movement In fact, EMDR, which is eye movement In fact, EMDR, which is eye movement desensitization and reprocessing was the desensitization and reprocessing was the desensitization and reprocessing was the woman who discovered it discovered it by woman who discovered it discovered it by woman who discovered it discovered it by going for a walk and realizing when she going for a walk and realizing when she going for a walk and realizing when she put uh something that she was distressed put uh something that she was distressed put uh something that she was distressed by in her mind at the end of the walk, by in her mind at the end of the walk, by in her mind at the end of the walk, she felt better. Yeah. Francine Shapiro. she felt better. Yeah. Francine Shapiro. she felt better. Yeah. Francine Shapiro. She was in Palo Alto walking behind She was in Palo Alto walking behind She was in Palo Alto walking behind Stanford when she made that discovery. Stanford when she made that discovery. Stanford when she made that discovery. There's a um as long as we're talking There's a um as long as we're talking There's a um as long as we're talking about this, it's funny that this is about this, it's funny that this is about this, it's funny that this is coming up because I online behavior, coming up because I online behavior, coming up because I online behavior, gambling, um looking for somebody to get drugs um looking for somebody to get drugs um looking for somebody to get drugs from, you know, those are the foraging from, you know, those are the foraging from, you know, those are the foraging is where the dopamine is released. We is where the dopamine is released. We is where the dopamine is released. We were talking about this earlier and were talking about this earlier and were talking about this earlier and foraging mentally is the same from the foraging mentally is the same from the foraging mentally is the same from the perspective of the dopamine system as perspective of the dopamine system as perspective of the dopamine system as foraging physically through space. Think foraging physically through space. Think foraging physically through space. Think about what the dopamine system evolved about what the dopamine system evolved about what the dopamine system evolved for. It's like any animal, including us, for. It's like any animal, including us, for. It's like any animal, including us, searching for water, searching for food, searching for water, searching for food, searching for water, searching for food, searching for mates. We rest at night, searching for mates. We rest at night, searching for mates. We rest at night, but it's the it's the movement forward but it's the it's the movement forward but it's the it's the movement forward through space that satisfies that through space that satisfies that through space that satisfies that dopamineergic system. And in fact, the dopamineergic system. And in fact, the dopamineergic system. And in fact, the major I don't want to go off on too the major I don't want to go off on too the major I don't want to go off on too much of a tangent here, but the much of a tangent here, but the much of a tangent here, but the major system for movement in the body, major system for movement in the body, major system for movement in the body, not just reward and motivation, is not just reward and motivation, is not just reward and motivation, is dopamine. That's why people with dopamine. That's why people with dopamine. That's why people with Parkinson's lose dopamineergic neurons Parkinson's lose dopamineergic neurons Parkinson's lose dopamineergic neurons and they can't generate smooth and they can't generate smooth and they can't generate smooth behavior anymore. And it's interesting behavior anymore. And it's interesting behavior anymore. And it's interesting that NIDRA and NSDR, the most impressive that NIDRA and NSDR, the most impressive that NIDRA and NSDR, the most impressive study in my mind, is the one that shows study in my mind, is the one that shows study in my mind, is the one that shows these big increases in dopamine from these big increases in dopamine from these big increases in dopamine from resting. So I feel like physical resting. So I feel like physical resting. So I feel like physical movement 65% increase in indogenous movement 65% increase in indogenous movement 65% increase in indogenous dopamine or something like that. It's dopamine or something like that. It's dopamine or something like that. It's incredible. There's something about incredible. There's something about incredible. There's something about still body active mind that ramps still body active mind that ramps still body active mind that ramps up our dopamine stores and then prepares up our dopamine stores and then prepares up our dopamine stores and then prepares us for Does a dopamine store get ramped us for Does a dopamine store get ramped us for Does a dopamine store get ramped up when we're sleeping? Yes. So I mean I up when we're sleeping? Yes. So I mean I up when we're sleeping? Yes. So I mean I think that's the I mean the yog think that's the I mean the yog think that's the I mean the yog anecdotally they'll say that you know a anecdotally they'll say that you know a anecdotally they'll say that you know a 30 minute yoga nidra is equal to about 3 30 minute yoga nidra is equal to about 3 30 minute yoga nidra is equal to about 3 hours of REM sleep. I don't know that hours of REM sleep. I don't know that hours of REM sleep. I don't know that that's true or not but it's hard to that's true or not but it's hard to that's true or not but it's hard to equate. Yeah, of course. But I'm just equate. Yeah, of course. But I'm just equate. Yeah, of course. But I'm just saying anecdotally, you know, but it saying anecdotally, you know, but it saying anecdotally, you know, but it makes sense. And I think, yeah, there's makes sense. And I think, yeah, there's makes sense. And I think, yeah, there's some there's some truth to that basic some there's some truth to that basic some there's some truth to that basic statement or basic truth to that statement or basic truth to that statement or basic truth to that statement. I think that transmuting just statement. I think that transmuting just statement. I think that transmuting just the energy that would otherwise become the energy that would otherwise become the energy that would otherwise become distress or that starts as distress. distress or that starts as distress. distress or that starts as distress. Like when we're stressed, we need to get Like when we're stressed, we need to get Like when we're stressed, we need to get that out of our body. And I think that out of our body. And I think that out of our body. And I think that um drugs like cocaine and amphetamine, um drugs like cocaine and amphetamine, um drugs like cocaine and amphetamine, big increases in dopamine, then crashes, big increases in dopamine, then crashes, big increases in dopamine, then crashes, you're essentially dispelling the you're essentially dispelling the you're essentially dispelling the energy. I'm not so sure that it's always energy. I'm not so sure that it's always energy. I'm not so sure that it's always about pursuit. That that that's kind of about pursuit. That that that's kind of about pursuit. That that that's kind of like you said, it's like the like you said, it's like the like you said, it's like the gambling addict that actually wants to gambling addict that actually wants to gambling addict that actually wants to lose. They want to lose, but they lose. They want to lose, but they lose. They want to lose, but they recognize that they felt that was recognize that they felt that was recognize that they felt that was the that was the hit or they felt one the that was the hit or they felt one the that was the hit or they felt one there. They I'm sure they felt it when there. They I'm sure they felt it when there. They I'm sure they felt it when they won as well. But well, when you're they won as well. But well, when you're they won as well. But well, when you're really low, the only place you can go up really low, the only place you can go up really low, the only place you can go up go from there is up. You know, when go from there is up. You know, when go from there is up. You know, when you're really high, the only place you you're really high, the only place you you're really high, the only place you can go from there is down. Yeah. This is can go from there is down. Yeah. This is can go from there is down. Yeah. This is so important so important so important because I think you know what is because I think you know what is because I think you know what is discomfort? What is the distress we're discomfort? What is the distress we're discomfort? What is the distress we're experiencing? It's not our thoughts. We experiencing? It's not our thoughts. We experiencing? It's not our thoughts. We don't feel our thoughts. We feel our don't feel our thoughts. We feel our don't feel our thoughts. We feel our feelings. They call them feelings, feelings. They call them feelings, feelings. They call them feelings, right? Because we feel them. What are we right? Because we feel them. What are we right? Because we feel them. What are we feeling? We're feeling some sort of feeling? We're feeling some sort of feeling? We're feeling some sort of sensation in our body. Yeah. It's sensation in our body. Yeah. It's sensation in our body. Yeah. It's energy. It's energy, which is energy. It's energy, which is energy. It's energy, which is energy. And and when we're feeling that energy And and when we're feeling that energy And and when we're feeling that energy in an appropriate situation, like I'm in an appropriate situation, like I'm in an appropriate situation, like I'm feeling uh intense adrenaline and feeling uh intense adrenaline and feeling uh intense adrenaline and excitement when I'm going on a roller excitement when I'm going on a roller excitement when I'm going on a roller coaster that I like, you know, and I'll coaster that I like, you know, and I'll coaster that I like, you know, and I'll pay and money and stand in line to do pay and money and stand in line to do pay and money and stand in line to do that. If you wake up on a Tuesday that. If you wake up on a Tuesday that. If you wake up on a Tuesday morning in your bed and you start morning in your bed and you start morning in your bed and you start feeling that it's anxiety, fear, feeling that it's anxiety, fear, feeling that it's anxiety, fear, desperation, you know, it's still just desperation, you know, it's still just desperation, you know, it's still just energy in our body. energy in our body. energy in our body. And everybody will experience things And everybody will experience things And everybody will experience things differently. I could probably ask you differently. I could probably ask you differently. I could probably ask you because you've got insight, you know, if because you've got insight, you know, if because you've got insight, you know, if you're experiencing anger, where it is. you're experiencing anger, where it is. you're experiencing anger, where it is. If somebody asks me, you know, I can If somebody asks me, you know, I can If somebody asks me, you know, I can experience that in a hot belly, like experience that in a hot belly, like experience that in a hot belly, like heat between my eyes. My my shoulders heat between my eyes. My my shoulders heat between my eyes. My my shoulders feel really tense. You know, if I'm if feel really tense. You know, if I'm if feel really tense. You know, if I'm if I'm scared, where do I feel that? You I'm scared, where do I feel that? You I'm scared, where do I feel that? You know, I feel like an emptiness in my know, I feel like an emptiness in my know, I feel like an emptiness in my stomach and a kind of tension in my stomach and a kind of tension in my stomach and a kind of tension in my body. You know, people can name it. And body. You know, people can name it. And body. You know, people can name it. And sometimes just naming it, you know, what sometimes just naming it, you know, what sometimes just naming it, you know, what it is versus kind of running through it is versus kind of running through it is versus kind of running through like I'm anxious, I'm afraid. Instead of like I'm anxious, I'm afraid. Instead of like I'm anxious, I'm afraid. Instead of saying I'm anxious or afraid, being able saying I'm anxious or afraid, being able saying I'm anxious or afraid, being able to go, well, my heart's racing, I'm to go, well, my heart's racing, I'm to go, well, my heart's racing, I'm feeling uh tension in my shoulders. feeling uh tension in my shoulders. feeling uh tension in my shoulders. Talking about the experience. And the Talking about the experience. And the Talking about the experience. And the goal isn't always just to dissipate it, goal isn't always just to dissipate it, goal isn't always just to dissipate it, but we can be with it. Because the but we can be with it. Because the but we can be with it. Because the idea that I'm anxious and I can't get idea that I'm anxious and I can't get idea that I'm anxious and I can't get out of it then causes more anxiety. out of it then causes more anxiety. out of it then causes more anxiety. That's right. And so these practices That's right. And so these practices That's right. And so these practices that we can anything that we can build that we can anything that we can build that we can anything that we can build where we just kind of lean into the where we just kind of lean into the where we just kind of lean into the discomfort a little discomfort a little discomfort a little bit and then lean out, we start to build bit and then lean out, we start to build bit and then lean out, we start to build capacity. We pendulate through kind of capacity. We pendulate through kind of capacity. We pendulate through kind of activation and activation and activation and resource until we have we have a resource until we have we have a resource until we have we have a larger range of motion. What about, and larger range of motion. What about, and larger range of motion. What about, and I'll bundle these, things that really I'll bundle these, things that really I'll bundle these, things that really hit the dopamine system hard, like in hit the dopamine system hard, like in hit the dopamine system hard, like in your observation, cocaine, your observation, cocaine, your observation, cocaine, empetamine being the most salient empetamine being the most salient empetamine being the most salient ones, aderall, and other stimulants. Is ones, aderall, and other stimulants. Is ones, aderall, and other stimulants. Is there something unique to those there something unique to those there something unique to those addictions that you see in people that addictions that you see in people that addictions that you see in people that come in that give them kind of special come in that give them kind of special come in that give them kind of special requirements for how to overcome those requirements for how to overcome those requirements for how to overcome those addictions? Yeah, I mean, it's addictions? Yeah, I mean, it's addictions? Yeah, I mean, it's interesting. I think in the um up until interesting. I think in the um up until interesting. I think in the um up until sometime in the 80s, and I'm not going sometime in the 80s, and I'm not going sometime in the 80s, and I'm not going to have this right, they didn't even I to have this right, they didn't even I to have this right, they didn't even I think they didn't really see cocaine as think they didn't really see cocaine as think they didn't really see cocaine as addictive because it you didn't addictive because it you didn't addictive because it you didn't become dependent on it like you would become dependent on it like you would become dependent on it like you would heroin or alcohol. Yeah. Somebody wrote heroin or alcohol. Yeah. Somebody wrote heroin or alcohol. Yeah. Somebody wrote a book called I think it was it Dr. a book called I think it was it Dr. a book called I think it was it Dr. Gold 1800 cocaine where they were Gold 1800 cocaine where they were Gold 1800 cocaine where they were starting to see that we could classify starting to see that we could classify starting to see that we could classify addiction as a psychological addiction. addiction as a psychological addiction. addiction as a psychological addiction. I might have that a little bit off, but I might have that a little bit off, but I might have that a little bit off, but I think it's somewhere in that in I think it's somewhere in that in I think it's somewhere in that in that neighborhood. There there's not a that neighborhood. There there's not a that neighborhood. There there's not a physical detox physical detox physical detox from stimulants like amphetamines or uh from stimulants like amphetamines or uh from stimulants like amphetamines or uh cocaine like there is uh cocaine like there is uh cocaine like there is from heroin, opioids or alcohol and from heroin, opioids or alcohol and from heroin, opioids or alcohol and bzzoazipines. Coming off stimulants is bzzoazipines. Coming off stimulants is bzzoazipines. Coming off stimulants is really hard. It's really hard. It's really hard. It's really hard. It's really hard. It's really hard. It's really hard, right? But it's there's a really hard, right? But it's there's a really hard, right? But it's there's a obsession of the mind that gets obsession of the mind that gets obsession of the mind that gets triggered and it's this it's this triggered and it's this it's this triggered and it's this it's this psychological uh addiction that they psychological uh addiction that they psychological uh addiction that they can't seem to get out of. I would can't seem to get out of. I would can't seem to get out of. I would imagine that you could probably describe imagine that you could probably describe imagine that you could probably describe it what's happening with the huge surge it what's happening with the huge surge it what's happening with the huge surge in dopamine and then dropping off of it. in dopamine and then dropping off of it. in dopamine and then dropping off of it. I'm not sure exactly where it falls I'm not sure exactly where it falls I'm not sure exactly where it falls in that, but you know there's uh they in that, but you know there's uh they in that, but you know there's uh they used to think that people couldn't you used to think that people couldn't you used to think that people couldn't you know recover from crack cocaine. That's know recover from crack cocaine. That's know recover from crack cocaine. That's what we were told. You do it once and what we were told. You do it once and what we were told. You do it once and you're addicted. I don't want to say you're addicted. I don't want to say you're addicted. I don't want to say that's not true, but there was no real that's not true, but there was no real that's not true, but there was no real evidence for that. It's just smoking evidence for that. It's just smoking evidence for that. It's just smoking crack aside from shooting cocaine like crack aside from shooting cocaine like crack aside from shooting cocaine like in introvenously leads to the fastest in introvenously leads to the fastest in introvenously leads to the fastest increase in dopamine. It's the rate of increase in dopamine. It's the rate of increase in dopamine. It's the rate of increase is just as important as the increase is just as important as the increase is just as important as the peak, right? In working with those. I peak, right? In working with those. I peak, right? In working with those. I mean, there's a lot of uh energy that mean, there's a lot of uh energy that mean, there's a lot of uh energy that goes into just having them kind of goes into just having them kind of goes into just having them kind of still. I mean, I think a lot of, you still. I mean, I think a lot of, you still. I mean, I think a lot of, you know, uh, stimulants kind of ma I see know, uh, stimulants kind of ma I see know, uh, stimulants kind of ma I see it as they help the physical body it as they help the physical body it as they help the physical body kind of match with the internal state of kind of match with the internal state of kind of match with the internal state of the of the nervous system. I mean, I the of the nervous system. I mean, I the of the nervous system. I mean, I think that's one of the reasons we see think that's one of the reasons we see think that's one of the reasons we see stimulants work for ADHD. I mean, you stimulants work for ADHD. I mean, you stimulants work for ADHD. I mean, you probably understand the biological you probably understand the biological you probably understand the biological reasons, but it seems to me that it kind reasons, but it seems to me that it kind reasons, but it seems to me that it kind of levels out their experience. I mean, of levels out their experience. I mean, of levels out their experience. I mean, I I've seen people that when they I I've seen people that when they I I've seen people that when they take stimulants, they get really calm. take stimulants, they get really calm. take stimulants, they get really calm. Yeah. Having a mismatch between your Yeah. Having a mismatch between your Yeah. Having a mismatch between your brain level of activity and your bodily brain level of activity and your bodily brain level of activity and your bodily level of activity is really rough. So, level of activity is really rough. So, level of activity is really rough. So, let's talk about some process let's talk about some process let's talk about some process addictions. Uh, these days I hear a ton addictions. Uh, these days I hear a ton addictions. Uh, these days I hear a ton of really um desperate stories, mostly of really um desperate stories, mostly of really um desperate stories, mostly from young guys. I've heard from maybe from young guys. I've heard from maybe from young guys. I've heard from maybe four or five women on this, but four or five women on this, but four or five women on this, but literally thousands of young men about literally thousands of young men about literally thousands of young men about porn addiction. Every time I hear about porn addiction. Every time I hear about porn addiction. Every time I hear about it, I feel so fortunate that I grew up it, I feel so fortunate that I grew up it, I feel so fortunate that I grew up in a time where or maybe I just don't in a time where or maybe I just don't in a time where or maybe I just don't have the wiring for it. And if I have the wiring for it. And if I have the wiring for it. And if I did, I would be I'm pretty open on did, I would be I'm pretty open on did, I would be I'm pretty open on this podcast. I it's never been an this podcast. I it's never been an this podcast. I it's never been an issue for me. Um and they're telling me issue for me. Um and they're telling me issue for me. Um and they're telling me that they can't stop watching porn. I that they can't stop watching porn. I that they can't stop watching porn. I get the sense that they're not enjoying get the sense that they're not enjoying get the sense that they're not enjoying this experience anymore because they're this experience anymore because they're this experience anymore because they're reaching out to me saying, "How in the reaching out to me saying, "How in the reaching out to me saying, "How in the world can I quit?" And what do I tell them? I remember, and And what do I tell them? I remember, and And what do I tell them? I remember, and again, I don't know this study, but I again, I don't know this study, but I again, I don't know this study, but I remember uh somebody referencing many remember uh somebody referencing many remember uh somebody referencing many years ago when I was first getting in years ago when I was first getting in years ago when I was first getting in the field that porn addiction at the field that porn addiction at the field that porn addiction at the time, specifically related to um video time, specifically related to um video time, specifically related to um video pornography, which is what it all is pornography, which is what it all is pornography, which is what it all is now, right? now, right? now, right? Um it was having the same impact on the Um it was having the same impact on the Um it was having the same impact on the brain and young men as crack cocaine. I brain and young men as crack cocaine. I brain and young men as crack cocaine. I mean, it's extremely powerful. has a lot mean, it's extremely powerful. has a lot mean, it's extremely powerful. has a lot of other effects in that it sets up a of other effects in that it sets up a of other effects in that it sets up a very unrealistic idea and perspective of what unrealistic idea and perspective of what unrealistic idea and perspective of what sex and intimacy is. You know, it also sex and intimacy is. You know, it also sex and intimacy is. You know, it also uh can help uh or can lead to kind of uh can help uh or can lead to kind of uh can help uh or can lead to kind of setting their sexual template. You know, setting their sexual template. You know, setting their sexual template. You know, they can quickly escalate just like you they can quickly escalate just like you they can quickly escalate just like you would escalate. you kind of back to the would escalate. you kind of back to the would escalate. you kind of back to the um uh hot fudge Sunday where it the um uh hot fudge Sunday where it the um uh hot fudge Sunday where it doesn't work anymore from you know doesn't work anymore from you know doesn't work anymore from you know something that might seem like normal something that might seem like normal something that might seem like normal sex to violent sex to really out there sex to violent sex to really out there sex to violent sex to really out there things that things that things that um can bring a lot of shame that they're um can bring a lot of shame that they're um can bring a lot of shame that they're even watching and it can escalate even watching and it can escalate even watching and it can escalate quickly and then have an impact on their quickly and then have an impact on their quickly and then have an impact on their own lives and relationships because own lives and relationships because own lives and relationships because they're playing out those relationships they're playing out those relationships they're playing out those relationships or that amount of intimacy or that amount of intimacy or that amount of intimacy depending on what are doing also if depending on what are doing also if depending on what are doing also if there's masturbation along with it in there's masturbation along with it in there's masturbation along with it in a fantasy. Well, what I'm also hearing a fantasy. Well, what I'm also hearing a fantasy. Well, what I'm also hearing is that anytime they are in a real life is that anytime they are in a real life is that anytime they are in a real life intimate scenario, which seems to be intimate scenario, which seems to be intimate scenario, which seems to be fewer and fewer times nowadays in the fewer and fewer times nowadays in the fewer and fewer times nowadays in the younger generation, that they're having younger generation, that they're having younger generation, that they're having sexual uh anxiety, sexual performance sexual uh anxiety, sexual performance sexual uh anxiety, sexual performance issues, which makes sense if they're if issues, which makes sense if they're if issues, which makes sense if they're if their brain and nervous system is their brain and nervous system is their brain and nervous system is getting wired by porn to observe sexual getting wired by porn to observe sexual getting wired by porn to observe sexual behavior as opposed to being in the behavior as opposed to being in the behavior as opposed to being in the experience of intimate sex experience of intimate sex experience of intimate sex behavior, right? two different things to behavior, right? two different things to behavior, right? two different things to be in the experience versus watching be in the experience versus watching be in the experience versus watching someone else's experience of it which is someone else's experience of it which is someone else's experience of it which is what pornography is. Yeah. This was what pornography is. Yeah. This was what pornography is. Yeah. This was probably 10, 15 years probably 10, 15 years probably 10, 15 years ago where we were treating some but we ago where we were treating some but we ago where we were treating some but we treating a lot of soldiers that had come treating a lot of soldiers that had come treating a lot of soldiers that had come back from Afghanistan or Iraq and you back from Afghanistan or Iraq and you back from Afghanistan or Iraq and you know they had access this was like the know they had access this was like the know they had access this was like the first wars where they had access to the first wars where they had access to the first wars where they had access to the internet and there's a lot of other internet and there's a lot of other internet and there's a lot of other things. So there was a lot of uh kind of things. So there was a lot of uh kind of things. So there was a lot of uh kind of uh combining of sex and violence, right? uh combining of sex and violence, right? uh combining of sex and violence, right? they're around a lot of violence and they're around a lot of violence and they're around a lot of violence and then they're watching sex and then that then they're watching sex and then that then they're watching sex and then that kind of sexual template would set around kind of sexual template would set around kind of sexual template would set around like in order for them to get pleasure like in order for them to get pleasure like in order for them to get pleasure out of sex it would need to be out of sex it would need to be out of sex it would need to be aggressive or even violent um or aggressive or even violent um or aggressive or even violent um or risk very risky you know so there's all risk very risky you know so there's all risk very risky you know so there's all these things that kind of collapse these things that kind of collapse these things that kind of collapse together there were other things going together there were other things going together there were other things going on was like the first time that they had on was like the first time that they had on was like the first time that they had also really had access to video uh also really had access to video uh also really had access to video uh video chats to be able to like be on a video chats to be able to like be on a video chats to be able to like be on a battlefield and then come back and be battlefield and then come back and be battlefield and then come back and be talking to their spouse house about talking to their spouse house about talking to their spouse house about something that's going on with the kids. something that's going on with the kids. something that's going on with the kids. It was very confusing in environment for It was very confusing in environment for It was very confusing in environment for uh those guys and men and women. uh those guys and men and women. uh those guys and men and women. Um you know Um you know Um you know the porn addiction is a is a tough the porn addiction is a is a tough the porn addiction is a is a tough one you know because it it's everywhere. one you know because it it's everywhere. one you know because it it's everywhere. I mean now you can find it on any social I mean now you can find it on any social I mean now you can find it on any social media almost not maybe not anyone but media almost not maybe not anyone but media almost not maybe not anyone but it's not really limited you know and it's not really limited you know and it's not really limited you know and even if it's not you know I know certain even if it's not you know I know certain even if it's not you know I know certain states have just put in where you have states have just put in where you have states have just put in where you have to put in your ID to get it but there's to put in your ID to get it but there's to put in your ID to get it but there's tons of ways around that and other sites tons of ways around that and other sites tons of ways around that and other sites that people can go to and I've run that people can go to and I've run that people can go to and I've run into that with a lot of it does seem to into that with a lot of it does seem to into that with a lot of it does seem to be young men you know and it's a way for be young men you know and it's a way for be young men you know and it's a way for them to play out some sort of fantasy them to play out some sort of fantasy them to play out some sort of fantasy around connection and relationship and around connection and relationship and around connection and relationship and it's it makes their world really small. it's it makes their world really small. it's it makes their world really small. I don't think it's the same as gambling, I don't think it's the same as gambling, I don't think it's the same as gambling, but it can make it can make their but it can make it can make their but it can make it can make their world very small in that they're world very small in that they're world very small in that they're instead of finding relationships out in instead of finding relationships out in instead of finding relationships out in the world. And it's not necessarily a the world. And it's not necessarily a the world. And it's not necessarily a relationship, but they're what they relationship, but they're what they relationship, but they're what they believe they're getting out of a believe they're getting out of a believe they're getting out of a relationship, they're then getting out relationship, they're then getting out relationship, they're then getting out of watching porn. It seems like of watching porn. It seems like of watching porn. It seems like basically stopping completely is the basically stopping completely is the basically stopping completely is the answer. And people say, and I'm not answer. And people say, and I'm not answer. And people say, and I'm not trying to moralize here, right? I'm not trying to moralize here, right? I'm not trying to moralize here, right? I'm not telling people what's moral about this. telling people what's moral about this. telling people what's moral about this. I just know that any behavior or I just know that any behavior or I just know that any behavior or substance that leads to quick repeated substance that leads to quick repeated substance that leads to quick repeated inflections in dopamine is going to inflections in dopamine is going to inflections in dopamine is going to create a groove in the nervous system create a groove in the nervous system create a groove in the nervous system where you're going to crave that thing where you're going to crave that thing where you're going to crave that thing and it's going to give you a lower and it's going to give you a lower and it's going to give you a lower and lower sense of satisfaction over time. lower sense of satisfaction over time. lower sense of satisfaction over time. And the only way to reset that circuit And the only way to reset that circuit And the only way to reset that circuit is to stop and do something else in its is to stop and do something else in its is to stop and do something else in its place. Ideally, that's adaptive. These place. Ideally, that's adaptive. These place. Ideally, that's adaptive. These are people that are asking you how they are people that are asking you how they are people that are asking you how they can stop. You know, they're telling you, can stop. You know, they're telling you, can stop. You know, they're telling you, I can't stop. how do I do it? So, it can I can't stop. how do I do it? So, it can I can't stop. how do I do it? So, it can be similar to other addictions, you be similar to other addictions, you be similar to other addictions, you know, I mean, first the admission part know, I mean, first the admission part know, I mean, first the admission part that it's a problem or awareness it is that it's a problem or awareness it is that it's a problem or awareness it is and then being able to start to talk and then being able to start to talk and then being able to start to talk to somebody and start to take some to somebody and start to take some to somebody and start to take some accountability around it. Not accountability around it. Not accountability around it. Not accountability like you're doing accountability like you're doing accountability like you're doing something wrong, but to be able to have something wrong, but to be able to have something wrong, but to be able to have some sort of identify the behaviors that some sort of identify the behaviors that some sort of identify the behaviors that start leading to that. You know, I mean, start leading to that. You know, I mean, start leading to that. You know, I mean, there uh that can be done in therapy. there uh that can be done in therapy. there uh that can be done in therapy. There's other 12step groups that can There's other 12step groups that can There's other 12step groups that can help people with that to identify what help people with that to identify what help people with that to identify what their sobriety would look like, if you their sobriety would look like, if you their sobriety would look like, if you want to call it sobriety, what it looks want to call it sobriety, what it looks want to call it sobriety, what it looks like. And if it does involve not like. And if it does involve not like. And if it does involve not watching any porn, then that's the rule watching any porn, then that's the rule watching any porn, then that's the rule set that they have. And then they figure set that they have. And then they figure set that they have. And then they figure out either with their therapist or in out either with their therapist or in out either with their therapist or in their treatment center or with their treatment center or with their treatment center or with their sponsor or community in 12step like how sponsor or community in 12step like how sponsor or community in 12step like how am I going to be held accountable to am I going to be held accountable to am I going to be held accountable to that? And that might be doing the things that? And that might be doing the things that? And that might be doing the things like we talked about laying out looking like we talked about laying out looking like we talked about laying out looking at your day ahead. at the at your day ahead. at the at your day ahead. at the beginning they might need to look at beginning they might need to look at beginning they might need to look at things like you know uh there's ways and things like you know uh there's ways and things like you know uh there's ways and software out there to not be able to software out there to not be able to software out there to not be able to look at that on your phone or have an look at that on your phone or have an look at that on your phone or have an accountability partner that can you know accountability partner that can you know accountability partner that can you know you have to they have to approve you have to they have to approve you have to they have to approve websites you go to and that websites you go to and that websites you go to and that that's not to say that they have to do that's not to say that they have to do that's not to say that they have to do that forever but it's something that's that forever but it's something that's that forever but it's something that's available right you know 50 years ago or available right you know 50 years ago or available right you know 50 years ago or 30 years ago someone had to like find 30 years ago someone had to like find 30 years ago someone had to like find their dad's porno mag somewhere and then their dad's porno mag somewhere and then their dad's porno mag somewhere and then look at it you know now it's on their look at it you know now it's on their look at it you know now it's on their phones or computers well we know that phones or computers well we know that phones or computers well we know that accessibil increasing accessibility accessibil increasing accessibility accessibil increasing accessibility increases addiction. Right? This has increases addiction. Right? This has increases addiction. Right? This has been studied over and over again and been studied over and over again and been studied over and over again and people say what about red light people say what about red light people say what about red light districts and things and there's some districts and things and there's some districts and things and there's some caveats that have to do with when you uh caveats that have to do with when you uh caveats that have to do with when you uh create areas within cities where certain create areas within cities where certain create areas within cities where certain things are allowed but you know this has things are allowed but you know this has things are allowed but you know this has been tested many times. Um it's been tested many times. Um it's been tested many times. Um it's also true and it's kind of a duh but to also true and it's kind of a duh but to also true and it's kind of a duh but to quote on ampki it's impossible to get quote on ampki it's impossible to get quote on ampki it's impossible to get addicted to a substance or a behavior addicted to a substance or a behavior addicted to a substance or a behavior that you've never taken or engaged in. that you've never taken or engaged in. that you've never taken or engaged in. Right. So some things are best avoided Right. So some things are best avoided Right. So some things are best avoided entirely. Um, are there specific 12step entirely. Um, are there specific 12step entirely. Um, are there specific 12step programs for porn addiction that are programs for porn addiction that are programs for porn addiction that are separate from say sex addiction? If you separate from say sex addiction? If you separate from say sex addiction? If you people look it up, I'm sure there's people look it up, I'm sure there's people look it up, I'm sure there's meetings out there that are meetings out there that are meetings out there that are specific to that. There are um some specific to that. There are um some specific to that. There are um some treatment centers that have tracks that treatment centers that have tracks that treatment centers that have tracks that deal specifically with that. There's deal specifically with that. There's deal specifically with that. There's therapists that work very closely with therapists that work very closely with therapists that work very closely with that. And I believe that there are that. And I believe that there are that. And I believe that there are some 12step I mean there's pretty much some 12step I mean there's pretty much some 12step I mean there's pretty much 12step programs for any sort of you know 12step programs for any sort of you know 12step programs for any sort of you know within things like SA or SLA there'll be within things like SA or SLA there'll be within things like SA or SLA there'll be subsets of meetings for people that are subsets of meetings for people that are subsets of meetings for people that are with a very specific condition. And one with a very specific condition. And one with a very specific condition. And one of the reasons I wanted to discuss this of the reasons I wanted to discuss this of the reasons I wanted to discuss this today is because I hear about it so much today is because I hear about it so much today is because I hear about it so much is unlike alcohol or drugs, there's a is unlike alcohol or drugs, there's a is unlike alcohol or drugs, there's a kind of extra layer of shame associated kind of extra layer of shame associated kind of extra layer of shame associated with pornography addiction for with pornography addiction for with pornography addiction for people. Um, you know, so many times people. Um, you know, so many times people. Um, you know, so many times we've heard, oh, like this celebrity was we've heard, oh, like this celebrity was we've heard, oh, like this celebrity was a alcoholic or drug addict, you know, a alcoholic or drug addict, you know, a alcoholic or drug addict, you know, wrapped their car around a pole, was wrapped their car around a pole, was wrapped their car around a pole, was arrested, this and that, then they get arrested, this and that, then they get arrested, this and that, then they get sober and everyone still loves them sober and everyone still loves them sober and everyone still loves them loves them more, right? If we knew that loves them more, right? If we knew that loves them more, right? If we knew that a given celebrity was like a porn a given celebrity was like a porn a given celebrity was like a porn addict or something, we look at that addict or something, we look at that addict or something, we look at that person differently. Yeah. Especially if person differently. Yeah. Especially if person differently. Yeah. Especially if they're male, we just look at them they're male, we just look at them they're male, we just look at them differently. And so reducing some of the differently. And so reducing some of the differently. And so reducing some of the shame around it, I think, is key to shame around it, I think, is key to shame around it, I think, is key to helping them recover because I can tell helping them recover because I can tell helping them recover because I can tell you there's the questions initially you there's the questions initially you there's the questions initially came in kind of like as is often the came in kind of like as is often the came in kind of like as is often the case with men when they're trying case with men when they're trying case with men when they're trying to talk about issues that they were kind to talk about issues that they were kind to talk about issues that they were kind of cloaked in like what are your of cloaked in like what are your of cloaked in like what are your thoughts about nofap, which is this thoughts about nofap, which is this thoughts about nofap, which is this thing where guys um withhold thing where guys um withhold thing where guys um withhold ejaculation, okay? Does it increase ejaculation, okay? Does it increase ejaculation, okay? Does it increase testosterone? Turns out in the short run testosterone? Turns out in the short run testosterone? Turns out in the short run it does, in the long term it's probably it does, in the long term it's probably it does, in the long term it's probably not good for the prostate, etc. But then not good for the prostate, etc. But then not good for the prostate, etc. But then what it turned out they were really what it turned out they were really what it turned out they were really asking about masturbation. they were asking about masturbation. they were asking about masturbation. they were really asking about pornography and really asking about pornography and really asking about pornography and then all of a sudden I don't know what then all of a sudden I don't know what then all of a sudden I don't know what changed out there but there's been this changed out there but there's been this changed out there but there's been this deluge of questions from young guys deluge of questions from young guys deluge of questions from young guys of how they can stop engaging in online of how they can stop engaging in online of how they can stop engaging in online porn. A key to that is what you said porn. A key to that is what you said porn. A key to that is what you said about we look at them differently. You about we look at them differently. You about we look at them differently. You know, they're going to keep it secret, know, they're going to keep it secret, know, they're going to keep it secret, you know, and there's a saying secrets you know, and there's a saying secrets you know, and there's a saying secrets keep us sick, but I believe there's like keep us sick, but I believe there's like keep us sick, but I believe there's like a real almost a biology to that. And a real almost a biology to that. And a real almost a biology to that. And that, you know, if you're holding it in, that, you know, if you're holding it in, that, you know, if you're holding it in, not sharing it, you know, there's no not sharing it, you know, there's no not sharing it, you know, there's no really place for it to go but really place for it to go but really place for it to go but shame. And shame separates us. And shame. And shame separates us. And shame. And shame separates us. And separate, we're not connected. And not separate, we're not connected. And not separate, we're not connected. And not connected, we're alone. And alone, connected, we're alone. And alone, connected, we're alone. And alone, we're, you know, we keep carrying that we're, you know, we keep carrying that we're, you know, we keep carrying that forward. Alone, we're forward. Alone, we're forward. Alone, we're dead. You know, maybe not in that sense dead. You know, maybe not in that sense dead. You know, maybe not in that sense anymore, like we talked about earlier, anymore, like we talked about earlier, anymore, like we talked about earlier, but like we're not really living. And so but like we're not really living. And so but like we're not really living. And so they're, you know, these guys are they're, you know, these guys are they're, you know, these guys are hearing you on a podcast and then DMing hearing you on a podcast and then DMing hearing you on a podcast and then DMing you, right? They're probably not in a you, right? They're probably not in a you, right? They're probably not in a personal close relationship with you, personal close relationship with you, personal close relationship with you, right? it's easier to send it there right? it's easier to send it there right? it's easier to send it there than maybe go ask for help with somebody than maybe go ask for help with somebody than maybe go ask for help with somebody in their area or go to a meeting or in their area or go to a meeting or in their area or go to a meeting or something like that because of the something like that because of the something like that because of the stigma. So, it's good that you've opened stigma. So, it's good that you've opened stigma. So, it's good that you've opened up the ability for people to do that, up the ability for people to do that, up the ability for people to do that, but to continue to direct them back to, but to continue to direct them back to, but to continue to direct them back to, you know, let's try to treat this like you know, let's try to treat this like you know, let's try to treat this like we would any other addiction at least we would any other addiction at least we would any other addiction at least from the standpoint of you've got to from the standpoint of you've got to from the standpoint of you've got to talk about it. You've got to have some talk about it. You've got to have some talk about it. You've got to have some sort of admission. You've got to be able sort of admission. You've got to be able sort of admission. You've got to be able to find a community around it. You want to find a community around it. You want to find a community around it. You want to be able to do work, you know, most to be able to do work, you know, most to be able to do work, you know, most likely with a therapist or a team of likely with a therapist or a team of likely with a therapist or a team of therapists that can help you understand therapists that can help you understand therapists that can help you understand what's driving that behavior, you know, what's driving that behavior, you know, what's driving that behavior, you know, and I I, you know, you and I have had and I I, you know, you and I have had and I I, you know, you and I have had long discussions about trauma before. long discussions about trauma before. long discussions about trauma before. That's something I've worked That's something I've worked That's something I've worked with for many years or most of my career with for many years or most of my career with for many years or most of my career as I came into being a therapist. Um, as I came into being a therapist. Um, as I came into being a therapist. Um, you know, and in trauma therapy, we're you know, and in trauma therapy, we're you know, and in trauma therapy, we're often going back to seeing like find we often going back to seeing like find we often going back to seeing like find we do a history and really kind of do a history and really kind of do a history and really kind of understand where the patterns started, understand where the patterns started, understand where the patterns started, you know, and I it's really helpful, you know, and I it's really helpful, you know, and I it's really helpful, you know, for me as a therapist when I can know, for me as a therapist when I can know, for me as a therapist when I can see where it is because I can start see where it is because I can start see where it is because I can start making sense of how people are behaving making sense of how people are behaving making sense of how people are behaving this way as adults when I can see all of this way as adults when I can see all of this way as adults when I can see all of the experiences they had and especially the experiences they had and especially the experiences they had and especially the more negative impactful ones the more negative impactful ones the more negative impactful ones which tend to impact the brain. Like you which tend to impact the brain. Like you which tend to impact the brain. Like you always say, fastest way to plasticity is always say, fastest way to plasticity is always say, fastest way to plasticity is through a traumatic event. Um I believe through a traumatic event. Um I believe through a traumatic event. Um I believe that's how you say one trial learning. that's how you say one trial learning. that's how you say one trial learning. It just takes once unfortunately. But It just takes once unfortunately. But It just takes once unfortunately. But luckily there's plasticity in the other luckily there's plasticity in the other luckily there's plasticity in the other direction. It just takes a little bit direction. It just takes a little bit direction. It just takes a little bit longer, right? I think that's where longer, right? I think that's where longer, right? I think that's where addiction comes in too because you know addiction comes in too because you know addiction comes in too because you know you can kind of feel a sense of you can kind of feel a sense of you can kind of feel a sense of plasticity, you know, if I'm if I'm plasticity, you know, if I'm if I'm plasticity, you know, if I'm if I'm drinking or if I'm doing drugs, right? I drinking or if I'm doing drugs, right? I drinking or if I'm doing drugs, right? I don't know if that's the actual term for don't know if that's the actual term for don't know if that's the actual term for it, but I'm not feeling like my brain is it, but I'm not feeling like my brain is it, but I'm not feeling like my brain is so stuck in that direction. You know, I so stuck in that direction. You know, I so stuck in that direction. You know, I can I can act a little bit differently. can I can act a little bit differently. can I can act a little bit differently. What comes to mind for to kind of What comes to mind for to kind of What comes to mind for to kind of encapsulate all of it because it gets to encapsulate all of it because it gets to encapsulate all of it because it gets to the underlying mechanisms, I think, is, the underlying mechanisms, I think, is, the underlying mechanisms, I think, is, you know, beware the things that come you know, beware the things that come you know, beware the things that come easily and quickly like really beware easily and quickly like really beware easily and quickly like really beware those things. If it's pornography and those things. If it's pornography and those things. If it's pornography and you can get to experience, it's not the you can get to experience, it's not the you can get to experience, it's not the experience of sex, but the um the experience of sex, but the um the experience of sex, but the um the illusion of pseudo sex, right? Right. If illusion of pseudo sex, right? Right. If illusion of pseudo sex, right? Right. If it's if it's easily it's if it's easily it's if it's easily available, beware of that thing. If it's available, beware of that thing. If it's available, beware of that thing. If it's a feeling of relaxation from a drink, a feeling of relaxation from a drink, a feeling of relaxation from a drink, beware of alcohol. Yeah. If it's um fast beware of alcohol. Yeah. If it's um fast beware of alcohol. Yeah. If it's um fast money. Yeah. If it's you are very money. Yeah. If it's you are very money. Yeah. If it's you are very proficient at um you know you find you proficient at um you know you find you proficient at um you know you find you know lift a weight you build muscle you know lift a weight you build muscle you know lift a weight you build muscle you get attention for it beware that you get attention for it beware that you get attention for it beware that thing because there all these positive thing because there all these positive thing because there all these positive reward signals that are masking what reward signals that are masking what reward signals that are masking what soon will happen which is that soon will happen which is that soon will happen which is that thing is going to make you lopsided thing is going to make you lopsided thing is going to make you lopsided internally and make you crave it more. internally and make you crave it more. internally and make you crave it more. And so I think that there there's And so I think that there there's And so I think that there there's something about this uh things that come something about this uh things that come something about this uh things that come easy it's a problem. And I think I kind easy it's a problem. And I think I kind easy it's a problem. And I think I kind of like that in the sense that um of like that in the sense that um of like that in the sense that um because many people are struggling and because many people are struggling and because many people are struggling and we don't often uh glorify the struggle. we don't often uh glorify the struggle. we don't often uh glorify the struggle. We're all we're all trying to you know We're all we're all trying to you know We're all we're all trying to you know struggle our way out of struggle. But struggle our way out of struggle. But struggle our way out of struggle. But struggle is distress and as long as struggle is distress and as long as struggle is distress and as long as we're struggling, we're in the distress we're struggling, we're in the distress we're struggling, we're in the distress tolerance. I'm not saying people tolerance. I'm not saying people tolerance. I'm not saying people shouldn't aim to succeed, but um and shouldn't aim to succeed, but um and shouldn't aim to succeed, but um and forgive me for going a little long on forgive me for going a little long on forgive me for going a little long on this reflection, but I remember in this reflection, but I remember in this reflection, but I remember in graduate school, I had a paper that got graduate school, I had a paper that got graduate school, I had a paper that got accepted by the journal Science, which accepted by the journal Science, which accepted by the journal Science, which is like one of the three apex journals, is like one of the three apex journals, is like one of the three apex journals, Nature, Science, and Cell. And I was Nature, Science, and Cell. And I was Nature, Science, and Cell. And I was like over the moon. Yeah. I was like, like over the moon. Yeah. I was like, like over the moon. Yeah. I was like, "Oh my god, like this is amazing." Like "Oh my god, like this is amazing." Like "Oh my god, like this is amazing." Like first author paper in science. Like some first author paper in science. Like some first author paper in science. Like some people never do that in their career. I people never do that in their career. I people never do that in their career. I was doing as a graduate student. And um was doing as a graduate student. And um was doing as a graduate student. And um my dad who's a scientist said, "Prepare my dad who's a scientist said, "Prepare my dad who's a scientist said, "Prepare for the week afterward when you wonder for the week afterward when you wonder for the week afterward when you wonder if you'll ever do it again." I was like, if you'll ever do it again." I was like, if you'll ever do it again." I was like, "Okay." Kind of a postpartum crash. And "Okay." Kind of a postpartum crash. And "Okay." Kind of a postpartum crash. And then my graduate adviser, I said, "Do we then my graduate adviser, I said, "Do we then my graduate adviser, I said, "Do we get to celebrate?" Like, "Do we get to get to celebrate?" Like, "Do we get to get to celebrate?" Like, "Do we get to like throw a meal or a party?" And she like throw a meal or a party?" And she like throw a meal or a party?" And she goes, "No." Like I suppose I could buy goes, "No." Like I suppose I could buy goes, "No." Like I suppose I could buy you a pizza, but that would be stupid. you a pizza, but that would be stupid. you a pizza, but that would be stupid. This is perfect chap. And uh very blunt. This is perfect chap. And uh very blunt. This is perfect chap. And uh very blunt. Um, and she said, "No, the pleasure was Um, and she said, "No, the pleasure was Um, and she said, "No, the pleasure was the work of doing the work of doing the work of doing the paper." And I was like, "I got it." paper." And I was like, "I got it." paper." And I was like, "I got it." And that's what taught me to repeat that And that's what taught me to repeat that And that's what taught me to repeat that process. I didn't always publish in process. I didn't always publish in process. I didn't always publish in science, but um certainly in other great science, but um certainly in other great science, but um certainly in other great journals again and again. It's like that journals again and again. It's like that journals again and again. It's like that the reward is in the process. Like that the reward is in the process. Like that the reward is in the process. Like the effort is the reward. And if there's the effort is the reward. And if there's the effort is the reward. And if there's no process or no effort, I mean, and we no process or no effort, I mean, and we no process or no effort, I mean, and we don't struggle, in one way, we're don't struggle, in one way, we're don't struggle, in one way, we're struggling with so much and in other struggling with so much and in other struggling with so much and in other ways we don't struggle, you know, with ways we don't struggle, you know, with ways we don't struggle, you know, with the stuff that we probably need to the stuff that we probably need to the stuff that we probably need to struggle with to move the energy out of struggle with to move the energy out of struggle with to move the energy out of our body. You know, I mean, Michael our body. You know, I mean, Michael our body. You know, I mean, Michael Easter's book Comfort Crisis is great. Easter's book Comfort Crisis is great. Easter's book Comfort Crisis is great. You know, it's like, you know, we You know, it's like, you know, we You know, it's like, you know, we used to walk like 10 miles a day and, used to walk like 10 miles a day and, used to walk like 10 miles a day and, you know, we're not burning that energy. you know, we're not burning that energy. you know, we're not burning that energy. So, we're just sitting there with this So, we're just sitting there with this So, we're just sitting there with this energy that used to just get energy that used to just get energy that used to just get disseminated or we'd like wake up in the disseminated or we'd like wake up in the disseminated or we'd like wake up in the morning, have move through the stressors morning, have move through the stressors morning, have move through the stressors of the day, good, bad, and different. of the day, good, bad, and different. of the day, good, bad, and different. You know, even good things are You know, even good things are You know, even good things are stressful. If you have to go to three stressful. If you have to go to three stressful. If you have to go to three birthday parties on a weekend, even if birthday parties on a weekend, even if birthday parties on a weekend, even if they're fun, you're tired at the they're fun, you're tired at the they're fun, you're tired at the end. Sounds like a dad. Yeah, it is a end. Sounds like a dad. Yeah, it is a end. Sounds like a dad. Yeah, it is a dad. I go to a lot of birthday parties dad. I go to a lot of birthday parties dad. I go to a lot of birthday parties and try not to get sick because of, you and try not to get sick because of, you and try not to get sick because of, you know, at them, especially when they're know, at them, especially when they're know, at them, especially when they're at these little at these little at these little indoor ballping kids. But what's indoor ballping kids. But what's indoor ballping kids. But what's interesting, Michael Easter, you know, interesting, Michael Easter, you know, interesting, Michael Easter, you know, with the comfort crisis, I mean, doing with the comfort crisis, I mean, doing with the comfort crisis, I mean, doing these hard masogi challenges, he calls these hard masogi challenges, he calls these hard masogi challenges, he calls them, you know, I mean, think about like them, you know, I mean, think about like them, you know, I mean, think about like self-imposing discomfort so that you self-imposing discomfort so that you self-imposing discomfort so that you don't get pulled into the illusion of don't get pulled into the illusion of don't get pulled into the illusion of comfort by these other things. I mean, comfort by these other things. I mean, comfort by these other things. I mean, the I think it's coming clear to me now the I think it's coming clear to me now the I think it's coming clear to me now that the things that come easy are the that the things that come easy are the that the things that come easy are the traps. Yeah, they're the traps. So traps. Yeah, they're the traps. So traps. Yeah, they're the traps. So folks, if you're really good at folks, if you're really good at folks, if you're really good at something, doesn't mean don't lean into something, doesn't mean don't lean into something, doesn't mean don't lean into it. But if something comes really easily it. But if something comes really easily it. But if something comes really easily for you, you have to be very mindful of for you, you have to be very mindful of for you, you have to be very mindful of that thing and other things around it. that thing and other things around it. that thing and other things around it. Sounds like you create a discomfort for Sounds like you create a discomfort for Sounds like you create a discomfort for yourself. Maybe there's like a yourself. Maybe there's like a yourself. Maybe there's like a discomfort um appetite that if we don't discomfort um appetite that if we don't discomfort um appetite that if we don't satisfy through healthy things, we will satisfy through healthy things, we will satisfy through healthy things, we will satisfy through unhealthy things. That's satisfy through unhealthy things. That's satisfy through unhealthy things. That's a very interesting concept. I mean, I a very interesting concept. I mean, I a very interesting concept. I mean, I don't know where that would exist in the don't know where that would exist in the don't know where that would exist in the nervous system, but because you hear, nervous system, but because you hear, nervous system, but because you hear, oh, we're trying to avoid pain and go oh, we're trying to avoid pain and go oh, we're trying to avoid pain and go toward pleasure, but those models are toward pleasure, but those models are toward pleasure, but those models are that's true, but those models are too that's true, but those models are too that's true, but those models are too simple. So, I like the idea of a ration simple. So, I like the idea of a ration simple. So, I like the idea of a ration of discomfort to experience every day, of discomfort to experience every day, of discomfort to experience every day, isn't it, that we're kind of built to isn't it, that we're kind of built to isn't it, that we're kind of built to expend energy and then sleep and then expend energy and then sleep and then expend energy and then sleep and then wake up the next day and expend energy wake up the next day and expend energy wake up the next day and expend energy and sleep. And if we're not expending and sleep. And if we're not expending and sleep. And if we're not expending the energy, how can we sleep and then we the energy, how can we sleep and then we the energy, how can we sleep and then we wake up with more and we just carry the wake up with more and we just carry the wake up with more and we just carry the stressors from the day before rather stressors from the day before rather stressors from the day before rather than just breaking it down. I mean, than just breaking it down. I mean, than just breaking it down. I mean, that's one of the beauties of, that's one of the beauties of, that's one of the beauties of, you know, recovery where they talk about you know, recovery where they talk about you know, recovery where they talk about one day at a time. Well, one of the one day at a time. Well, one of the one day at a time. Well, one of the um you know, this last couple weeks, um you know, this last couple weeks, um you know, this last couple weeks, there's always something each year that there's always something each year that there's always something each year that really pops that gets kind of viral really pops that gets kind of viral really pops that gets kind of viral overnight. Last year it was the Hakua overnight. Last year it was the Hakua overnight. Last year it was the Hakua girl. This year it's the morning routine girl. This year it's the morning routine girl. This year it's the morning routine guy, the guy that he shows his morning guy, the guy that he shows his morning guy, the guy that he shows his morning routine and it got millions and millions routine and it got millions and millions routine and it got millions and millions of hits. And um this guy does cold water of hits. And um this guy does cold water of hits. And um this guy does cold water on the face. He's working. He's praying. on the face. He's working. He's praying. on the face. He's working. He's praying. He's doing all these things. He's he's He's doing all these things. He's he's He's doing all these things. He's he's wearing no shirt. He's super jacked. wearing no shirt. He's super jacked. wearing no shirt. He's super jacked. Like he was getting attention for Like he was getting attention for Like he was getting attention for different reasons. Anyway, huge different reasons. Anyway, huge different reasons. Anyway, huge following and uh the best comment ever following and uh the best comment ever following and uh the best comment ever was, "Oh man, this guy's going to come was, "Oh man, this guy's going to come was, "Oh man, this guy's going to come after me. Uh he seems like a like a like after me. Uh he seems like a like a like after me. Uh he seems like a like a like he's got his life organized." Someone he's got his life organized." Someone he's got his life organized." Someone put a comment, "This guy spends all day put a comment, "This guy spends all day put a comment, "This guy spends all day preparing for the next day, which is, preparing for the next day, which is, preparing for the next day, which is, you know, the worst thing about you know, the worst thing about you know, the worst thing about optimization, right? The whole purpose optimization, right? The whole purpose optimization, right? The whole purpose of tools like sleep or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and all of tools like sleep or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and all of tools like sleep or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and all these things that you can, and you these things that you can, and you these things that you can, and you taught me this, really good protocols taught me this, really good protocols taught me this, really good protocols let you lean into life more, not less. let you lean into life more, not less. let you lean into life more, not less. It's not about withdrawing and getting It's not about withdrawing and getting It's not about withdrawing and getting into a wellness loop where you're just into a wellness loop where you're just into a wellness loop where you're just preparing for the next day, right? It's preparing for the next day, right? It's preparing for the next day, right? It's about being able to lean into the third about being able to lean into the third about being able to lean into the third birthday party where you're like, and birthday party where you're like, and birthday party where you're like, and the kids are sick and you know, you're the kids are sick and you know, you're the kids are sick and you know, you're being exposed to all this stuff, but being exposed to all this stuff, but being exposed to all this stuff, but you're there because your daughter needs you're there because your daughter needs you're there because your daughter needs to be there and she's elated to be to be there and she's elated to be to be there and she's elated to be there. Yeah. Can we put on the shelf there. Yeah. Can we put on the shelf there. Yeah. Can we put on the shelf that perhaps we have an appetite for that perhaps we have an appetite for that perhaps we have an appetite for discomfort that we can either satisfy discomfort that we can either satisfy discomfort that we can either satisfy through healthy things or unhealthy? I through healthy things or unhealthy? I through healthy things or unhealthy? I think that's a good way to put it. Can think that's a good way to put it. Can think that's a good way to put it. Can we call it the suave hubman? We can call we call it the suave hubman? We can call we call it the suave hubman? We can call it that. We'll go suave. It's fine. it that. We'll go suave. It's fine. it that. We'll go suave. It's fine. Addiction means that somebody's already Addiction means that somebody's already Addiction means that somebody's already in the pit. Like they haven't done the in the pit. Like they haven't done the in the pit. Like they haven't done the okay, I have an appetite for the okay, I have an appetite for the okay, I have an appetite for discomfort. I need to satisfy with discomfort. I need to satisfy with discomfort. I need to satisfy with adaptive things. um they're in the pit. adaptive things. um they're in the pit. adaptive things. um they're in the pit. So, if you would um if people out there So, if you would um if people out there So, if you would um if people out there listening are in a place where they're listening are in a place where they're listening are in a place where they're like they know they're something's got like they know they're something's got like they know they're something's got them as opposed to them having it where them as opposed to them having it where them as opposed to them having it where they're wondering or someone they they're wondering or someone they they're wondering or someone they know and it and especially if it's know and it and especially if it's know and it and especially if it's somebody that they somebody that they somebody that they know, what do you suggest? I mean, know, what do you suggest? I mean, know, what do you suggest? I mean, this isn't kind of like call the suicide this isn't kind of like call the suicide this isn't kind of like call the suicide hotline. I mean, unless they're hotline. I mean, unless they're hotline. I mean, unless they're suicidal, obviously. I suicidal, obviously. I suicidal, obviously. I mean, a lot of people don't have means mean, a lot of people don't have means mean, a lot of people don't have means to like start therapy with a world-class to like start therapy with a world-class to like start therapy with a world-class addiction therapist, trauma specialist. addiction therapist, trauma specialist. addiction therapist, trauma specialist. Some do, some don't. What do people do? Some do, some don't. What do people do? Some do, some don't. What do people do? Um, well, there are a lot of, you know, Um, well, there are a lot of, you know, Um, well, there are a lot of, you know, options for people out there. You know, options for people out there. You know, options for people out there. You know, sometimes they don't think that they sometimes they don't think that they sometimes they don't think that they have them because they don't have means, have them because they don't have means, have them because they don't have means, but, you know, in our centers, we, but, you know, in our centers, we, but, you know, in our centers, we, you know, strive to create access and I you know, strive to create access and I you know, strive to create access and I know a lot of others do, too. So, it's know a lot of others do, too. So, it's know a lot of others do, too. So, it's not just people that pay with out of not just people that pay with out of not just people that pay with out of pocket. There's insurance and you know, pocket. There's insurance and you know, pocket. There's insurance and you know, we build some quality treatment centers we build some quality treatment centers we build some quality treatment centers for people with Medicaid in different for people with Medicaid in different for people with Medicaid in different states. You know, that's um we don't states. You know, that's um we don't states. You know, that's um we don't know what's happening with that at the know what's happening with that at the know what's happening with that at the moment, but you know, it's uh currently moment, but you know, it's uh currently moment, but you know, it's uh currently they can get treatment for that. So, if they can get treatment for that. So, if they can get treatment for that. So, if they're in a state where they needed they're in a state where they needed they're in a state where they needed like detox or, you know, they're in a like detox or, you know, they're in a like detox or, you know, they're in a place where if they try to stop drinking place where if they try to stop drinking place where if they try to stop drinking or using it gets uh pretty significant, or using it gets uh pretty significant, or using it gets uh pretty significant, um there's services out there for them. um there's services out there for them. um there's services out there for them. Another great thing though is to just go Another great thing though is to just go Another great thing though is to just go straight into a 12step meeting. straight into a 12step meeting. straight into a 12step meeting. They're everywhere. How do people find They're everywhere. How do people find They're everywhere. How do people find those meetings? They go online, Google those meetings? They go online, Google those meetings? They go online, Google 12step in your area. If it's, you know, 12step in your area. If it's, you know, 12step in your area. If it's, you know, there's narcotics anonymous, there's narcotics anonymous, there's narcotics anonymous, there's alcoholics anonymous, there's cocaine alcoholics anonymous, there's cocaine alcoholics anonymous, there's cocaine anonymous, there's overeaters anonymous, there's overeaters anonymous, there's overeaters anonymous, there's gambling anonymous. I mean, if there's gambling anonymous. I mean, if there's gambling anonymous. I mean, if you every one of them has a central you every one of them has a central you every one of them has a central office. The organizational structure, office. The organizational structure, office. The organizational structure, especially of like Alcoholics Anonymous, especially of like Alcoholics Anonymous, especially of like Alcoholics Anonymous, is really incredible. We could do a is really incredible. We could do a is really incredible. We could do a whole episode on it. There's no there's whole episode on it. There's no there's whole episode on it. There's no there's no leaders. It's a very flat no leaders. It's a very flat no leaders. It's a very flat organization, politically unaffiliated. organization, politically unaffiliated. organization, politically unaffiliated. Politically unaffiliated. They have a Politically unaffiliated. They have a Politically unaffiliated. They have a vow of poverty. If somebody died and vow of poverty. If somebody died and vow of poverty. If somebody died and donated a million dollars, they can't donated a million dollars, they can't donated a million dollars, they can't take more than 10,000. Really? Yeah. take more than 10,000. Really? Yeah. take more than 10,000. Really? Yeah. There's only trusted servants. There's only trusted servants. There's only trusted servants. There's no leaders. The the there um there are no leaders. The the there um there are no leaders. The the there um there are people who are employed that do people who are employed that do people who are employed that do administrative work, but everything else administrative work, but everything else administrative work, but everything else and it's been like this for 80ome years. and it's been like this for 80ome years. and it's been like this for 80ome years. It's it's really quite incredible. And It's it's really quite incredible. And It's it's really quite incredible. And there are online meetings. There's there are online meetings. There's there are online meetings. There's online meetings. Um they're all over the online meetings. Um they're all over the online meetings. Um they're all over the world, you know. Um you can find them at world, you know. Um you can find them at world, you know. Um you can find them at any time. That's one of the beauties of any time. That's one of the beauties of any time. That's one of the beauties of 12step meetings is that, you know, of 12step meetings is that, you know, of 12step meetings is that, you know, I obviously I'm a therapist. We have I obviously I'm a therapist. We have I obviously I'm a therapist. We have treatment centers. I um it's nice to treatment centers. I um it's nice to treatment centers. I um it's nice to get people to come to those and it's get people to come to those and it's get people to come to those and it's great for people to be able to step it's great for people to be able to step it's great for people to be able to step out, but there's things that we can do out, but there's things that we can do out, but there's things that we can do that they can't. I mean, they're not that they can't. I mean, they're not that they can't. I mean, they're not going to medically detox them. They going to medically detox them. They going to medically detox them. They can't keep them out of like, you know, can't keep them out of like, you know, can't keep them out of like, you know, in a safe environment for a period of in a safe environment for a period of in a safe environment for a period of time. But a kid with a porn addiction, time. But a kid with a porn addiction, time. But a kid with a porn addiction, somebody who's abusing alcohol or somebody who's abusing alcohol or somebody who's abusing alcohol or addicted to food, shopping, gambling, addicted to food, shopping, gambling, addicted to food, shopping, gambling, they can find a meeting. They can find a they can find a meeting. They can find a they can find a meeting. They can find a meeting. Yep. They can find a meeting. Yep. They can find a meeting. Yep. They can find a meeting. And you know, I always tell people to And you know, I always tell people to And you know, I always tell people to try six different ones. They're free. try six different ones. They're free. try six different ones. They're free. you know, you're going to find your you know, you're going to find your you know, you're going to find your group. I mean, listen, they're group. I mean, listen, they're group. I mean, listen, they're run by peers. So, this is like they're run by peers. So, this is like they're run by peers. So, this is like something that was developed as it would something that was developed as it would something that was developed as it would be like if somebody developed a be like if somebody developed a be like if somebody developed a therapeutic modality 80 years ago and therapeutic modality 80 years ago and therapeutic modality 80 years ago and then passed it on to everybody that they then passed it on to everybody that they then passed it on to everybody that they gave they every client they had and then gave they every client they had and then gave they every client they had and then they ran it. I mean, it's not it's they ran it. I mean, it's not it's they ran it. I mean, it's not it's not run by professional counselors, not run by professional counselors, not run by professional counselors, although there are professional although there are professional although there are professional counselors in them. There's every walk counselors in them. There's every walk counselors in them. There's every walk of life from I've you know, been around of life from I've you know, been around of life from I've you know, been around people who are anything from priests to people who are anything from priests to people who are anything from priests to rabbis to doctors. there's no rabbis to doctors. there's no rabbis to doctors. there's no prejudiced in the in the in the disease. prejudiced in the in the in the disease. prejudiced in the in the in the disease. Um, but you know, you can build a Um, but you know, you can build a Um, but you know, you can build a community where people are willing to community where people are willing to community where people are willing to help and be in service to each other. help and be in service to each other. help and be in service to each other. And you know, you can't call a therapist And you know, you can't call a therapist And you know, you can't call a therapist any time during the night. You can't any time during the night. You can't any time during the night. You can't just look up and find a meeting and just look up and find a meeting and just look up and find a meeting and go. And at this point with things go. And at this point with things go. And at this point with things online, you could find a meeting 24 online, you could find a meeting 24 online, you could find a meeting 24 hours a day anywhere. And the meeting is hours a day anywhere. And the meeting is hours a day anywhere. And the meeting is not going to solve it necessarily, but not going to solve it necessarily, but not going to solve it necessarily, but the fact that you're the fact that you're the fact that you're uh moving in that direction. You know, uh moving in that direction. You know, uh moving in that direction. You know, you're spending an hour if you're spending an hour if you're spending an hour if you're spending an hour thinking and reflecting spending an hour thinking and reflecting spending an hour thinking and reflecting and talking about it. Even if you're not and talking about it. Even if you're not and talking about it. Even if you're not like in silent meditation, it's almost like in silent meditation, it's almost like in silent meditation, it's almost like a meditation. If you're spending an like a meditation. If you're spending an like a meditation. If you're spending an hour hearing people talk about how they hour hearing people talk about how they hour hearing people talk about how they recovered and helping you, it's an hour recovered and helping you, it's an hour recovered and helping you, it's an hour that you're not doing the other thing. that you're not doing the other thing. that you're not doing the other thing. And in the beginning, that might be the And in the beginning, that might be the And in the beginning, that might be the white knuckling of it, right? But the white knuckling of it, right? But the white knuckling of it, right? But the idea is to get out of white knuckling, idea is to get out of white knuckling, idea is to get out of white knuckling, you know. And so the beauty of the you know. And so the beauty of the you know. And so the beauty of the 12step programs, which was founded by 12step programs, which was founded by 12step programs, which was founded by the guys that started Alcoholics the guys that started Alcoholics the guys that started Alcoholics Anonymous and then it was Dr. Bob Smith Anonymous and then it was Dr. Bob Smith Anonymous and then it was Dr. Bob Smith and Bill Wilson. And the way they and Bill Wilson. And the way they and Bill Wilson. And the way they discovered it was by helping each other. discovered it was by helping each other. discovered it was by helping each other. Bill Wilson had been uh trying to get Bill Wilson had been uh trying to get Bill Wilson had been uh trying to get sober for a long time. He'd been sober for a long time. He'd been sober for a long time. He'd been introduced to something called the introduced to something called the introduced to something called the Oxford group, which was more of a Oxford group, which was more of a Oxford group, which was more of a religious group based in Christianity. religious group based in Christianity. religious group based in Christianity. and they had like a four I think it was and they had like a four I think it was and they had like a four I think it was a fourstep process um which the 12 steps a fourstep process um which the 12 steps a fourstep process um which the 12 steps are just kind of really expanded on. Um, are just kind of really expanded on. Um, are just kind of really expanded on. Um, but there's a there's in the but there's a there's in the but there's a there's in the literature there's this beautiful moment literature there's this beautiful moment literature there's this beautiful moment where uh Bill Wilson had been trying to where uh Bill Wilson had been trying to where uh Bill Wilson had been trying to stay sober for a while and he was, but stay sober for a while and he was, but stay sober for a while and he was, but he was really white knuckling it. And he was really white knuckling it. And he was really white knuckling it. And he'd been at his home in New York, he'd been at his home in New York, he'd been at his home in New York, he'd been going into the hospital and been going into the hospital and been going into the hospital and helping others. And he found by trying helping others. And he found by trying helping others. And he found by trying to help others, he stayed sober. to help others, he stayed sober. to help others, he stayed sober. And he's a guy that had struggled for a And he's a guy that had struggled for a And he's a guy that had struggled for a very long time. And none of those guys very long time. And none of those guys very long time. And none of those guys were staying sober, but he was, which were staying sober, but he was, which were staying sober, but he was, which was kind of he first kind of was kind of he first kind of was kind of he first kind of conceptualized this. And then he was on conceptualized this. And then he was on conceptualized this. And then he was on a business trip in Akran, Ohio, which is a business trip in Akran, Ohio, which is a business trip in Akran, Ohio, which is where this Dr. Bob Smith lived. And he where this Dr. Bob Smith lived. And he where this Dr. Bob Smith lived. And he was staying at this hotel. I think it he was staying at this hotel. I think it he was staying at this hotel. I think it was called the Mayflower Hotel in the in was called the Mayflower Hotel in the in was called the Mayflower Hotel in the in the history. And he had come out of a the history. And he had come out of a the history. And he had come out of a business meeting. I think it didn't go business meeting. I think it didn't go business meeting. I think it didn't go the way he wanted. And he walked in the way he wanted. And he walked in the way he wanted. And he walked in and in the story, he's describing and in the story, he's describing and in the story, he's describing hearing the bar and the kind of clinking hearing the bar and the kind of clinking hearing the bar and the kind of clinking of the glasses over here and the of the glasses over here and the of the glasses over here and the kind of the call of the bar. and he had kind of the call of the bar. and he had kind of the call of the bar. and he had some change in his pocket and it was in some change in his pocket and it was in some change in his pocket and it was in the 1930s, early 1930s. Um, maybe 34, the 1930s, early 1930s. Um, maybe 34, the 1930s, early 1930s. Um, maybe 34, 35. And then there was a bank of phones 35. And then there was a bank of phones 35. And then there was a bank of phones over here. And so he was kind of pulled over here. And so he was kind of pulled over here. And so he was kind of pulled between the bar and the phones and between the bar and the phones and between the bar and the phones and for whatever reason he went to the for whatever reason he went to the for whatever reason he went to the phones. He paused and he went there and phones. He paused and he went there and phones. He paused and he went there and he called I forget who he called, maybe he called I forget who he called, maybe he called I forget who he called, maybe the hospital, and he asked if the hospital, and he asked if the hospital, and he asked if there was I think he basically asked if there was I think he basically asked if there was I think he basically asked if there was any drunks in the town he there was any drunks in the town he there was any drunks in the town he could help. And they directed him to in could help. And they directed him to in could help. And they directed him to in some way to this doctor who was some way to this doctor who was some way to this doctor who was like the local town doctor, Bob Smith. like the local town doctor, Bob Smith. like the local town doctor, Bob Smith. And he was uh And he was uh And he was uh also an alcoholic who struggled for a also an alcoholic who struggled for a also an alcoholic who struggled for a long time. And they met and he I think long time. And they met and he I think long time. And they met and he I think he went to his house or he might have he went to his house or he might have he went to his house or he might have been in the hospital at the time. I been in the hospital at the time. I been in the hospital at the time. I could have the history a little bit could have the history a little bit could have the history a little bit wrong. But they met and started talking wrong. But they met and started talking wrong. But they met and started talking and I think Bob relapsed one more time. and I think Bob relapsed one more time. and I think Bob relapsed one more time. But they started talking and helping But they started talking and helping But they started talking and helping each other and then they went and helped each other and then they went and helped each other and then they went and helped another guy and then they went and another guy and then they went and another guy and then they went and helped another guy and there's a whole helped another guy and there's a whole helped another guy and there's a whole history to like how it developed and history to like how it developed and history to like how it developed and then how they wrote a book together. The then how they wrote a book together. The then how they wrote a book together. The book was really meant to send it was book was really meant to send it was book was really meant to send it was written like four years later send the written like four years later send the written like four years later send the information about alcoholism and information about alcoholism and information about alcoholism and alcoholics anonymous to everywhere in alcoholics anonymous to everywhere in alcoholics anonymous to everywhere in the country where they didn't have the country where they didn't have the country where they didn't have meetings. they started having the these meetings. they started having the these meetings. they started having the these meetings and helping each other through meetings and helping each other through meetings and helping each other through this step process that they this step process that they this step process that they developed. And um it's really developed. And um it's really developed. And um it's really interesting because this was one man's interesting because this was one man's interesting because this was one man's decision, you know, instead of going to decision, you know, instead of going to decision, you know, instead of going to the bar or going to the phone, instead the bar or going to the phone, instead the bar or going to the phone, instead of going to the bar, he made one phone of going to the bar, he made one phone of going to the bar, he made one phone call and that transformed millions of call and that transformed millions of call and that transformed millions of lives. I mean, there's millions of lives. I mean, there's millions of lives. I mean, there's millions of members around the around the world. you members around the around the world. you members around the around the world. you know, he was like I think he was called know, he was like I think he was called know, he was like I think he was called either Time magazine or Life magazine's either Time magazine or Life magazine's either Time magazine or Life magazine's hundred most influential people of the hundred most influential people of the hundred most influential people of the of the 20th century and there's still of the 20th century and there's still of the 20th century and there's still people who find recovery through and people who find recovery through and people who find recovery through and then they gifted those steps to all of then they gifted those steps to all of then they gifted those steps to all of the other things like Cocaine Anonymous the other things like Cocaine Anonymous the other things like Cocaine Anonymous and Alcoholics Anonymous and you know and Alcoholics Anonymous and you know and Alcoholics Anonymous and you know it's not for everybody and they'll even it's not for everybody and they'll even it's not for everybody and they'll even say that in the literature. That's why I say that in the literature. That's why I say that in the literature. That's why I don't I wouldn't consider it a cult don't I wouldn't consider it a cult don't I wouldn't consider it a cult because I'll say we don't have a because I'll say we don't have a because I'll say we don't have a monopoly, you know, and of course you're monopoly, you know, and of course you're monopoly, you know, and of course you're going to meet personalities in there, going to meet personalities in there, going to meet personalities in there, but the organization itself is but the organization itself is but the organization itself is agnostic to religion, to ideas, to agnostic to religion, to ideas, to agnostic to religion, to ideas, to politics and it's a place that people politics and it's a place that people politics and it's a place that people can come with a common problem and find can come with a common problem and find can come with a common problem and find a common solution. And these meetings a common solution. And these meetings a common solution. And these meetings can be the place that hold people as a can be the place that hold people as a can be the place that hold people as a container. You know, I always see our container. You know, I always see our container. You know, I always see our treatment centers as like a container of treatment centers as like a container of treatment centers as like a container of space and time where people can come in space and time where people can come in space and time where people can come in and really kind of let themselves fall and really kind of let themselves fall and really kind of let themselves fall apart and we can start helping them apart and we can start helping them apart and we can start helping them build their life back. But these 12step build their life back. But these 12step build their life back. But these 12step meetings are like a container and they meetings are like a container and they meetings are like a container and they have a you know people will people are have a you know people will people are have a you know people will people are you know excited in there to reach out you know excited in there to reach out you know excited in there to reach out and connect with you. And it's in and connect with you. And it's in and connect with you. And it's in those moments of connection that we can those moments of connection that we can those moments of connection that we can really find healing. I mean, look at really find healing. I mean, look at really find healing. I mean, look at what happened to him. Instead of going what happened to him. Instead of going what happened to him. Instead of going into the bar and connecting with the into the bar and connecting with the into the bar and connecting with the people in there and drinking and, you people in there and drinking and, you people in there and drinking and, you know, he had enough evidence to show know, he had enough evidence to show know, he had enough evidence to show that drinking would, you know, it that drinking would, you know, it that drinking would, you know, it didn't take him in the right direction. didn't take him in the right direction. didn't take him in the right direction. Um, he was able to make a phone call, Um, he was able to make a phone call, Um, he was able to make a phone call, connect with somebody else, and it connect with somebody else, and it connect with somebody else, and it created all these connections later on, created all these connections later on, created all these connections later on, you know, and it's not a place that you know, and it's not a place that you know, and it's not a place that people go just to white knuckle it. I people go just to white knuckle it. I people go just to white knuckle it. I mean, that's how they might get in mean, that's how they might get in mean, that's how they might get in there. Nobody usually comes there there. Nobody usually comes there there. Nobody usually comes there because they, you know, had one bad because they, you know, had one bad because they, you know, had one bad night of drinking. It's usually, as some night of drinking. It's usually, as some night of drinking. It's usually, as some people say, no one comes in here a people say, no one comes in here a people say, no one comes in here a winner. you've been on a losing streak winner. you've been on a losing streak winner. you've been on a losing streak and uh and that's okay. But to be able and uh and that's okay. But to be able and uh and that's okay. But to be able to admit that and really discover who to admit that and really discover who to admit that and really discover who you are and share that with others and you are and share that with others and you are and share that with others and find frivolity and joy in like find frivolity and joy in like find frivolity and joy in like in the depths of people's pain and they in the depths of people's pain and they in the depths of people's pain and they can really understand that there's can really understand that there's can really understand that there's hope, there's promise and there's hope, there's promise and there's hope, there's promise and there's a way out. And these people who there's a way out. And these people who there's a way out. And these people who are struggling aren't going to are struggling aren't going to are struggling aren't going to necessarily find that in their necessarily find that in their necessarily find that in their first meeting, but they might get the first meeting, but they might get the first meeting, but they might get the hope and the connection with others. And hope and the connection with others. And hope and the connection with others. And so they're available out there. And if so they're available out there. And if so they're available out there. And if you don't like the 12step and the you don't like the 12step and the you don't like the 12step and the spirituality, there's other recovery the spirituality, there's other recovery the spirituality, there's other recovery programs out there or other peer support programs out there or other peer support programs out there or other peer support groups out there like Smart Recovery or groups out there like Smart Recovery or groups out there like Smart Recovery or Refuge Recovery and they'll talk Refuge Recovery and they'll talk Refuge Recovery and they'll talk about things in a different way. So, about things in a different way. So, about things in a different way. So, it's not about like finding a specific it's not about like finding a specific it's not about like finding a specific dogma. Go out and try different things. dogma. Go out and try different things. dogma. Go out and try different things. You know, even the act of trying You know, even the act of trying You know, even the act of trying different things is going to help them different things is going to help them different things is going to help them move out of being stuck in that if it's move out of being stuck in that if it's move out of being stuck in that if it's like the porn addiction, right? Um, and like the porn addiction, right? Um, and like the porn addiction, right? Um, and then people do reach a certain point in then people do reach a certain point in then people do reach a certain point in acuity, especially with drugs and acuity, especially with drugs and acuity, especially with drugs and alcohol, that they need to be in a alcohol, that they need to be in a alcohol, that they need to be in a facility, you know, and that might be a facility, you know, and that might be a facility, you know, and that might be a hospital, it might be a treatment hospital, it might be a treatment hospital, it might be a treatment center. Um, and you know, you can there center. Um, and you know, you can there center. Um, and you know, you can there are resources for that. I think it's a are resources for that. I think it's a are resources for that. I think it's a good place for people to start if they good place for people to start if they good place for people to start if they don't have the resources to be able to don't have the resources to be able to don't have the resources to be able to attend a treatment center or work in attend a treatment center or work in attend a treatment center or work in therapy. Thanks for sharing that therapy. Thanks for sharing that therapy. Thanks for sharing that avenue for people um with all sorts of avenue for people um with all sorts of avenue for people um with all sorts of uh addictions not just alcohol and for uh addictions not just alcohol and for uh addictions not just alcohol and for the families. Alanon for the people is the families. Alanon for the people is the families. Alanon for the people is for the families. There's is for the families. There's is for the families. There's codependence anonymous. There's families codependence anonymous. There's families codependence anonymous. There's families anonymous. There's uh adult children of anonymous. There's uh adult children of anonymous. There's uh adult children of alcoholics anonymous or adult children alcoholics anonymous or adult children alcoholics anonymous or adult children of alcoholics is really about uh of alcoholics is really about uh of alcoholics is really about uh um dysfunctional family systems that um dysfunctional family systems that um dysfunctional family systems that people might have grown up even if their people might have grown up even if their people might have grown up even if their parents weren't alcoholics. So there's parents weren't alcoholics. So there's parents weren't alcoholics. So there's stuff out there for there's stuff out there for there's stuff out there for everyone. Prior to this conversation, I everyone. Prior to this conversation, I everyone. Prior to this conversation, I solicited for questions from the internet about for questions from the internet about for questions from the internet about addiction, broadly speaking, and got addiction, broadly speaking, and got addiction, broadly speaking, and got some great questions. The first question some great questions. The first question some great questions. The first question is, is addiction the problem? They put is, is addiction the problem? They put is, is addiction the problem? They put the in quotes. Or is addiction an the in quotes. Or is addiction an the in quotes. Or is addiction an attempted solution to a different but attempted solution to a different but attempted solution to a different but less obvious problem? The short answer less obvious problem? The short answer less obvious problem? The short answer to that is both. the addiction is really to that is both. the addiction is really to that is both. the addiction is really the solution to some sort of discomfort the solution to some sort of discomfort the solution to some sort of discomfort or stress that they're experiencing, but or stress that they're experiencing, but or stress that they're experiencing, but then the addiction itself becomes then the addiction itself becomes then the addiction itself becomes problematic. I would say that addiction problematic. I would say that addiction problematic. I would say that addiction is the solution in the sense that it's is the solution in the sense that it's is the solution in the sense that it's the person's attempt to solve or to find the person's attempt to solve or to find the person's attempt to solve or to find relief from whatever stressor they're relief from whatever stressor they're relief from whatever stressor they're experiencing. Um, but it's a solution experiencing. Um, but it's a solution experiencing. Um, but it's a solution that becomes problematic. So, it takes that becomes problematic. So, it takes that becomes problematic. So, it takes on a life of its own. It becomes its own on a life of its own. It becomes its own on a life of its own. It becomes its own trauma itself. you know that drinking trauma itself. you know that drinking trauma itself. you know that drinking alcoholically and blacking out is a alcoholically and blacking out is a alcoholically and blacking out is a trauma to your body, to your brain. The trauma to your body, to your brain. The trauma to your body, to your brain. The things that people do in addiction things that people do in addiction things that people do in addiction become more traumatic. I think there's become more traumatic. I think there's become more traumatic. I think there's this cycle that I always use in the this cycle that I always use in the this cycle that I always use in the background called it's trauma, stress, background called it's trauma, stress, background called it's trauma, stress, and addiction. And expanding the and addiction. And expanding the and addiction. And expanding the definition of trauma to wound, it starts definition of trauma to wound, it starts definition of trauma to wound, it starts with a wound and then stress is the with a wound and then stress is the with a wound and then stress is the relationship to that wound much like a relationship to that wound much like a relationship to that wound much like a limp after a broken leg. And when stress limp after a broken leg. And when stress limp after a broken leg. And when stress gets big enough, people look for relief. gets big enough, people look for relief. gets big enough, people look for relief. And so they look to behaviors or And so they look to behaviors or And so they look to behaviors or substances which then can if the stress substances which then can if the stress substances which then can if the stress is big enough and repeated can become is big enough and repeated can become is big enough and repeated can become alcoholic. So um that stress is not alcoholic. So um that stress is not alcoholic. So um that stress is not really the wound, it's the relationship really the wound, it's the relationship really the wound, it's the relationship to it. Like I said, the limp after to it. Like I said, the limp after to it. Like I said, the limp after the broken leg, but that limp, while the broken leg, but that limp, while the broken leg, but that limp, while it's not the broken leg, informs how we it's not the broken leg, informs how we it's not the broken leg, informs how we walk or don't walk, how we run or don't walk or don't walk, how we run or don't walk or don't walk, how we run or don't run, how we view ourselves, how we view run, how we view ourselves, how we view run, how we view ourselves, how we view the other people in the world view us. the other people in the world view us. the other people in the world view us. And all of those things together can And all of those things together can And all of those things together can lead to a level of stress where people lead to a level of stress where people lead to a level of stress where people find relief. And since it's chronic, find relief. And since it's chronic, find relief. And since it's chronic, then they keep they keep using, but then they keep they keep using, but then they keep they keep using, but then the behaviors and things that they then the behaviors and things that they then the behaviors and things that they do while they're using or drinking do while they're using or drinking do while they're using or drinking create a trauma itself, which then leads create a trauma itself, which then leads create a trauma itself, which then leads to more stress, which then leads to more to more stress, which then leads to more to more stress, which then leads to more addiction. So it becomes kind of this addiction. So it becomes kind of this addiction. So it becomes kind of this perpetual motion machine if you will. So perpetual motion machine if you will. So perpetual motion machine if you will. So the medicine becomes the source of the medicine becomes the source of the medicine becomes the source of stress. Yeah. Are GLP-1 agonists things stress. Yeah. Are GLP-1 agonists things stress. Yeah. Are GLP-1 agonists things like ompic, wiggoi, etc. being used for like ompic, wiggoi, etc. being used for like ompic, wiggoi, etc. being used for addiction outside the context of weight addiction outside the context of weight addiction outside the context of weight loss? Interesting question. And will loss? Interesting question. And will loss? Interesting question. And will this happen in an official capacity or this happen in an official capacity or this happen in an official capacity or remain off label use? They're asking remain off label use? They're asking remain off label use? They're asking your opinion. your opinion. your opinion. Um, are GLP1s being used to treat Um, are GLP1s being used to treat Um, are GLP1s being used to treat addiction to food? And do you think it addiction to food? And do you think it addiction to food? And do you think it can be useful for uh treating addiction can be useful for uh treating addiction can be useful for uh treating addiction to other things? I believe that there's to other things? I believe that there's to other things? I believe that there's some initial research going on that it some initial research going on that it some initial research going on that it uh it can help with uh cravings um and uh it can help with uh cravings um and uh it can help with uh cravings um and addiction in general. Um it makes sense addiction in general. Um it makes sense addiction in general. Um it makes sense to me. I mean, I've heard that to me. I mean, I've heard that to me. I mean, I've heard that anecdotally over the years that people anecdotally over the years that people anecdotally over the years that people that were diabetic and also alcoholic, that were diabetic and also alcoholic, that were diabetic and also alcoholic, but the diabetics that maintained their but the diabetics that maintained their but the diabetics that maintained their blood sugar properly had less chance of blood sugar properly had less chance of blood sugar properly had less chance of relapse. I mean, there's this very relapse. I mean, there's this very relapse. I mean, there's this very simple uh kind of an acronym called simple uh kind of an acronym called simple uh kind of an acronym called HALT. You may have heard of hungry, HALT. You may have heard of hungry, HALT. You may have heard of hungry, angry, lonely, tired, which seems so angry, lonely, tired, which seems so angry, lonely, tired, which seems so simple. It used to drive me crazy, but simple. It used to drive me crazy, but simple. It used to drive me crazy, but it's so true that, you know, people tend it's so true that, you know, people tend it's so true that, you know, people tend to be at higher risk for relapse or to be at higher risk for relapse or to be at higher risk for relapse or using when they're either hungry, using when they're either hungry, using when they're either hungry, they're angry, they're lonely, or they're angry, they're lonely, or they're angry, they're lonely, or they're tired. And sometimes those they're tired. And sometimes those they're tired. And sometimes those things are all together. And those are things are all together. And those are things are all together. And those are times in which I would imagine uh their times in which I would imagine uh their times in which I would imagine uh their system is looking for something to uh I system is looking for something to uh I system is looking for something to uh I mean, if you're hungry, you're looking mean, if you're hungry, you're looking mean, if you're hungry, you're looking to elevate your blood sugar. And if you to elevate your blood sugar. And if you to elevate your blood sugar. And if you can maintain that, uh, I would imagine can maintain that, uh, I would imagine can maintain that, uh, I would imagine that it would have some interesting that it would have some interesting that it would have some interesting effects. I was just at a, um, a meeting effects. I was just at a, um, a meeting effects. I was just at a, um, a meeting with some of the executives of the major with some of the executives of the major with some of the executives of the major insurance companies, our company, insurance companies, our company, insurance companies, our company, uh, and has a private meeting with them uh, and has a private meeting with them uh, and has a private meeting with them and they were talking about that's some and they were talking about that's some and they were talking about that's some of the things that they're looking some of the things that they're looking some of the things that they're looking for. I don't know that I'm sure it's for. I don't know that I'm sure it's for. I don't know that I'm sure it's been used off label, but I don't know of been used off label, but I don't know of been used off label, but I don't know of anybody that's using it yet on label for anybody that's using it yet on label for anybody that's using it yet on label for any of that. Can somebody be for any of that. Can somebody be for any of that. Can somebody be addicted to stress? meaning are habits addicted to stress? meaning are habits addicted to stress? meaning are habits addictions? Those are sort of two addictions? Those are sort of two addictions? Those are sort of two questions. Clever. This person snuck in questions. Clever. This person snuck in questions. Clever. This person snuck in two questions. First question, can two questions. First question, can two questions. First question, can somebody be addicted to stress? I think somebody be addicted to stress? I think somebody be addicted to stress? I think that people can be set have their that people can be set have their that people can be set have their nervous system set in a way that they nervous system set in a way that they nervous system set in a way that they need that level of stress or activation need that level of stress or activation need that level of stress or activation in order just to kind of get to in order just to kind of get to in order just to kind of get to baseline, in order to kind of feel baseline, in order to kind of feel baseline, in order to kind of feel alive. You know, I I've seen that a lot alive. You know, I I've seen that a lot alive. You know, I I've seen that a lot when I worked with when I've worked with when I worked with when I've worked with when I worked with when I've worked with um especially special forces combat um especially special forces combat um especially special forces combat veterans, you know, coming home, like a veterans, you know, coming home, like a veterans, you know, coming home, like a lot of the mundane stuff almost didn't lot of the mundane stuff almost didn't lot of the mundane stuff almost didn't feel like they felt alive, you know, and feel like they felt alive, you know, and feel like they felt alive, you know, and of course, this isn't everybody. This is of course, this isn't everybody. This is of course, this isn't everybody. This is the ones that were coming to me, but the ones that were coming to me, but the ones that were coming to me, but that they needed to be involved in like that they needed to be involved in like that they needed to be involved in like really risky behaviors or really uh high really risky behaviors or really uh high really risky behaviors or really uh high adrenaline behaviors kind and it felt adrenaline behaviors kind and it felt adrenaline behaviors kind and it felt like they were just getting to kind of like they were just getting to kind of like they were just getting to kind of baseline of being normal. It wasn't even baseline of being normal. It wasn't even baseline of being normal. It wasn't even like taking them to another edge. Um, like taking them to another edge. Um, like taking them to another edge. Um, and you know, that makes sense to me and you know, that makes sense to me and you know, that makes sense to me because a lot of like what basic because a lot of like what basic because a lot of like what basic training or the training that they do training or the training that they do training or the training that they do later on for more special forces is later on for more special forces is later on for more special forces is while it's skills training, it it's while it's skills training, it it's while it's skills training, it it's really nervous system training, right? really nervous system training, right? really nervous system training, right? It's it's the ability you could it's It's it's the ability you could it's It's it's the ability you could it's the ability to do those skills it's the ability to do those skills it's the ability to do those skills under an extreme amount of stress or under an extreme amount of stress or under an extreme amount of stress or lack of sleep and everything like lack of sleep and everything like lack of sleep and everything like that. So if they're kind of oriented in that. So if they're kind of oriented in that. So if they're kind of oriented in that way, then when they come home or that way, then when they come home or that way, then when they come home or they're in environments where it they're in environments where it they're in environments where it doesn't it takes a lot to bring them up doesn't it takes a lot to bring them up doesn't it takes a lot to bring them up just to that level of like what might just to that level of like what might just to that level of like what might feel normal for them. Their their kind feel normal for them. Their their kind feel normal for them. Their their kind of system is set up much higher than of system is set up much higher than of system is set up much higher than here and they've got to get up to that here and they've got to get up to that here and they've got to get up to that to just feel alive. So I don't know if to just feel alive. So I don't know if to just feel alive. So I don't know if addicted it maybe it is addicted. I feel addicted it maybe it is addicted. I feel addicted it maybe it is addicted. I feel like they have a need, you know, it's a like they have a need, you know, it's a like they have a need, you know, it's a drive. It's a drive. Intensity drive. It's a drive. Intensity drive. It's a drive. Intensity addiction. Um, that's a you and I know addiction. Um, that's a you and I know addiction. Um, that's a you and I know some people with that. Yes. Yeah. some people with that. Yes. Yeah. some people with that. Yes. Yeah. I'd like to know about social behavior I'd like to know about social behavior I'd like to know about social behavior addictions, social media, coffee, sugar, addictions, social media, coffee, sugar, addictions, social media, coffee, sugar, even work even work even work addiction. And as always, thank you for addiction. And as always, thank you for addiction. And as always, thank you for tackling hard topics. I guess that was tackling hard topics. I guess that was tackling hard topics. I guess that was directed toward me, but you're the one directed toward me, but you're the one directed toward me, but you're the one who's about to try and tackle this who's about to try and tackle this who's about to try and tackle this topic. So, um, are all are those things topic. So, um, are all are those things topic. So, um, are all are those things really addict addictions? Are people really addict addictions? Are people really addict addictions? Are people addicted to sugar, addicted to coffee? addicted to sugar, addicted to coffee? addicted to sugar, addicted to coffee? Do they meet the classic definition of Do they meet the classic definition of Do they meet the classic definition of addiction? Well, they're not going to of addiction? Well, they're not going to of addiction? Well, they're not going to meet a diagnostic criteria for meet a diagnostic criteria for meet a diagnostic criteria for progressive, etc. What is the progressive, etc. What is the progressive, etc. What is the diagnostic? It's always this diagnostic? It's always this diagnostic? It's always this progressive. I don't know if it was progressive. I don't know if it was progressive. I don't know if it was it on your podcast or did I read about it on your podcast or did I read about it on your podcast or did I read about this somewhere else where when they took this somewhere else where when they took this somewhere else where when they took you know there's the classic study about you know there's the classic study about you know there's the classic study about taking rats with cocaine and they'll taking rats with cocaine and they'll taking rats with cocaine and they'll they had water and uh they'll they had water and uh they'll they had water and uh cocaine and they would like press that cocaine and they would like press that cocaine and they would like press that lever thousands of times to get the lever thousands of times to get the lever thousands of times to get the cocaine. Somebody else repeated that but cocaine. Somebody else repeated that but cocaine. Somebody else repeated that but added one that had sugar in it and their added one that had sugar in it and their added one that had sugar in it and their cocaine uh use went significantly down cocaine uh use went significantly down cocaine uh use went significantly down when sugar was also present. Well, meth when sugar was also present. Well, meth when sugar was also present. Well, meth addicts will consume sugar and meth more addicts will consume sugar and meth more addicts will consume sugar and meth more readily than either one alone. I mean, I readily than either one alone. I mean, I readily than either one alone. I mean, I we see this different drug. We see this we see this different drug. We see this we see this different drug. We see this when people get sober, you know, that, when people get sober, you know, that, when people get sober, you know, that, you know, there's people that will get you know, there's people that will get you know, there's people that will get very heavy. You know, they'll engage in very heavy. You know, they'll engage in very heavy. You know, they'll engage in what looks like a food addiction. And what looks like a food addiction. And what looks like a food addiction. And when we peel that back, I can't tell you when we peel that back, I can't tell you when we peel that back, I can't tell you how many times I've heard of, you know, how many times I've heard of, you know, how many times I've heard of, you know, people recognizing their first addictive people recognizing their first addictive people recognizing their first addictive behavior is going to the sugar bowl and, behavior is going to the sugar bowl and, behavior is going to the sugar bowl and, you know, taking spoonfuls of it. that you know, taking spoonfuls of it. that you know, taking spoonfuls of it. that I've actually heard people say that I've actually heard people say that I've actually heard people say that uh food addiction and probably uh food addiction and probably uh food addiction and probably specifically around sugar is often the specifically around sugar is often the specifically around sugar is often the primary addiction for people. It's kind primary addiction for people. It's kind primary addiction for people. It's kind of like how they get in get in get in of like how they get in get in get in of like how they get in get in get in there. I don't I'm sure that's not true there. I don't I'm sure that's not true there. I don't I'm sure that's not true for everybody, but I think if we for everybody, but I think if we for everybody, but I think if we broaden the term of addiction beyond broaden the term of addiction beyond broaden the term of addiction beyond what um a use disorder is in the DSM and move um a use disorder is in the DSM and move um a use disorder is in the DSM and move towards do you have it or does it have towards do you have it or does it have towards do you have it or does it have you? Absolutely. I mean, I don't think you? Absolutely. I mean, I don't think you? Absolutely. I mean, I don't think we can become sugar dependent in a way we can become sugar dependent in a way we can become sugar dependent in a way that if we stop it, we're going to go that if we stop it, we're going to go that if we stop it, we're going to go into some sort of major withdrawal, but into some sort of major withdrawal, but into some sort of major withdrawal, but I would imagine there would be some sort I would imagine there would be some sort I would imagine there would be some sort of withdrawal. Same with caffeine. I've withdrawal. Same with caffeine. I've withdrawal. Same with caffeine. I've seen people go into psychosis with seen people go into psychosis with seen people go into psychosis with caffeine. I never want to find out what caffeine. I never want to find out what caffeine. I never want to find out what happens if I quick. You might just happens if I quick. You might just happens if I quick. You might just always be in psychosis. Caffeine always be in psychosis. Caffeine always be in psychosis. Caffeine psychosis. Thanks for that. No, not you. I meant Thanks for that. No, not you. I meant Thanks for that. No, not you. I meant all Yeah. I mean, I love caffeine, but I all Yeah. I mean, I love caffeine, but I all Yeah. I mean, I love caffeine, but I keep that out. I can sleep on No, no, keep that out. I can sleep on No, no, keep that out. I can sleep on No, no, that's fine. I actually can sleep on it, that's fine. I actually can sleep on it, that's fine. I actually can sleep on it, too. Like, well, I don't I don't I don't too. Like, well, I don't I don't I don't too. Like, well, I don't I don't I don't drink caffeine past 2 p.m. Occasionally. drink caffeine past 2 p.m. Occasionally. drink caffeine past 2 p.m. Occasionally. I don't either, but once in a while I don't either, but once in a while I don't either, but once in a while I do, and it doesn't You're definitely do, and it doesn't You're definitely do, and it doesn't You're definitely getting less REM sleep in there, but getting less REM sleep in there, but getting less REM sleep in there, but you look rested. So, not last night. Um you look rested. So, not last night. Um you look rested. So, not last night. Um lot of questions about Ibeane probably lot of questions about Ibeane probably lot of questions about Ibeane probably because um the incredible work of my because um the incredible work of my because um the incredible work of my colleague Nolan Williams at Stanford colleague Nolan Williams at Stanford colleague Nolan Williams at Stanford with these single Iagain trials for with these single Iagain trials for with these single Iagain trials for people getting over people getting over people getting over alcoholism meaning one taking Iagain alcoholism meaning one taking Iagain alcoholism meaning one taking Iagain once or twice and uh mostly in veterans once or twice and uh mostly in veterans once or twice and uh mostly in veterans was covered on the uh Rogan podcast and was covered on the uh Rogan podcast and was covered on the uh Rogan podcast and Nolan's been on here. What are your Nolan's been on here. What are your Nolan's been on here. What are your thoughts on the use of Ibagane and other thoughts on the use of Ibagane and other thoughts on the use of Ibagane and other psychedelics? Let's leave MDMA out of it psychedelics? Let's leave MDMA out of it psychedelics? Let's leave MDMA out of it because that's more for the treatment of because that's more for the treatment of because that's more for the treatment of trauma and it's not actually a classic trauma and it's not actually a classic trauma and it's not actually a classic psychedelic. But things like psilocybin, psychedelic. But things like psilocybin, psychedelic. But things like psilocybin, ibagane for people seeking relief from ibagane for people seeking relief from ibagane for people seeking relief from alcohol and drugs specifically, but alcohol and drugs specifically, but alcohol and drugs specifically, but maybe other addictions. You know, I've maybe other addictions. You know, I've maybe other addictions. You know, I've seen some pretty incredible things seen some pretty incredible things seen some pretty incredible things happen with people. Um it's uh I and I'm happen with people. Um it's uh I and I'm happen with people. Um it's uh I and I'm glad that the studies have been going on glad that the studies have been going on glad that the studies have been going on specifically around psilocybin in the specifically around psilocybin in the specifically around psilocybin in the US. I'm not really aware of any around US. I'm not really aware of any around US. I'm not really aware of any around ibagane. So anybody that is doing I gain ibagane. So anybody that is doing I gain ibagane. So anybody that is doing I gain treatments are either you know I don't treatments are either you know I don't treatments are either you know I don't know if they're finding it in the US or know if they're finding it in the US or know if they're finding it in the US or they're going to Mexico or wherever they're going to Mexico or wherever they're going to Mexico or wherever which has to be done in Mexico they're which has to be done in Mexico they're which has to be done in Mexico they're doing the brain scans at Stanford before doing the brain scans at Stanford before doing the brain scans at Stanford before and after okay it's not currently in the and after okay it's not currently in the and after okay it's not currently in the new admin so they are doing some studies new admin so they are doing some studies new admin so they are doing some studies around it the rates of remission from around it the rates of remission from around it the rates of remission from alcohol use disorder and other uh alcohol use disorder and other uh alcohol use disorder and other uh substance use uh disorders is somewhere substance use uh disorders is somewhere substance use uh disorders is somewhere there's a range but 40 to in some cases there's a range but 40 to in some cases there's a range but 40 to in some cases 80% um with one or to Ivagane trials but 80% um with one or to Ivagane trials but 80% um with one or to Ivagane trials but this is with therapeutic support there this is with therapeutic support there this is with therapeutic support there are a bunch of other things happening are a bunch of other things happening are a bunch of other things happening there and then there's evidence of brain there and then there's evidence of brain there and then there's evidence of brain plasticity in a number of brain areas plasticity in a number of brain areas plasticity in a number of brain areas yeah so I don't know enough about the yeah so I don't know enough about the yeah so I don't know enough about the studies happening before like they were studies happening before like they were studies happening before like they were doing this where Stanford was doing a doing this where Stanford was doing a doing this where Stanford was doing a study and taking people down to Mexico study and taking people down to Mexico study and taking people down to Mexico or people going down there to do it was or people going down there to do it was or people going down there to do it was kind of a lot of uh I don't know how kind of a lot of uh I don't know how kind of a lot of uh I don't know how else to say it but renegade folks doing else to say it but renegade folks doing else to say it but renegade folks doing it outside wasn't always you know run by it outside wasn't always you know run by it outside wasn't always you know run by medical teams and people making sure medical teams and people making sure medical teams and people making sure that everybody is safe uh at least from that everybody is safe uh at least from that everybody is safe uh at least from my experience although then I've seen my experience although then I've seen my experience although then I've seen some amazing things around it. My some amazing things around it. My some amazing things around it. My general take on psychedelics. If I look general take on psychedelics. If I look general take on psychedelics. If I look at PTSD, post-traumatic stress at PTSD, post-traumatic stress at PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder, I really see that as you could disorder, I really see that as you could disorder, I really see that as you could almost substitute state disorder in almost substitute state disorder in almost substitute state disorder in there for stress because people get there for stress because people get there for stress because people get stuck in a certain state and call it the stuck in a certain state and call it the stuck in a certain state and call it the survival state. And you know that's as survival state. And you know that's as survival state. And you know that's as I've said one of our biggest challenges I've said one of our biggest challenges I've said one of our biggest challenges is that we go into survival mode when we is that we go into survival mode when we is that we go into survival mode when we don't need to go into survival mode, an don't need to go into survival mode, an don't need to go into survival mode, an appropriate response at an inappropriate appropriate response at an inappropriate appropriate response at an inappropriate time. And so things like psychedelics or time. And so things like psychedelics or time. And so things like psychedelics or we actually can see this with breath we actually can see this with breath we actually can see this with breath work and can help people have an work and can help people have an work and can help people have an experience where they uh recognize experience where they uh recognize experience where they uh recognize another state, you know, that they can another state, you know, that they can another state, you know, that they can be in another state, not another be in another state, not another be in another state, not another state of the US, but like uh they have state of the US, but like uh they have state of the US, but like uh they have access to something other than survival access to something other than survival access to something other than survival and those touchstone experiences can and those touchstone experiences can and those touchstone experiences can really give them something to build on. really give them something to build on. really give them something to build on. Um, I think like any other approach to Um, I think like any other approach to Um, I think like any other approach to medicine that seems miraculous at times, medicine that seems miraculous at times, medicine that seems miraculous at times, there's a lot out there of this worked there's a lot out there of this worked there's a lot out there of this worked for me, so everybody should try it. I for me, so everybody should try it. I for me, so everybody should try it. I there's what I'm most concerned I'm not there's what I'm most concerned I'm not there's what I'm most concerned I'm not concerned about the effectiveness of concerned about the effectiveness of concerned about the effectiveness of overall of psychedelics because I think overall of psychedelics because I think overall of psychedelics because I think there's definitely a place for them, but there's definitely a place for them, but there's definitely a place for them, but I'm really most concerned about the I'm really most concerned about the I'm really most concerned about the ethics that we develop around them. ethics that we develop around them. ethics that we develop around them. Who's delivering it? What are the rules? Who's delivering it? What are the rules? Who's delivering it? What are the rules? You know, I know we weren't we were You know, I know we weren't we were You know, I know we weren't we were going to leave MDMA out, but I know some going to leave MDMA out, but I know some going to leave MDMA out, but I know some of the MAP studies it was like three of the MAP studies it was like three of the MAP studies it was like three sessions. I think it was over and I sessions. I think it was over and I sessions. I think it was over and I don't think that the world that I don't think that the world that I don't think that the world that kind of sees those is then taking that, kind of sees those is then taking that, kind of sees those is then taking that, especially in the personal development especially in the personal development especially in the personal development world, and going we're going to do three world, and going we're going to do three world, and going we're going to do three sessions. It can kind of come be sessions. It can kind of come be sessions. It can kind of come be something that we do all the time, you something that we do all the time, you something that we do all the time, you know, or micro doing all the time. I know, or micro doing all the time. I know, or micro doing all the time. I don't know enough about it to see if don't know enough about it to see if don't know enough about it to see if that's going to have an impact. And you that's going to have an impact. And you that's going to have an impact. And you know it there are people with know it there are people with know it there are people with psychological and psychiatric disorders psychological and psychiatric disorders psychological and psychiatric disorders that it can really impact in another that it can really impact in another that it can really impact in another way you know schizophrenic bipolar and way you know schizophrenic bipolar and way you know schizophrenic bipolar and you know you know I look at it like you know you know I look at it like you know you know I look at it like you know antibiotics like penicellin saved a know antibiotics like penicellin saved a know antibiotics like penicellin saved a lot of people but then there's people lot of people but then there's people lot of people but then there's people that it kills right I can eat peanuts that it kills right I can eat peanuts that it kills right I can eat peanuts and uh get protein out of them and I and uh get protein out of them and I and uh get protein out of them and I know people that eat peanuts and they know people that eat peanuts and they know people that eat peanuts and they can they can die so we lousy source of can they can die so we lousy source of can they can die so we lousy source of protein by the lousy source of protein by the lousy source of protein by the lousy source of protein eggs let's say uh but there there's a eggs let's say uh but there there's a eggs let's say uh but there there's a real we need to really understand the real we need to really understand the real we need to really understand the ethics around it and the and the time ethics around it and the and the time ethics around it and the and the time frame and then make sure that people are frame and then make sure that people are frame and then make sure that people are following that up with something because following that up with something because following that up with something because I think you've used this example before I think you've used this example before I think you've used this example before of like kind of being on a trampoline of like kind of being on a trampoline of like kind of being on a trampoline and you can jump up and see the top of and you can jump up and see the top of and you can jump up and see the top of the building, you know, and you can see the building, you know, and you can see the building, you know, and you can see where you want to be, but you haven't where you want to be, but you haven't where you want to be, but you haven't built the staircase or the elevator yet. built the staircase or the elevator yet. built the staircase or the elevator yet. We got to go out and build the staircase We got to go out and build the staircase We got to go out and build the staircase and the elevator. So, I think they're a and the elevator. So, I think they're a and the elevator. So, I think they're a great window into how we can be and an great window into how we can be and an great window into how we can be and an experience of this person that I can be, experience of this person that I can be, experience of this person that I can be, but I don't think that there's going to but I don't think that there's going to but I don't think that there's going to be like some immediate structural change be like some immediate structural change be like some immediate structural change that's going to last. And the danger in that's going to last. And the danger in that's going to last. And the danger in that is then people start using that is then people start using that is then people start using that over and over again and can lean on that over and over again and can lean on that over and over again and can lean on that as a as a as a crutch. Last as a as a as a crutch. Last as a as a as a crutch. Last question. If we know somebody or are question. If we know somebody or are question. If we know somebody or are close to somebody that's clearly close to somebody that's clearly close to somebody that's clearly suffering from addiction or struggling suffering from addiction or struggling suffering from addiction or struggling with addiction, what can and should we with addiction, what can and should we with addiction, what can and should we do? This sounds like somebody who is do? This sounds like somebody who is do? This sounds like somebody who is aware of the all too common scenario of aware of the all too common scenario of aware of the all too common scenario of this kid, this parent, this co-orker, this kid, this parent, this co-orker, this kid, this parent, this co-orker, this significant other is clearly an this significant other is clearly an this significant other is clearly an alcoholic, clearly a drug addict, alcoholic, clearly a drug addict, alcoholic, clearly a drug addict, clearly addicted to fill in the blank. clearly addicted to fill in the blank. clearly addicted to fill in the blank. What can people reasonably do assuming What can people reasonably do assuming What can people reasonably do assuming that person is not in a uh medical that person is not in a uh medical that person is not in a uh medical crisis yet? I think one of the biggest crisis yet? I think one of the biggest crisis yet? I think one of the biggest things we can do is talk to things we can do is talk to things we can do is talk to them, but also without shaming them, you them, but also without shaming them, you them, but also without shaming them, you know. Um, and if you don't know how to know. Um, and if you don't know how to know. Um, and if you don't know how to talk to them, reach out for some help talk to them, reach out for some help talk to them, reach out for some help yourself. You know, there's, like I yourself. You know, there's, like I yourself. You know, there's, like I said, there's family support said, there's family support said, there's family support meetings like Alanon that you can go to. meetings like Alanon that you can go to. meetings like Alanon that you can go to. Um, if you reach out to a treatment Um, if you reach out to a treatment Um, if you reach out to a treatment center like ours, you can um we're happy center like ours, you can um we're happy center like ours, you can um we're happy to talk to the families and help to talk to the families and help to talk to the families and help point them in the in the right point them in the in the right point them in the in the right direction. Uh but having an open direction. Uh but having an open direction. Uh but having an open conversation without shaming them and conversation without shaming them and conversation without shaming them and understanding that this is a you know understanding that this is a you know understanding that this is a you know approaching it with the idea that this approaching it with the idea that this approaching it with the idea that this is a disease and a and a like a like is a disease and a and a like a like is a disease and a and a like a like we're talking to a sick friend not like we're talking to a sick friend not like we're talking to a sick friend not that we're talking to a bad a bad that we're talking to a bad a bad that we're talking to a bad a bad person. Can I ask slash offer one which person. Can I ask slash offer one which person. Can I ask slash offer one which is if uh if a 12step meeting is an open is if uh if a 12step meeting is an open is if uh if a 12step meeting is an open meeting as they call it like an open AA meeting as they call it like an open AA meeting as they call it like an open AA meeting you could offer to go with them meeting you could offer to go with them meeting you could offer to go with them uh when they do the round the circle uh when they do the round the circle uh when they do the round the circle thing you if you go and you don't want thing you if you go and you don't want thing you if you go and you don't want to say anything you just say pass no one to say anything you just say pass no one to say anything you just say pass no one no one and a lot of places they don't no one and a lot of places they don't no one and a lot of places they don't even do around the circle so you can you even do around the circle so you can you even do around the circle so you can you could go with them to you could take could go with them to you could take could go with them to you could take them to a meeting. Yeah. As long as it's them to a meeting. Yeah. As long as it's them to a meeting. Yeah. As long as it's an what's called an open meeting. You an what's called an open meeting. You an what's called an open meeting. You don't have to be an alcoholic or an don't have to be an alcoholic or an don't have to be an alcoholic or an addict to go to that meeting. And so you addict to go to that meeting. And so you addict to go to that meeting. And so you could take them, you could even go and could take them, you could even go and could take them, you could even go and just observe. Believe it or not, some just observe. Believe it or not, some just observe. Believe it or not, some non-alcoholics have come to 12step non-alcoholics have come to 12step non-alcoholics have come to 12step meetings that uh were open meetings to meetings that uh were open meetings to meetings that uh were open meetings to learn more about it to then be able to learn more about it to then be able to learn more about it to then be able to go help somebody that they know and go help somebody that they know and go help somebody that they know and reach out and find a therapist that reach out and find a therapist that reach out and find a therapist that can um do an assessment in our mission can um do an assessment in our mission can um do an assessment in our mission to create access. Um we have been really to create access. Um we have been really to create access. Um we have been really doing some kind of innovative stuff doing some kind of innovative stuff doing some kind of innovative stuff around virtual care and inhome care. So around virtual care and inhome care. So around virtual care and inhome care. So when there are people that are resistant when there are people that are resistant when there are people that are resistant and maybe if they even it is true that and maybe if they even it is true that and maybe if they even it is true that they need to go to a residential they need to go to a residential they need to go to a residential treatment center that we can offer this treatment center that we can offer this treatment center that we can offer this different service that's much lower cost different service that's much lower cost different service that's much lower cost and covered by insurance that we can and covered by insurance that we can and covered by insurance that we can come in and kind of build a relationship come in and kind of build a relationship come in and kind of build a relationship with them and you know in some way with them and you know in some way with them and you know in some way sometimes it works for them and sometimes it works for them and sometimes it works for them and they're able to move through it and they're able to move through it and they're able to move through it and other times we're able to help them other times we're able to help them other times we're able to help them witness their failures and then have h witness their failures and then have h witness their failures and then have h having done complete assessments with having done complete assessments with having done complete assessments with them get them to the correct level of them get them to the correct level of them get them to the correct level of care and make sure that the family has care and make sure that the family has care and make sure that the family has everything they need. So those options everything they need. So those options everything they need. So those options are out there as well. I've seen the are out there as well. I've seen the are out there as well. I've seen the work you do help so many people um so work you do help so many people um so work you do help so many people um so many people and so I'm just very feel many people and so I'm just very feel many people and so I'm just very feel very lucky uh you come on here and share very lucky uh you come on here and share very lucky uh you come on here and share with a lot a lot more people. Yeah. And with a lot a lot more people. Yeah. And with a lot a lot more people. Yeah. And I'm sure you'll get some outreach. Well, I'm sure you'll get some outreach. Well, I'm sure you'll get some outreach. Well, we'll put links to uh where people can we'll put links to uh where people can we'll put links to uh where people can find you and some of the resources and find you and some of the resources and find you and some of the resources and things that you're up to and um and the things that you're up to and um and the things that you're up to and um and the papers and other things mentioned. But papers and other things mentioned. But papers and other things mentioned. But yeah, on behalf of myself um and yeah, on behalf of myself um and yeah, on behalf of myself um and everyone listening and watching, I just everyone listening and watching, I just everyone listening and watching, I just want to say thank you. you're doing want to say thank you. you're doing want to say thank you. you're doing incredible work. I was uh reflecting on incredible work. I was uh reflecting on incredible work. I was uh reflecting on this a lot before coming out here, but this a lot before coming out here, but this a lot before coming out here, but you know, I really appreciate what you know, I really appreciate what you know, I really appreciate what you do in the world and especially knowing do in the world and especially knowing do in the world and especially knowing you and knowing how and why you started you and knowing how and why you started you and knowing how and why you started it. And there wasn't this grand vision it. And there wasn't this grand vision it. And there wasn't this grand vision at the end. It was like, I'm just going at the end. It was like, I'm just going at the end. It was like, I'm just going to help people today. I mean, you to help people today. I mean, you to help people today. I mean, you literally was like, I'm going to help literally was like, I'm going to help literally was like, I'm going to help people today. I'm going to write do people today. I'm going to write do people today. I'm going to write do these little diagrams and these little these little diagrams and these little these little diagrams and these little things and I'm going to help them today. things and I'm going to help them today. things and I'm going to help them today. and helping people today and the next and helping people today and the next and helping people today and the next day and the next day, you know, has led day and the next day, you know, has led day and the next day, you know, has led to you having such an impact in the to you having such an impact in the to you having such an impact in the world. You know, I you I was telling world. You know, I you I was telling world. You know, I you I was telling someone on your team someone on your team someone on your team earlier, your work makes my work easier, earlier, your work makes my work easier, earlier, your work makes my work easier, right? I've had men specifically, mostly right? I've had men specifically, mostly right? I've had men specifically, mostly men that come to me more open because of men that come to me more open because of men that come to me more open because of what they've heard you talk about. And what they've heard you talk about. And what they've heard you talk about. And conversely, I've had men that we're conversely, I've had men that we're conversely, I've had men that we're working with that are very closed off working with that are very closed off working with that are very closed off and then I'll have them listen to and then I'll have them listen to and then I'll have them listen to something that you've done and it opens something that you've done and it opens something that you've done and it opens them up. My wife wanted me to tell, you them up. My wife wanted me to tell, you them up. My wife wanted me to tell, you know, she's a therapist, too, and she know, she's a therapist, too, and she know, she's a therapist, too, and she was running a group this morning with a was running a group this morning with a was running a group this morning with a group of kind of more uh mentally ill group of kind of more uh mentally ill group of kind of more uh mentally ill folks and they were doing a group on folks and they were doing a group on folks and they were doing a group on stress management and she used a video stress management and she used a video stress management and she used a video of the physiological sigh. So, she of the physiological sigh. So, she of the physiological sigh. So, she wanted to say thank you for that. But I wanted to say thank you for that. But I wanted to say thank you for that. But I know lots of therapists that are using know lots of therapists that are using know lots of therapists that are using that and it it's just you make our that and it it's just you make our that and it it's just you make our you make our jobs easier by bringing you make our jobs easier by bringing you make our jobs easier by bringing awareness to the challenges and awareness to the challenges and awareness to the challenges and problems that are out there. So I really problems that are out there. So I really problems that are out there. So I really appreciate that. Plus I just really appreciate that. Plus I just really appreciate that. Plus I just appreciate you as a human being and appreciate you as a human being and appreciate you as a human being and very much value our friendship. Thank very much value our friendship. Thank very much value our friendship. Thank you for that. That's extremely you for that. That's extremely you for that. That's extremely gratifying to hear. gratifying to hear. gratifying to hear. And I'd be remiss if I didn't say that And I'd be remiss if I didn't say that And I'd be remiss if I didn't say that were not for you and your support and were not for you and your support and were not for you and your support and the many things you've taught me and our the many things you've taught me and our the many things you've taught me and our friendship, I definitely wouldn't be friendship, I definitely wouldn't be friendship, I definitely wouldn't be doing this and uh maybe wouldn't even be doing this and uh maybe wouldn't even be doing this and uh maybe wouldn't even be here today at all uh in the biggest here today at all uh in the biggest here today at all uh in the biggest sense. So, thanks for everything. I sense. So, thanks for everything. I sense. So, thanks for everything. I appreciate you. Thank you. Thank you for appreciate you. Thank you. Thank you for appreciate you. Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with joining me for today's discussion with Ryan Suave. To learn more about Ryan's Ryan Suave. To learn more about Ryan's Ryan Suave. To learn more about Ryan's work and to find links to the various work and to find links to the various work and to find links to the various resources discussed during today's resources discussed during today's resources discussed during today's episode, please see the show note episode, please see the show note episode, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social not already following me on social not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Ryan Suave. And today's discussion with Ryan Suave. And today's discussion with Ryan Suave. And last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]