Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, Stanford School of Medicine. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Eric Jarvis. for my discussion with Dr. Eric Jarvis. for my discussion with Dr. Eric Jarvis. Eric, so great to have you here. Thank Eric, so great to have you here. Thank Eric, so great to have you here. Thank you. Yeah. Very interested in learning you. Yeah. Very interested in learning you. Yeah. Very interested in learning from you about speech and language. In from you about speech and language. In from you about speech and language. In terms of the study of speech and terms of the study of speech and terms of the study of speech and language and thinking about how the language and thinking about how the language and thinking about how the brain organizes speech and language, brain organizes speech and language, brain organizes speech and language, what are the similarities, what are the what are the similarities, what are the what are the similarities, what are the differences, how should we think about differences, how should we think about differences, how should we think about speech and language? speech and language? speech and language? &gt;&gt; There really isn't such a sharp &gt;&gt; There really isn't such a sharp &gt;&gt; There really isn't such a sharp distinction. Now, let me tell you how distinction. Now, let me tell you how distinction. Now, let me tell you how some people think of it now. That some people think of it now. That some people think of it now. That there's a separate language module in there's a separate language module in there's a separate language module in the brain that has all the algorithms the brain that has all the algorithms the brain that has all the algorithms and computations that influence the and computations that influence the and computations that influence the speech pathway on how to produce sound speech pathway on how to produce sound speech pathway on how to produce sound and the auditory pathway on how to and the auditory pathway on how to and the auditory pathway on how to perceive and interpret it uh for speech perceive and interpret it uh for speech perceive and interpret it uh for speech or for, you know, or for, you know, or for, you know, sound that we call speech. I don't think sound that we call speech. I don't think sound that we call speech. I don't think there is any good evidence for a there is any good evidence for a there is any good evidence for a separate language module. separate language module. separate language module. Instead, there is a speech production pathway there is a speech production pathway there is a speech production pathway that's controlling our larynx, that's controlling our larynx, that's controlling our larynx, controlling our jaw muscles, that has controlling our jaw muscles, that has controlling our jaw muscles, that has built within it all the complex built within it all the complex built within it all the complex algorithms for spoken language. And algorithms for spoken language. And algorithms for spoken language. And there's the auditory pathway that has there's the auditory pathway that has there's the auditory pathway that has built within it all the complex built within it all the complex built within it all the complex algorithms for understanding speech, not algorithms for understanding speech, not algorithms for understanding speech, not separate from a language module. separate from a language module. separate from a language module. And the speech production pathway is And the speech production pathway is And the speech production pathway is specialized to humans specialized to humans specialized to humans and parrots and songbirds, whereas this and parrots and songbirds, whereas this and parrots and songbirds, whereas this auditory perception pathway is more auditory perception pathway is more auditory perception pathway is more ubiquitous amongst the animal kingdom. ubiquitous amongst the animal kingdom. ubiquitous amongst the animal kingdom. And this is why dogs can understand sit, And this is why dogs can understand sit, And this is why dogs can understand sit, sientese, come here, ball boy, get the sientese, come here, ball boy, get the sientese, come here, ball boy, get the ball, and so forth. Dogs can understand ball, and so forth. Dogs can understand ball, and so forth. Dogs can understand several hundred human speech words. several hundred human speech words. several hundred human speech words. Great apes, you can teach them for Great apes, you can teach them for Great apes, you can teach them for several thousand, but they can't say a several thousand, but they can't say a several thousand, but they can't say a word. What do we understand about modes word. What do we understand about modes word. What do we understand about modes of communication that are of communication that are of communication that are like language, but might not be what like language, but might not be what like language, but might not be what would classically be called language? would classically be called language? would classically be called language? &gt;&gt; So, next to the brain regions that are &gt;&gt; So, next to the brain regions that are &gt;&gt; So, next to the brain regions that are controlling spoken language are the controlling spoken language are the controlling spoken language are the brain regions for gesturing with the brain regions for gesturing with the brain regions for gesturing with the hands. And that hand parallel pathway has also And that hand parallel pathway has also And that hand parallel pathway has also complex algorithms that we can utilize. complex algorithms that we can utilize. complex algorithms that we can utilize. And some species are more advanced in And some species are more advanced in And some species are more advanced in these circuits, whether it's sound or these circuits, whether it's sound or these circuits, whether it's sound or gesturing with hands, and some are less gesturing with hands, and some are less gesturing with hands, and some are less advanced. Humans are the most advanced advanced. Humans are the most advanced advanced. Humans are the most advanced at spoken language, at spoken language, at spoken language, but not necessarily as big a difference but not necessarily as big a difference but not necessarily as big a difference at gestural language compared to some at gestural language compared to some at gestural language compared to some other species. So, as you and I are other species. So, as you and I are other species. So, as you and I are talking here today, and people who are talking here today, and people who are talking here today, and people who are listening but can't see us, we're listening but can't see us, we're listening but can't see us, we're actually gesturing with our hands as we actually gesturing with our hands as we actually gesturing with our hands as we talk uh without knowing it, or doing it talk uh without knowing it, or doing it talk uh without knowing it, or doing it unconsciously. And if we were talking on unconsciously. And if we were talking on unconsciously. And if we were talking on a telephone, I would have one hand here a telephone, I would have one hand here a telephone, I would have one hand here and I'd be gesturing with the other hand and I'd be gesturing with the other hand and I'd be gesturing with the other hand uh without even you seeing me, right? uh without even you seeing me, right? uh without even you seeing me, right? And so, why is that? Uh some have And so, why is that? Uh some have And so, why is that? Uh some have argued, and I would agree with based argued, and I would agree with based argued, and I would agree with based upon what we've seen, is that there's an upon what we've seen, is that there's an upon what we've seen, is that there's an evolutionary relationship between the evolutionary relationship between the evolutionary relationship between the brain pathways that control speech brain pathways that control speech brain pathways that control speech production and gesturing. production and gesturing. production and gesturing. Uh and the brain regions I mentioned Uh and the brain regions I mentioned Uh and the brain regions I mentioned are directly adjacent to each other. And are directly adjacent to each other. And are directly adjacent to each other. And why is that? I think that the brain why is that? I think that the brain why is that? I think that the brain pathways that control speech evolved out pathways that control speech evolved out pathways that control speech evolved out of the brain pathways that control body of the brain pathways that control body of the brain pathways that control body movement. All right? And um All right? And um All right? And um that uh that uh that uh when you talk about Italian, French, when you talk about Italian, French, when you talk about Italian, French, English, and so forth, English, and so forth, English, and so forth, um each one of those languages come with um each one of those languages come with um each one of those languages come with a learned set of gestures a learned set of gestures a learned set of gestures that uh you can communicate with. Now, that uh you can communicate with. Now, that uh you can communicate with. Now, how is that related to other animals? how is that related to other animals? how is that related to other animals? Well, Koko, a gorilla who was raised Well, Koko, a gorilla who was raised Well, Koko, a gorilla who was raised with humans for 39 years or more, with humans for 39 years or more, with humans for 39 years or more, uh learned how to do gesture uh learned how to do gesture uh learned how to do gesture communication, learned how to sign communication, learned how to sign communication, learned how to sign language, so to speak, right? But Koko language, so to speak, right? But Koko language, so to speak, right? But Koko couldn't produce those sounds. Koko couldn't produce those sounds. Koko couldn't produce those sounds. Koko could understand them as well could understand them as well could understand them as well by sign by seeing somebody sign or by sign by seeing somebody sign or by sign by seeing somebody sign or hearing somebody produce speech, but hearing somebody produce speech, but hearing somebody produce speech, but Koko couldn't produce it with her voice. Koko couldn't produce it with her voice. Koko couldn't produce it with her voice. And so what's going on there is that And so what's going on there is that And so what's going on there is that a number of species, not all of them, a number of species, not all of them, a number of species, not all of them, a number of species have motor pathways in number of species have motor pathways in number of species have motor pathways in the brain where you can do learned the brain where you can do learned the brain where you can do learned gesturing, rudimentary language if you gesturing, rudimentary language if you gesturing, rudimentary language if you wanted to say with your limbs, even if wanted to say with your limbs, even if wanted to say with your limbs, even if it's not as advanced as humans, but they it's not as advanced as humans, but they it's not as advanced as humans, but they don't have this extra brain pathway for don't have this extra brain pathway for don't have this extra brain pathway for the sound. So they can't gesture with the sound. So they can't gesture with the sound. So they can't gesture with their voice in the way that they gesture their voice in the way that they gesture their voice in the way that they gesture with their hands. One thing that I've with their hands. One thing that I've with their hands. One thing that I've wondered about for a very long time is wondered about for a very long time is wondered about for a very long time is whether or not whether or not whether or not primitive emotions primitive emotions primitive emotions and primitive sounds are the early and primitive sounds are the early and primitive sounds are the early substrate of language. When I smell substrate of language. When I smell substrate of language. When I smell something delicious, I typically inhale something delicious, I typically inhale something delicious, I typically inhale more and I might say more and I might say more and I might say or something like that. Whereas if I or something like that. Whereas if I or something like that. Whereas if I smell something putrid, I typically turn smell something putrid, I typically turn smell something putrid, I typically turn away, I wince, and I will exhale trying away, I wince, and I will exhale trying away, I wince, and I will exhale trying to not ingest those molecules or inhale to not ingest those molecules or inhale to not ingest those molecules or inhale those molecules. I could imagine that those molecules. I could imagine that those molecules. I could imagine that these are the basic dark and light these are the basic dark and light these are the basic dark and light contrasts of the language system. Is contrasts of the language system. Is contrasts of the language system. Is kind of primitive to more sophisticated kind of primitive to more sophisticated kind of primitive to more sophisticated pyramid of sound to language? Is this pyramid of sound to language? Is this pyramid of sound to language? Is this a crazy idea? Do we have any a crazy idea? Do we have any a crazy idea? Do we have any Do we have any evidence this is the way Do we have any evidence this is the way Do we have any evidence this is the way it works? No, it's not a crazy idea and it works? No, it's not a crazy idea and it works? No, it's not a crazy idea and in fact you hit upon one of the key in fact you hit upon one of the key in fact you hit upon one of the key distinctions in the field of research distinctions in the field of research distinctions in the field of research that I had started out in, which is that I had started out in, which is that I had started out in, which is vocal learning research. Most vertebrate vocal learning research. Most vertebrate vocal learning research. Most vertebrate species vocalize, but most of them are species vocalize, but most of them are species vocalize, but most of them are producing innate sounds that they're producing innate sounds that they're producing innate sounds that they're born with, that is babies crying, for born with, that is babies crying, for born with, that is babies crying, for example, or dogs barking. And only a few example, or dogs barking. And only a few example, or dogs barking. And only a few species have learned vocal species have learned vocal species have learned vocal communication, the ability to imitate communication, the ability to imitate communication, the ability to imitate sounds. And that's is what makes spoken sounds. And that's is what makes spoken sounds. And that's is what makes spoken language special. When people think of language special. When people think of language special. When people think of what's special about language, it's the what's special about language, it's the what's special about language, it's the learned vocalizations. That is what's learned vocalizations. That is what's learned vocalizations. That is what's rare. So, all the things you talked rare. So, all the things you talked rare. So, all the things you talked about, the breathing, the grunting, and about, the breathing, the grunting, and about, the breathing, the grunting, and so forth, a lot of that is handled by so forth, a lot of that is handled by so forth, a lot of that is handled by the brain stem circuits, you know, right the brain stem circuits, you know, right the brain stem circuits, you know, right around the level of your neck and below. around the level of your neck and below. around the level of your neck and below. Uh like a reflex kind of thing. So, or like a reflex kind of thing. So, or like a reflex kind of thing. So, or even some emotional aspects of your even some emotional aspects of your even some emotional aspects of your behavior in the hypothalamus and so behavior in the hypothalamus and so behavior in the hypothalamus and so forth. But, for a learned behavior, learning But, for a learned behavior, learning But, for a learned behavior, learning how to speak, uh learning how to play how to speak, uh learning how to play how to speak, uh learning how to play the piano, teaching a dog to learn how the piano, teaching a dog to learn how the piano, teaching a dog to learn how to do tricks, to do tricks, to do tricks, is using the forebrain circuits. is using the forebrain circuits. is using the forebrain circuits. And what has happened is that there's a And what has happened is that there's a And what has happened is that there's a lot of forebrain circuits that are lot of forebrain circuits that are lot of forebrain circuits that are controlling learning how to move body controlling learning how to move body controlling learning how to move body parts in these species, but not for the parts in these species, but not for the parts in these species, but not for the vocalizations. But, in humans and in vocalizations. But, in humans and in vocalizations. But, in humans and in parrots and some other species, somehow parrots and some other species, somehow parrots and some other species, somehow we acquired circuits where the forebrain we acquired circuits where the forebrain we acquired circuits where the forebrain has taken over the brain stem, has taken over the brain stem, has taken over the brain stem, and now using that brain stem not only and now using that brain stem not only and now using that brain stem not only to produce the innate behaviors or vocal to produce the innate behaviors or vocal to produce the innate behaviors or vocal behaviors, but the learned ones as well. behaviors, but the learned ones as well. behaviors, but the learned ones as well. Do we have any sense of when Do we have any sense of when Do we have any sense of when modern or sophisticated language modern or sophisticated language modern or sophisticated language evolved? Amongst the primates, which we evolved? Amongst the primates, which we evolved? Amongst the primates, which we humans belong to, we are the only ones humans belong to, we are the only ones humans belong to, we are the only ones that have this advanced vocal learning that have this advanced vocal learning that have this advanced vocal learning ability. Uh Now, when you when you when you It was assumed that it was only Homo It was assumed that it was only Homo It was assumed that it was only Homo sapiens. Uh then you can go back in time now Uh then you can go back in time now Uh then you can go back in time now based upon genomic data based upon genomic data based upon genomic data not only of us living humans, but of the not only of us living humans, but of the not only of us living humans, but of the fossils that have been found for Homo fossils that have been found for Homo fossils that have been found for Homo sapiens, of Neanderthals, of Denisovan sapiens, of Neanderthals, of Denisovan sapiens, of Neanderthals, of Denisovan uh individuals, and discover that our uh individuals, and discover that our uh individuals, and discover that our ancestor our human ancestors supposedly ancestor our human ancestors supposedly ancestor our human ancestors supposedly hybridized with these other hybridized with these other hybridized with these other hominid species. hominid species. hominid species. And it was assumed that these other And it was assumed that these other And it was assumed that these other hominid species don't learn how to hominid species don't learn how to hominid species don't learn how to imitate sounds. imitate sounds. imitate sounds. I don't know of any species today that's I don't know of any species today that's I don't know of any species today that's a vocal learner a vocal learner a vocal learner that can have children with a non-vocal that can have children with a non-vocal that can have children with a non-vocal learning species. learning species. learning species. I don't see it. It doesn't mean it I don't see it. It doesn't mean it I don't see it. It doesn't mean it didn't exist. didn't exist. didn't exist. Uh and when we look at the genetic data Uh and when we look at the genetic data Uh and when we look at the genetic data from these ancestral hominids that uh from these ancestral hominids that uh from these ancestral hominids that uh you know, where we can look at genes you know, where we can look at genes you know, where we can look at genes that are involved in learn vocal that are involved in learn vocal that are involved in learn vocal communication, they have the same communication, they have the same communication, they have the same sequence as we humans do sequence as we humans do sequence as we humans do for genes that function in speech for genes that function in speech for genes that function in speech circuits. So, I think Neanderthals had spoken So, I think Neanderthals had spoken So, I think Neanderthals had spoken language. I'm not going to say it's as language. I'm not going to say it's as language. I'm not going to say it's as advanced as what it is in humans, I advanced as what it is in humans, I advanced as what it is in humans, I don't know. don't know. don't know. Um but I think it's been there for at Um but I think it's been there for at Um but I think it's been there for at least between 500,000 to a million least between 500,000 to a million least between 500,000 to a million years. Maybe we could talk a little bit years. Maybe we could talk a little bit years. Maybe we could talk a little bit more about the overlap between brain more about the overlap between brain more about the overlap between brain circuits that control language and circuits that control language and circuits that control language and speech in humans and other animals. You speech in humans and other animals. You speech in humans and other animals. You know, I was weaned in the neuroscience know, I was weaned in the neuroscience know, I was weaned in the neuroscience era where bird song and the uh era where bird song and the uh era where bird song and the uh the ability of birds to learn their the ability of birds to learn their the ability of birds to learn their tutor song was and still is a prominent tutor song was and still is a prominent tutor song was and still is a prominent field and um subfield of neuroscience. field and um subfield of neuroscience. field and um subfield of neuroscience. And this notion of a critical period, a And this notion of a critical period, a And this notion of a critical period, a time in which language is learned more time in which language is learned more time in which language is learned more easily than it is later in life. And easily than it is later in life. And easily than it is later in life. And the names of the different brain areas the names of the different brain areas the names of the different brain areas were quite different. Um it when one were quite different. Um it when one were quite different. Um it when one opens the textbooks, we hear Wernicke's opens the textbooks, we hear Wernicke's opens the textbooks, we hear Wernicke's and Broca's for the humans and then you and Broca's for the humans and then you and Broca's for the humans and then you look at the birds, so that I remember, look at the birds, so that I remember, look at the birds, so that I remember, you know, HVC you know, HVC you know, HVC &gt;&gt; Yeah, a robust archistriatum, area X, &gt;&gt; Yeah, a robust archistriatum, area X, &gt;&gt; Yeah, a robust archistriatum, area X, right? &gt;&gt; That's right. Yes. &gt;&gt; That's right. Yes. &gt;&gt; That's right. Yes. &gt;&gt; how similar or different are the brains &gt;&gt; how similar or different are the brains &gt;&gt; how similar or different are the brains uh brain areas controlling speech and uh brain areas controlling speech and uh brain areas controlling speech and language in say a songbird and a and a language in say a songbird and a and a language in say a songbird and a and a young human child? Yeah. So, going back young human child? Yeah. So, going back young human child? Yeah. So, going back to the 1950s or and even a little to the 1950s or and even a little to the 1950s or and even a little earlier and Peter Marler and others who earlier and Peter Marler and others who earlier and Peter Marler and others who got involved in neuroethology, the study got involved in neuroethology, the study got involved in neuroethology, the study of neurobiology of behavior in a natural of neurobiology of behavior in a natural of neurobiology of behavior in a natural way, right? Um you know, they started to way, right? Um you know, they started to way, right? Um you know, they started to find that find that find that behaviorally there are these species of behaviorally there are these species of behaviorally there are these species of birds like songbirds and parrots and now birds like songbirds and parrots and now birds like songbirds and parrots and now we also know hummingbirds, just three of we also know hummingbirds, just three of we also know hummingbirds, just three of them out of the 40-something bird groups them out of the 40-something bird groups them out of the 40-something bird groups out there on the planet, orders, out there on the planet, orders, out there on the planet, orders, that they can imitate sounds like we that they can imitate sounds like we that they can imitate sounds like we And so that was a similarity. In other And so that was a similarity. In other And so that was a similarity. In other words, they had this kind of behavior words, they had this kind of behavior words, they had this kind of behavior that's more similar to us than that's more similar to us than that's more similar to us than chimpanzees have with us or than chimpanzees have with us or than chimpanzees have with us or than chickens have with them, right? They're chickens have with them, right? They're chickens have with them, right? They're more closer relatives. And then they more closer relatives. And then they more closer relatives. And then they discovered even more similarities, these discovered even more similarities, these discovered even more similarities, these critical periods that if you remove a critical periods that if you remove a critical periods that if you remove a child you know, this unfortunately child you know, this unfortunately child you know, this unfortunately happens where a child is feral and does happens where a child is feral and does happens where a child is feral and does is not raised with human and goes is not raised with human and goes is not raised with human and goes through their puberty phase of growth through their puberty phase of growth through their puberty phase of growth becomes hard for them to learn a becomes hard for them to learn a becomes hard for them to learn a language as an adult. So there's this language as an adult. So there's this language as an adult. So there's this critical period where you learn best. critical period where you learn best. critical period where you learn best. And even later on when you're in regular And even later on when you're in regular And even later on when you're in regular society, it's hard to learn. Well, the society, it's hard to learn. Well, the society, it's hard to learn. Well, the same birds undergo these same thing. And same birds undergo these same thing. And same birds undergo these same thing. And then it was discovered that if they then it was discovered that if they then it was discovered that if they become deaf, we humans become deaf, our become deaf, we humans become deaf, our become deaf, we humans become deaf, our speech starts to deteriorate without any speech starts to deteriorate without any speech starts to deteriorate without any kind of therapy. kind of therapy. kind of therapy. Uh if a non-human primate or Uh if a non-human primate or Uh if a non-human primate or you know, or let's say a chicken becomes you know, or let's say a chicken becomes you know, or let's say a chicken becomes deaf, uh their vocalizations don't deaf, uh their vocalizations don't deaf, uh their vocalizations don't deteriorate, very little at least. Uh deteriorate, very little at least. Uh deteriorate, very little at least. Uh well, this happens in the vocal learning well, this happens in the vocal learning well, this happens in the vocal learning birds. So there were all these birds. So there were all these birds. So there were all these behavioral parallels that it came along behavioral parallels that it came along behavioral parallels that it came along with a package. And then people looked with a package. And then people looked with a package. And then people looked into the brain, Fernando Nottebohm, my into the brain, Fernando Nottebohm, my into the brain, Fernando Nottebohm, my former PhD advisor, and began to former PhD advisor, and began to former PhD advisor, and began to discover the area X you talked about, uh discover the area X you talked about, uh discover the area X you talked about, uh the robust nucleus of the arcopallium. the robust nucleus of the arcopallium. the robust nucleus of the arcopallium. And um And um And um and these brain pathways were not found and these brain pathways were not found and these brain pathways were not found in the species who couldn't imitate. So in the species who couldn't imitate. So in the species who couldn't imitate. So there was a parallel here. there was a parallel here. there was a parallel here. And then uh jumping many years later, And then uh jumping many years later, And then uh jumping many years later, you know, I started to dig down into you know, I started to dig down into you know, I started to dig down into these uh brain circuits to discover that these uh brain circuits to discover that these uh brain circuits to discover that these brain circuits have parallel these brain circuits have parallel these brain circuits have parallel functions with the brain circuits for functions with the brain circuits for functions with the brain circuits for humans, even though they're by a humans, even though they're by a humans, even though they're by a different name like Broca's and different name like Broca's and different name like Broca's and laryngeal motor cortex. And most laryngeal motor cortex. And most laryngeal motor cortex. And most recently, we discovered not only the recently, we discovered not only the recently, we discovered not only the actual circuitry and the connectivity actual circuitry and the connectivity actual circuitry and the connectivity are similar, but the underlying genes are similar, but the underlying genes are similar, but the underlying genes that are expressed in these brain that are expressed in these brain that are expressed in these brain regions in a specialized way different regions in a specialized way different regions in a specialized way different from the rest of the brain are also from the rest of the brain are also from the rest of the brain are also similar between humans and songbirds and similar between humans and songbirds and similar between humans and songbirds and parrots. So all the way down to the parrots. So all the way down to the parrots. So all the way down to the genes, and now we're finding the genes, and now we're finding the genes, and now we're finding the specific mutations specific mutations specific mutations are also similar. Not always identical, are also similar. Not always identical, are also similar. Not always identical, but similar. but similar. but similar. Uh which indicates remarkable Uh which indicates remarkable Uh which indicates remarkable convergence for a so-called complex convergence for a so-called complex convergence for a so-called complex behavior in species separated by 300 behavior in species separated by 300 behavior in species separated by 300 million years from a common ancestor. million years from a common ancestor. million years from a common ancestor. And not only that, we are discovering And not only that, we are discovering And not only that, we are discovering that mutations in these genes that cause mutations in these genes that cause mutations in these genes that cause speech deficits in humans, like in speech deficits in humans, like in speech deficits in humans, like in FOXP2, uh if you put those same FOXP2, uh if you put those same FOXP2, uh if you put those same mutations or similar type of deficits in mutations or similar type of deficits in mutations or similar type of deficits in these vocal learning birds, you get these vocal learning birds, you get these vocal learning birds, you get similar deficits. So, convergence of the similar deficits. So, convergence of the similar deficits. So, convergence of the behavior is associated with similar behavior is associated with similar behavior is associated with similar genetic disorders of the behavior. Do genetic disorders of the behavior. Do genetic disorders of the behavior. Do hummingbirds sing or do they hum? hummingbirds sing or do they hum? hummingbirds sing or do they hum? Hummingbirds hum with their wings and Hummingbirds hum with their wings and Hummingbirds hum with their wings and sing with their syrinx. sing with their syrinx. sing with their syrinx. &gt;&gt; In a coordinated way? In a coordinated &gt;&gt; In a coordinated way? In a coordinated &gt;&gt; In a coordinated way? In a coordinated way. There is some species of way. There is some species of way. There is some species of hummingbirds um hummingbirds um hummingbirds um that actually will that actually will that actually will um Doug Ashler showed this that will um Doug Ashler showed this that will um Doug Ashler showed this that will flap uh their wings and create a flap uh their wings and create a flap uh their wings and create a slapping sound with their wings that's slapping sound with their wings that's slapping sound with their wings that's in unison with their song. And oh and in unison with their song. And oh and in unison with their song. And oh and you would not know it, but it sounds you would not know it, but it sounds you would not know it, but it sounds like a particular syllable in their like a particular syllable in their like a particular syllable in their songs, uh even though it's their wings songs, uh even though it's their wings songs, uh even though it's their wings and their voice at the same time. and their voice at the same time. and their voice at the same time. Hummingbirds are clapping to their song. Hummingbirds are clapping to their song. Hummingbirds are clapping to their song. &gt;&gt; Clapping with their they're snapping &gt;&gt; Clapping with their they're snapping &gt;&gt; Clapping with their they're snapping their wings together uh in unison with their wings together uh in unison with their wings together uh in unison with the song to make it like if I'm going the song to make it like if I'm going the song to make it like if I'm going ba da ba da. ba da ba da. ba da ba da. You know, I banged on the table. Except You know, I banged on the table. Except You know, I banged on the table. Except they make it almost sound like their they make it almost sound like their they make it almost sound like their voice with their wings. What's amazing voice with their wings. What's amazing voice with their wings. What's amazing about hummingbirds, and I we're going to about hummingbirds, and I we're going to about hummingbirds, and I we're going to say vocal learning species in general, say vocal learning species in general, say vocal learning species in general, is that for whatever reason, they seem is that for whatever reason, they seem is that for whatever reason, they seem to evolve multiple complex traits. to evolve multiple complex traits. to evolve multiple complex traits. You know, this idea that the evolving You know, this idea that the evolving You know, this idea that the evolving language, spoken language in particular, language, spoken language in particular, language, spoken language in particular, comes along with a set of comes along with a set of comes along with a set of specializations. When I was coming up in specializations. When I was coming up in specializations. When I was coming up in neuroscience, I neuroscience, I neuroscience, I learned that I think it was the work of learned that I think it was the work of learned that I think it was the work of Peter Marler that um young birds learn Peter Marler that um young birds learn Peter Marler that um young birds learn songbirds learn their tutor's song songbirds learn their tutor's song songbirds learn their tutor's song and learn it quite well, but that and learn it quite well, but that and learn it quite well, but that they could learn the song of another they could learn the song of another they could learn the song of another tutor. In other words, they could learn tutor. In other words, they could learn tutor. In other words, they could learn a different and for the listeners I'm a different and for the listeners I'm a different and for the listeners I'm doing air quotes here, a different doing air quotes here, a different doing air quotes here, a different language, a different bird song, language, a different bird song, language, a different bird song, different than their own species song, different than their own species song, different than their own species song, but never as well as they could learn but never as well as they could learn but never as well as they could learn their own natural their own natural their own natural genetically linked song. Yes. genetically linked song. Yes. genetically linked song. Yes. &gt;&gt; Genetically linked meaning that it would &gt;&gt; Genetically linked meaning that it would &gt;&gt; Genetically linked meaning that it would be like me being raised in a different be like me being raised in a different be like me being raised in a different culture and um culture and um culture and um that I would learn that the other that I would learn that the other that I would learn that the other language, but not as well as I would language, but not as well as I would language, but not as well as I would have learned English. This this is the have learned English. This this is the have learned English. This this is the idea. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Is that true? &gt;&gt; Is that true? &gt;&gt; Is that true? &gt;&gt; That is true. Yes, and that's and that's &gt;&gt; That is true. Yes, and that's and that's &gt;&gt; That is true. Yes, and that's and that's what I learned growing up as well and what I learned growing up as well and what I learned growing up as well and talked to Peter Marler himself and talked to Peter Marler himself and talked to Peter Marler himself about before he passed. Um yeah, this he about before he passed. Um yeah, this he about before he passed. Um yeah, this he used to call it the innate used to call it the innate used to call it the innate predisposition to learn. All right, so predisposition to learn. All right, so predisposition to learn. All right, so um which would be kind of the equivalent in which would be kind of the equivalent in which would be kind of the equivalent in the linguistic community of universal the linguistic community of universal the linguistic community of universal grammar. There is something genetically grammar. There is something genetically grammar. There is something genetically influencing our vocal communication on top of what our vocal communication on top of what our vocal communication on top of what we learn culturally. And so there is we learn culturally. And so there is we learn culturally. And so there is this balance between the genetic control this balance between the genetic control this balance between the genetic control of speech or a song in these birds and of speech or a song in these birds and of speech or a song in these birds and the learned uh cultural control. And so the learned uh cultural control. And so the learned uh cultural control. And so yes, if you were to take um you know, so yes, if you were to take um you know, so yes, if you were to take um you know, um I mean in this case we actually um I mean in this case we actually um I mean in this case we actually tried this at Rockefeller later on, take tried this at Rockefeller later on, take tried this at Rockefeller later on, take a zebra finch and raise it with a zebra finch and raise it with a zebra finch and raise it with a canary, it would sing a song that was canary, it would sing a song that was canary, it would sing a song that was sort of like a hybrid in between. We sort of like a hybrid in between. We sort of like a hybrid in between. We call it a caninch. Right? call it a caninch. Right? call it a caninch. Right? Uh and vice versa for the canary because Uh and vice versa for the canary because Uh and vice versa for the canary because there's something different about their there's something different about their there's something different about their vocal musculature or the or the vocal musculature or the or the vocal musculature or the or the circuitry in the brain. And with a zebra circuitry in the brain. And with a zebra circuitry in the brain. And with a zebra finch, even with a closely related finch, even with a closely related finch, even with a closely related species, if you would take a zebra finch species, if you would take a zebra finch species, if you would take a zebra finch uh young animal and in one cage next to uh young animal and in one cage next to uh young animal and in one cage next to it place its own species adult male, it place its own species adult male, it place its own species adult male, right? And in the other cage place a right? And in the other cage place a right? And in the other cage place a Bengali finch next to it, it would Bengali finch next to it, it would Bengali finch next to it, it would preferably learn the song from the its preferably learn the song from the its preferably learn the song from the its own species neighbor. But if you remove own species neighbor. But if you remove own species neighbor. But if you remove its neighbor, it would learn that its neighbor, it would learn that its neighbor, it would learn that Bengali finch very well. Fantastic. Bengali finch very well. Fantastic. Bengali finch very well. Fantastic. &gt;&gt; So, there's it has something to do &gt;&gt; So, there's it has something to do &gt;&gt; So, there's it has something to do with also the social bonding with your with also the social bonding with your with also the social bonding with your own species. That raises a question that own species. That raises a question that own species. That raises a question that I've based on something I also heard, I've based on something I also heard, I've based on something I also heard, but I don't have any scientific but I don't have any scientific but I don't have any scientific peer-reviewed publication to point to, peer-reviewed publication to point to, peer-reviewed publication to point to, which is this idea of pigeon, not which is this idea of pigeon, not which is this idea of pigeon, not the bird, but this idea of when multiple the bird, but this idea of when multiple the bird, but this idea of when multiple cultures and languages converge in a cultures and languages converge in a cultures and languages converge in a given geographic area, that the children given geographic area, that the children given geographic area, that the children of all the different native languages of all the different native languages of all the different native languages will come up with their own language. will come up with their own language. will come up with their own language. I think this was in island culture, I think this was in island culture, I think this was in island culture, maybe in Hawaii, called pigeon, which is maybe in Hawaii, called pigeon, which is maybe in Hawaii, called pigeon, which is sort of a hybrid of the various sort of a hybrid of the various sort of a hybrid of the various languages that their parents speak at languages that their parents speak at languages that their parents speak at home. And that they themselves speak. home. And that they themselves speak. home. And that they themselves speak. And that somehow pigeon, again, not the And that somehow pigeon, again, not the And that somehow pigeon, again, not the bird, but a language called pigeon for bird, but a language called pigeon for bird, but a language called pigeon for reasons I don't know, reasons I don't know, reasons I don't know, harbors certain basic elements of all harbors certain basic elements of all harbors certain basic elements of all language. Mhm. Is that true? Is that not language. Mhm. Is that true? Is that not language. Mhm. Is that true? Is that not true? What is going on here is true? What is going on here is true? What is going on here is cultural evolution remarkably tracks cultural evolution remarkably tracks cultural evolution remarkably tracks genetic evolution. So, if you bring genetic evolution. So, if you bring genetic evolution. So, if you bring people from two separate populations people from two separate populations people from two separate populations together that have been in their together that have been in their together that have been in their separate populations evolutionarily at separate populations evolutionarily at separate populations evolutionarily at least for hundreds of generations. So, least for hundreds of generations. So, least for hundreds of generations. So, someone speaking Chinese, someone speaking Chinese, someone speaking Chinese, someone speaking English. speaking English. speaking English. And that child then's learning from both And that child then's learning from both And that child then's learning from both of them. of them. of them. Yes, that child's going to be able to Yes, that child's going to be able to Yes, that child's going to be able to pick up and merge uh pick up and merge uh pick up and merge uh phonemes and words together in a way phonemes and words together in a way phonemes and words together in a way that an adult wouldn't. Because why? that an adult wouldn't. Because why? that an adult wouldn't. Because why? They're experiencing both languages at They're experiencing both languages at They're experiencing both languages at the same time during their critical the same time during their critical the same time during their critical period uh years in a way that um adults period uh years in a way that um adults period uh years in a way that um adults would not be able to experience. And so, would not be able to experience. And so, would not be able to experience. And so, you get a hybrid. you get a hybrid. you get a hybrid. And the lowest common denominator is And the lowest common denominator is And the lowest common denominator is going to be what they share. And so, the going to be what they share. And so, the going to be what they share. And so, the phonemes that they retained in each of phonemes that they retained in each of phonemes that they retained in each of their languages is what's going to be, I languages is what's going to be, I languages is what's going to be, I imagine, used the most. imagine, used the most. imagine, used the most. So we've got So we've got So we've got brain circuits in songbirds and in brain circuits in songbirds and in brain circuits in songbirds and in humans that in many ways are similar, humans that in many ways are similar, humans that in many ways are similar, perhaps not in their exact wiring, but perhaps not in their exact wiring, but perhaps not in their exact wiring, but in their basic contour of wiring, and in their basic contour of wiring, and in their basic contour of wiring, and genes that are expressed in both sets of genes that are expressed in both sets of genes that are expressed in both sets of neural circuits in very distinct species neural circuits in very distinct species neural circuits in very distinct species that are responsible for these phenomena that are responsible for these phenomena that are responsible for these phenomena we're calling speech and language. I we're calling speech and language. I we're calling speech and language. I mean, what are What are these genes mean, what are What are these genes mean, what are What are these genes doing? Uh one of the things that differ doing? Uh one of the things that differ doing? Uh one of the things that differ in the speech pathways of us and these in the speech pathways of us and these in the speech pathways of us and these song pathways of birds is some of the song pathways of birds is some of the song pathways of birds is some of the connections are fundamentally different connections are fundamentally different connections are fundamentally different than the surrounding circuits. Like a than the surrounding circuits. Like a than the surrounding circuits. Like a direct cortical connection a direct cortical connection a direct cortical connection from the areas that control from the areas that control from the areas that control vocalizations in the cortex to the motor vocalizations in the cortex to the motor vocalizations in the cortex to the motor neurons that control the larynx in neurons that control the larynx in neurons that control the larynx in humans or the syrinx in birds. And so we humans or the syrinx in birds. And so we humans or the syrinx in birds. And so we actually made a prediction that since actually made a prediction that since actually made a prediction that since some of these connections differ, we're some of these connections differ, we're some of these connections differ, we're going to find genes that control going to find genes that control going to find genes that control neural connectivity neural connectivity neural connectivity and that specialize in that function and that specialize in that function and that specialize in that function that differ. And that's exactly what we that differ. And that's exactly what we that differ. And that's exactly what we found. Um genes that control what we found. Um genes that control what we found. Um genes that control what we call axon guidance and formation of call axon guidance and formation of call axon guidance and formation of connections. And what was interesting, connections. And what was interesting, connections. And what was interesting, it was sort of in the opposite direction it was sort of in the opposite direction it was sort of in the opposite direction that we expected. That is that we expected. That is that we expected. That is some of these genes, actually a number some of these genes, actually a number some of these genes, actually a number of them that control neural of them that control neural of them that control neural connectivity, were turned off connectivity, were turned off connectivity, were turned off in the speech circuit. in the speech circuit. in the speech circuit. All right. All right. All right. And it didn't make sense to us at first, And it didn't make sense to us at first, And it didn't make sense to us at first, and so we started to realize the and so we started to realize the and so we started to realize the function of these genes are to repel function of these genes are to repel function of these genes are to repel connections from forming. connections from forming. connections from forming. So repulsive molecules. And so when you So repulsive molecules. And so when you So repulsive molecules. And so when you turn them off, they allow certain turn them off, they allow certain turn them off, they allow certain connections to form that normally would connections to form that normally would connections to form that normally would have not formed. So it's So by turning have not formed. So it's So by turning have not formed. So it's So by turning it off, you got a gain of function for it off, you got a gain of function for it off, you got a gain of function for speech, right? Um other genes that speech, right? Um other genes that speech, right? Um other genes that surprised us were genes involved in surprised us were genes involved in surprised us were genes involved in calcium buffering, neuroprotection. calcium buffering, neuroprotection. calcium buffering, neuroprotection. Like a parvalbumin or heat shock Like a parvalbumin or heat shock Like a parvalbumin or heat shock protein. So when your brain gets hot, protein. So when your brain gets hot, protein. So when your brain gets hot, these proteins turn on. And we couldn't these proteins turn on. And we couldn't these proteins turn on. And we couldn't figure out for a long time why is that figure out for a long time why is that figure out for a long time why is that the case? the case? the case? And then the idea popped to me one day. And then the idea popped to me one day. And then the idea popped to me one day. I said, "Ah, when I heard the larynx is I said, "Ah, when I heard the larynx is I said, "Ah, when I heard the larynx is the fastest firing muscles in the body." the fastest firing muscles in the body." the fastest firing muscles in the body." All right? In order to vibrate sound and All right? In order to vibrate sound and All right? In order to vibrate sound and modulate sound in the way we do, you and modulate sound in the way we do, you and modulate sound in the way we do, you have to control you have to move those have to control you have to move those have to control you have to move those muscles, you know, three to four to five muscles, you know, three to four to five muscles, you know, three to four to five times faster than just regular walking times faster than just regular walking times faster than just regular walking or running. or running. or running. And so, um And so, um And so, um when you stick electrodes in the when you stick electrodes in the when you stick electrodes in the brain areas that control learn brain areas that control learn brain areas that control learn vocalizations in these birds and I think vocalizations in these birds and I think vocalizations in these birds and I think in humans as well, uh those neurons are in humans as well, uh those neurons are in humans as well, uh those neurons are firing at a higher rate to control these firing at a higher rate to control these firing at a higher rate to control these muscles. And so, what is that going to do? You're And so, what is that going to do? You're And so, what is that going to do? You're going to have lots of toxicity in those going to have lots of toxicity in those going to have lots of toxicity in those neurons unless you upregulate molecules neurons unless you upregulate molecules neurons unless you upregulate molecules that take out take out take out uh the extra load that is needed to uh the extra load that is needed to uh the extra load that is needed to control the larynx. And then finally, a control the larynx. And then finally, a control the larynx. And then finally, a third set of genes that are uh third set of genes that are uh third set of genes that are uh specialized in these speech circuit are specialized in these speech circuit are specialized in these speech circuit are involved in neuroplasticity. involved in neuroplasticity. involved in neuroplasticity. Uh neuroplasticity meaning allowing the Uh neuroplasticity meaning allowing the Uh neuroplasticity meaning allowing the brain circuits to be more flexible, uh brain circuits to be more flexible, uh brain circuits to be more flexible, uh so you can learn better. And why is so you can learn better. And why is so you can learn better. And why is that? I think learning how to produce that? I think learning how to produce that? I think learning how to produce speech is a more complex learning speech is a more complex learning speech is a more complex learning ability than say learning how to walk ability than say learning how to walk ability than say learning how to walk or learning how to do tricks and or learning how to do tricks and or learning how to do tricks and jumps and so forth that dogs do. In jumps and so forth that dogs do. In jumps and so forth that dogs do. In terms of plasticity of speech and the terms of plasticity of speech and the terms of plasticity of speech and the ability to learn multiple languages, but ability to learn multiple languages, but ability to learn multiple languages, but even just one language, what's going on even just one language, what's going on even just one language, what's going on in the so-called critical period? And in the so-called critical period? And in the so-called critical period? And then the second question is, if one can then the second question is, if one can then the second question is, if one can already speak more than one language as already speak more than one language as already speak more than one language as a consequence of childhood learning, is a consequence of childhood learning, is a consequence of childhood learning, is it easier to acquire new languages later it easier to acquire new languages later it easier to acquire new languages later on? Actually, the entire brain on? Actually, the entire brain on? Actually, the entire brain uh is undergoing a critical period uh is undergoing a critical period uh is undergoing a critical period development, not just the speech development, not just the speech development, not just the speech pathways. And uh so, it's easier to pathways. And uh so, it's easier to pathways. And uh so, it's easier to learn how to play a piano. It's easier learn how to play a piano. It's easier learn how to play a piano. It's easier to learn how to ride a bike for the to learn how to ride a bike for the to learn how to ride a bike for the first time and so forth as a young child first time and so forth as a young child first time and so forth as a young child than it is later in life. The brain can than it is later in life. The brain can than it is later in life. The brain can only hold so much information. And if only hold so much information. And if only hold so much information. And if you are undergoing rapid learning to you are undergoing rapid learning to you are undergoing rapid learning to learn to acquire new knowledge, you also learn to acquire new knowledge, you also learn to acquire new knowledge, you also have to put memory or information in have to put memory or information in have to put memory or information in the trash, like in a computer. You the trash, like in a computer. You the trash, like in a computer. You only have so many gigabases of memory. only have so many gigabases of memory. only have so many gigabases of memory. Plus also for survival, you don't want Plus also for survival, you don't want Plus also for survival, you don't want to keep forgetting things. to keep forgetting things. to keep forgetting things. And so So, the brain is designed, I And so So, the brain is designed, I And so So, the brain is designed, I believe, to undergo this critical period and to undergo this critical period and to undergo this critical period and solidify the circuits with what you solidify the circuits with what you solidify the circuits with what you learned as a child and you use that for learned as a child and you use that for learned as a child and you use that for the rest of your life. And now, the rest of your life. And now, the rest of your life. And now, the question you asked about if you learned question you asked about if you learned question you asked about if you learned more languages as a child, can you Is it more languages as a child, can you Is it more languages as a child, can you Is it easier to learn as an adult? And that's easier to learn as an adult? And that's easier to learn as an adult? And that's a common uh finding out there in the a common uh finding out there in the a common uh finding out there in the literature. There's some that argue literature. There's some that argue literature. There's some that argue against it. But for those that support against it. But for those that support against it. But for those that support it, the idea there is it, the idea there is it, the idea there is um you are born with a set of innate um you are born with a set of innate um you are born with a set of innate sounds you can produce of phonemes. sounds you can produce of phonemes. sounds you can produce of phonemes. And you narrow that down because not all And you narrow that down because not all And you narrow that down because not all languages use all of them. And so, you languages use all of them. And so, you languages use all of them. And so, you narrow down the ones you use to string narrow down the ones you use to string narrow down the ones you use to string the phonemes together in words that you the phonemes together in words that you the phonemes together in words that you learn. And you maintain those phonemes learn. And you maintain those phonemes learn. And you maintain those phonemes as an adult. And here comes along as an adult. And here comes along as an adult. And here comes along another language that's using those another language that's using those another language that's using those phonemes or in the in different phonemes or in the in different phonemes or in the in different combinations you're not used to. Uh and combinations you're not used to. Uh and combinations you're not used to. Uh and therefore, you it's like starting from therefore, you it's like starting from therefore, you it's like starting from first principles. But if you already first principles. But if you already first principles. But if you already have them in multiple languages that have them in multiple languages that have them in multiple languages that you're using, then it makes it easier to you're using, then it makes it easier to you're using, then it makes it easier to use them in another third or fourth use them in another third or fourth use them in another third or fourth language. So, it's not like your brain language. So, it's not like your brain language. So, it's not like your brain has under has maintained greater has under has maintained greater has under has maintained greater plasticity. Is your brain has plasticity. Is your brain has plasticity. Is your brain has maintained greater ability to produce maintained greater ability to produce maintained greater ability to produce different sounds that then allows you to different sounds that then allows you to different sounds that then allows you to learn another language faster. What learn another language faster. What learn another language faster. What about modes of speech and language that about modes of speech and language that about modes of speech and language that seem to have a depth of emotionality and seem to have a depth of emotionality and seem to have a depth of emotionality and meaning, but for which it departs from meaning, but for which it departs from meaning, but for which it departs from structured language? I think of structured language? I think of structured language? I think of musicians, like there's some Bob Dylan musicians, like there's some Bob Dylan musicians, like there's some Bob Dylan songs that to me songs that to me songs that to me I understand the individual words. I understand the individual words. I understand the individual words. I like to think there's an emotion I like to think there's an emotion I like to think there's an emotion associated with it. At least I associated with it. At least I associated with it. At least I experience some sort of emotion and I experience some sort of emotion and I experience some sort of emotion and I have a guess about what he was have a guess about what he was have a guess about what he was experiencing. But if I were to just read experiencing. But if I were to just read experiencing. But if I were to just read it linearly without the music and it linearly without the music and it linearly without the music and without him singing it or somebody without him singing it or somebody without him singing it or somebody singing it like him, it wouldn't hold singing it like him, it wouldn't hold singing it like him, it wouldn't hold any meaning. So in other words, any meaning. So in other words, any meaning. So in other words, uh words that seem to have meaning but uh words that seem to have meaning but uh words that seem to have meaning but not associated with language but somehow not associated with language but somehow not associated with language but somehow tap into an emotionality. Absolutely. So tap into an emotionality. Absolutely. So tap into an emotionality. Absolutely. So we call this difference um semantic So we call this difference um semantic So we call this difference um semantic communication, communication with communication, communication with communication, communication with meaning, and effective communication, meaning, and effective communication, meaning, and effective communication, that has more of an emotional that has more of an emotional that has more of an emotional feeling content to it. I believe, you feeling content to it. I believe, you feeling content to it. I believe, you know, based upon imaging work and work know, based upon imaging work and work know, based upon imaging work and work we see in birds, when birds are we see in birds, when birds are we see in birds, when birds are communicating semantic information in communicating semantic information in communicating semantic information in their sounds, which is not too often, their sounds, which is not too often, their sounds, which is not too often, but it happens, versus uh effective but it happens, versus uh effective but it happens, versus uh effective communication, sing because I'm trying communication, sing because I'm trying communication, sing because I'm trying to attract the mate, my courtship song, to attract the mate, my courtship song, to attract the mate, my courtship song, or defend my territory, it's the same or defend my territory, it's the same or defend my territory, it's the same brain circuits, the same speech-like or brain circuits, the same speech-like or brain circuits, the same speech-like or song circuits are being used in song circuits are being used in song circuits are being used in different ways. There's several other different ways. There's several other different ways. There's several other points here I think it's important for points here I think it's important for points here I think it's important for the those listening out there to for the those listening out there to for the those listening out there to hear is that when I say also this hear is that when I say also this hear is that when I say also this effective and um semantic communication effective and um semantic communication effective and um semantic communication um being used by similar brain circuits, um being used by similar brain circuits, um being used by similar brain circuits, it also matters the side of the brain. it also matters the side of the brain. it also matters the side of the brain. Uh in birds and in humans, Uh in birds and in humans, Uh in birds and in humans, um there's left-right dominance um there's left-right dominance um there's left-right dominance uh for learned uh communication, learned uh for learned uh communication, learned uh for learned uh communication, learned sound communication. Uh so the left in sound communication. Uh so the left in sound communication. Uh so the left in us humans is more dominant for speech, us humans is more dominant for speech, us humans is more dominant for speech, but the right has a more balance for but the right has a more balance for but the right has a more balance for singing or processing musical sounds as singing or processing musical sounds as singing or processing musical sounds as opposed to processing speech. Both get opposed to processing speech. Both get opposed to processing speech. Both get used for both reasons. And so when used for both reasons. And so when used for both reasons. And so when people say your right brain is your people say your right brain is your people say your right brain is your artistic brain and your left brain is artistic brain and your left brain is artistic brain and your left brain is your thinking brain, this is what your thinking brain, this is what your thinking brain, this is what they're referring to. Uh and uh so they're referring to. Uh and uh so they're referring to. Uh and uh so that's another distinction. The second that's another distinction. The second that's another distinction. The second uh thing that's useful to know uh thing that's useful to know uh thing that's useful to know is all vocal learning species use their is all vocal learning species use their is all vocal learning species use their learned sounds for this emotional learned sounds for this emotional learned sounds for this emotional effective kind of communication. effective kind of communication. effective kind of communication. But only a few of them, like humans and But only a few of them, like humans and But only a few of them, like humans and some parrots and dolphins, use it for some parrots and dolphins, use it for some parrots and dolphins, use it for the semantic kind of communication we the semantic kind of communication we the semantic kind of communication we calling speech. calling speech. calling speech. And and that has led a number of people And and that has led a number of people And and that has led a number of people to hypothesize that the evolution of to hypothesize that the evolution of to hypothesize that the evolution of spoken language of speech evolved first spoken language of speech evolved first spoken language of speech evolved first for singing. Uh for this more like for singing. Uh for this more like for singing. Uh for this more like emotional kind of mate attraction, like emotional kind of mate attraction, like emotional kind of mate attraction, like the Jennifer Lopez, the Ricky Martin the Jennifer Lopez, the Ricky Martin the Jennifer Lopez, the Ricky Martin kind of songs and so forth. Uh and then kind of songs and so forth. Uh and then kind of songs and so forth. Uh and then later on it became used for abstract later on it became used for abstract later on it became used for abstract communication like we're doing now. I'd communication like we're doing now. I'd communication like we're doing now. I'd love to chat a moment about facial love to chat a moment about facial love to chat a moment about facial expression, many of which are expression, many of which are expression, many of which are subconscious. We are all familiar with subconscious. We are all familiar with subconscious. We are all familiar with the fact that the fact that the fact that when what somebody says doesn't match when what somebody says doesn't match when what somebody says doesn't match some specific feature of their facial some specific feature of their facial some specific feature of their facial expression, that it can um call, you expression, that it can um call, you expression, that it can um call, you know, that mismatch can cue our know, that mismatch can cue our know, that mismatch can cue our attention. Yeah. So, how does motor attention. Yeah. So, how does motor attention. Yeah. So, how does motor circuitry that controls facial circuitry that controls facial circuitry that controls facial expression map onto the brain expression map onto the brain expression map onto the brain circuits that control language, speech, circuits that control language, speech, circuits that control language, speech, and even bodily and hand movements? and even bodily and hand movements? and even bodily and hand movements? &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you ask a great question &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you ask a great question &gt;&gt; Yeah. And you ask a great question because we both know some colleagues because we both know some colleagues because we both know some colleagues like Win Privol that uh Rockefeller like Win Privol that uh Rockefeller like Win Privol that uh Rockefeller University who study facial expression University who study facial expression University who study facial expression and the neurology behind it. Non-human and the neurology behind it. Non-human and the neurology behind it. Non-human primates have a lot of diversity in primates have a lot of diversity in primates have a lot of diversity in their facial expression like we humans their facial expression like we humans their facial expression like we humans do. And what we know about the neurobiology And what we know about the neurobiology And what we know about the neurobiology of brain regions controlling those of brain regions controlling those of brain regions controlling those muscles of the face muscles of the face muscles of the face is that these non-human primates and is that these non-human primates and is that these non-human primates and some other species that don't learn how some other species that don't learn how some other species that don't learn how to imitate vocalizations, they have s- to imitate vocalizations, they have s- to imitate vocalizations, they have s- strong connections from the cortical strong connections from the cortical strong connections from the cortical regions to the motor neurons that regions to the motor neurons that regions to the motor neurons that control facial expressions. And even control facial expressions. And even control facial expressions. And even though it's more diverse in these though it's more diverse in these though it's more diverse in these non-human primates, there was already a non-human primates, there was already a non-human primates, there was already a pre-existing diversity of communication, pre-existing diversity of communication, pre-existing diversity of communication, whether it's intentional or unconscious, whether it's intentional or unconscious, whether it's intentional or unconscious, through facial expression in our land through facial expression in our land through facial expression in our land And on top of that, we humans now add And on top of that, we humans now add And on top of that, we humans now add the voice the voice the voice uh along with those facial expressions. uh along with those facial expressions. uh along with those facial expressions. So, it's like an email, too. You're So, it's like an email, too. You're So, it's like an email, too. You're emailing, and someone says You're emailing, and someone says You're emailing, and someone says something by email, someone can something by email, someone can something by email, someone can interpret that angrily or gently, interpret that angrily or gently, interpret that angrily or gently, uh and it bec- becomes ambiguous. The and it bec- becomes ambiguous. The and it bec- becomes ambiguous. The facial expressions get rid of that facial expressions get rid of that facial expressions get rid of that ambiguity. I'm so glad you brought that ambiguity. I'm so glad you brought that ambiguity. I'm so glad you brought that out because my next question was and is out because my next question was and is out because my next question was and is about written language. What is the about written language. What is the about written language. What is the process of going from a thought to process of going from a thought to process of going from a thought to language to written word? And what's language to written word? And what's language to written word? And what's going on there? What do we know about going on there? What do we know about going on there? What do we know about the neural circuitry? What I think is the neural circuitry? What I think is the neural circuitry? What I think is going on is, to explain what you're going on is, to explain what you're going on is, to explain what you're asking, is about asking, is about asking, is about that I'm going to take it from the that I'm going to take it from the that I'm going to take it from the perspective reading something. You read perspective reading something. You read perspective reading something. You read something on a paper, something on a paper, something on a paper, the signal from the paper goes through the signal from the paper goes through the signal from the paper goes through your eyes, it goes to the back of your eyes, it goes to the back of your eyes, it goes to the back of your brain to your visual cortical regions, brain to your visual cortical regions, brain to your visual cortical regions, eventually. That visual signal then goes eventually. That visual signal then goes eventually. That visual signal then goes to your speech pathway in the motor to your speech pathway in the motor to your speech pathway in the motor cortex in front of you in Broca's area, cortex in front of you in Broca's area, cortex in front of you in Broca's area, and you silently speak what you read in and you silently speak what you read in and you silently speak what you read in your brain without moving your muscles. your brain without moving your muscles. your brain without moving your muscles. And sometimes, actually, if you put And sometimes, actually, if you put And sometimes, actually, if you put electrodes EMG electrodes on your electrodes EMG electrodes on your electrodes EMG electrodes on your laryngeal muscles, even on birds you can laryngeal muscles, even on birds you can laryngeal muscles, even on birds you can do this, you'll see activity there while do this, you'll see activity there while do this, you'll see activity there while you're reading or trying to speak you're reading or trying to speak you're reading or trying to speak silently, even though no sound's coming silently, even though no sound's coming silently, even though no sound's coming out. And so, your And so, your And so, your speech pathway is now speaking what speech pathway is now speaking what speech pathway is now speaking what you're reading. you're reading. you're reading. Now, to finish it off, that signal is Now, to finish it off, that signal is Now, to finish it off, that signal is sent to your auditory pathway so you can sent to your auditory pathway so you can sent to your auditory pathway so you can hear what you're speaking in your own hear what you're speaking in your own hear what you're speaking in your own head. That's incredible. head. That's incredible. head. That's incredible. &gt;&gt; And this is why it's complicated. Oh, &gt;&gt; And this is why it's complicated. Oh, &gt;&gt; And this is why it's complicated. Oh, and then you got to write, right? Okay, and then you got to write, right? Okay, and then you got to write, right? Okay, here comes the fourth one. Now, the hand here comes the fourth one. Now, the hand here comes the fourth one. Now, the hand area is next to your speech pathway is area is next to your speech pathway is area is next to your speech pathway is got to take that auditory signal or even got to take that auditory signal or even got to take that auditory signal or even the adjacent motor signals for speaking the adjacent motor signals for speaking the adjacent motor signals for speaking and translate it into a visual signal on and translate it into a visual signal on and translate it into a visual signal on paper. So, so you're using at least four brain So, so you're using at least four brain So, so you're using at least four brain circuits, um which includes the speech production um which includes the speech production um which includes the speech production and the speech perception pathways to and the speech perception pathways to and the speech perception pathways to write. Stutter is a um particularly write. Stutter is a um particularly write. Stutter is a um particularly interesting case. What is the current interesting case. What is the current interesting case. What is the current neurobiological understanding of stutter neurobiological understanding of stutter neurobiological understanding of stutter and are uh what's being developed in and are uh what's being developed in and are uh what's being developed in terms of treatments for stutter? Yes, so terms of treatments for stutter? Yes, so terms of treatments for stutter? Yes, so we actually uh we actually uh we actually uh accidentally came across stuttering in accidentally came across stuttering in accidentally came across stuttering in songbirds. And we've uh published songbirds. And we've uh published songbirds. And we've uh published several papers on this. So, try to several papers on this. So, try to several papers on this. So, try to figure out the neurobiological basis. figure out the neurobiological basis. figure out the neurobiological basis. The first study we had was a brain area The first study we had was a brain area The first study we had was a brain area uh called the basal ganglia or this uh called the basal ganglia or this uh called the basal ganglia or this what's the striatum part of the what's the striatum part of the what's the striatum part of the basal ganglia involved in coordinating basal ganglia involved in coordinating basal ganglia involved in coordinating movements, learning how to make movements, learning how to make movements, learning how to make movements. When it was damaged in these in this in When it was damaged in these in this in When it was damaged in these in this in the speech-like pathway in these birds, the speech-like pathway in these birds, the speech-like pathway in these birds, what we found is that they started to what we found is that they started to what we found is that they started to stutter as the brain region recovered. as the brain region recovered. as the brain region recovered. And unlike humans, they actually And unlike humans, they actually And unlike humans, they actually recovered after three or four months. recovered after three or four months. recovered after three or four months. And why is that the case? Because bird And why is that the case? Because bird And why is that the case? Because bird brains undergoes new neurogenesis in a brains undergoes new neurogenesis in a brains undergoes new neurogenesis in a way that human or mammal brains don't. way that human or mammal brains don't. way that human or mammal brains don't. Uh and it was the new neurons that were Uh and it was the new neurons that were Uh and it was the new neurons that were coming in into the circuit, uh but not coming in into the circuit, uh but not coming in into the circuit, uh but not quite, you know, with the right proper quite, you know, with the right proper quite, you know, with the right proper activity uh was resulting in the stuttering in uh was resulting in the stuttering in uh was resulting in the stuttering in these birds. these birds. these birds. Uh and after it was repaired, not Uh and after it was repaired, not Uh and after it was repaired, not exactly the old song came back as a exactly the old song came back as a exactly the old song came back as a after repair, but still it recovered a after repair, but still it recovered a after repair, but still it recovered a lot better. lot better. lot better. And it's now known they call this And it's now known they call this And it's now known they call this neurogen- neurogenics uh stuttering in neurogen- neurogenics uh stuttering in neurogen- neurogenics uh stuttering in humans. Uh with damage to the basal ganglia or Uh with damage to the basal ganglia or Uh with damage to the basal ganglia or some type of disruption to the basal some type of disruption to the basal some type of disruption to the basal ganglia at a young age also causes ganglia at a young age also causes ganglia at a young age also causes stuttering in humans. And even those who stuttering in humans. And even those who stuttering in humans. And even those who are born with stuttering, uh are born with stuttering, uh are born with stuttering, uh um it's often the basal ganglia uh it's often the basal ganglia uh it's often the basal ganglia uh that's disrupted than some other brain that's disrupted than some other brain that's disrupted than some other brain circuit. And we think the speech part of circuit. And we think the speech part of circuit. And we think the speech part of the basal ganglia. Can adults who the basal ganglia. Can adults who the basal ganglia. Can adults who maintain a stutter from childhood uh maintain a stutter from childhood uh maintain a stutter from childhood uh repair that stutter? There are ways to repair that stutter? There are ways to repair that stutter? There are ways to overcome the stuttering through um overcome the stuttering through um overcome the stuttering through um through you know behavioral therapy. through you know behavioral therapy. through you know behavioral therapy. Uh and I think all of the tools out Uh and I think all of the tools out Uh and I think all of the tools out there have something to do with sensory motor have something to do with sensory motor have something to do with sensory motor integration. Uh controlling what you hear with what Uh controlling what you hear with what Uh controlling what you hear with what you output in a you output in a you output in a thoughtful controlled way helps reduce thoughtful controlled way helps reduce thoughtful controlled way helps reduce the stuttering. the stuttering. the stuttering. Texting is a very interesting evolution of is a very interesting evolution of is a very interesting evolution of language. I wonder sometimes whether or language. I wonder sometimes whether or language. I wonder sometimes whether or not we are getting less proficient at not we are getting less proficient at not we are getting less proficient at speech because we are not required to speech because we are not required to speech because we are not required to write and think in complete sentences. write and think in complete sentences. write and think in complete sentences. Mhm. What do you think's happening to Mhm. What do you think's happening to Mhm. What do you think's happening to language? Are we getting better at language? Are we getting better at language? Are we getting better at speaking, worse at speaking, and what do speaking, worse at speaking, and what do speaking, worse at speaking, and what do you think the role of things like you think the role of things like you think the role of things like texting and tweeting and shorthand texting and tweeting and shorthand texting and tweeting and shorthand communication, hashtagging? communication, hashtagging? communication, hashtagging? Uh what's that doing to the way that our Uh what's that doing to the way that our Uh what's that doing to the way that our brains work? Uh texting brains work? Uh texting brains work? Uh texting actually has allowed for more rapid actually has allowed for more rapid actually has allowed for more rapid communication amongst people. It's more communication amongst people. It's more communication amongst people. It's more like a use it or lose it kind of a uh um like a use it or lose it kind of a uh um like a use it or lose it kind of a uh um thing with the brain. The more you use a thing with the brain. The more you use a thing with the brain. The more you use a particular brain region or circuit, the particular brain region or circuit, the particular brain region or circuit, the more enhanced. It's like a muscle. more enhanced. It's like a muscle. more enhanced. It's like a muscle. Uh the more you exercise it, the more Uh the more you exercise it, the more Uh the more you exercise it, the more healthier it is, the bigger it becomes, healthier it is, the bigger it becomes, healthier it is, the bigger it becomes, and the more space it takes, and the and the more space it takes, and the and the more space it takes, and the more you lose something else. more you lose something else. more you lose something else. So, I think texting is not decreasing So, I think texting is not decreasing So, I think texting is not decreasing the speech powers or the intellectual the speech powers or the intellectual the speech powers or the intellectual powers of speech. It's converting it and powers of speech. It's converting it and powers of speech. It's converting it and using it a lot in a different way. In a using it a lot in a different way. In a using it a lot in a different way. In a way that may not be as rich in way that may not be as rich in way that may not be as rich in regular writing because uh you can only regular writing because uh you can only regular writing because uh you can only communicate so much nuance in short term communicate so much nuance in short term communicate so much nuance in short term writing. But um whatever that it writing. But um whatever that it writing. But um whatever that it whatever is being done, you got people whatever is being done, you got people whatever is being done, you got people texting hours and hours and hours on the texting hours and hours and hours on the texting hours and hours and hours on the phone. So, whatever your thumb circuit phone. So, whatever your thumb circuit phone. So, whatever your thumb circuit is going to get pretty big, actually. is going to get pretty big, actually. is going to get pretty big, actually. For those listening who are interested For those listening who are interested For those listening who are interested in getting better at speaking and in getting better at speaking and in getting better at speaking and understanding languages, are there any understanding languages, are there any understanding languages, are there any tools that you recommend? Should kids tools that you recommend? Should kids tools that you recommend? Should kids learn how to read hard books and simple learn how to read hard books and simple learn how to read hard books and simple books? What do you recommend? Should books? What do you recommend? Should books? What do you recommend? Should adults learn how to do that? Everyone adults learn how to do that? Everyone adults learn how to do that? Everyone wants to know how to keep their brain wants to know how to keep their brain wants to know how to keep their brain working better, so to speak, but also I working better, so to speak, but also I working better, so to speak, but also I think people want to be able to speak think people want to be able to speak think people want to be able to speak well, and people want to be able to well, and people want to be able to well, and people want to be able to understand well. Yeah. What I've understand well. Yeah. What I've understand well. Yeah. What I've discovered personally, right, is that discovered personally, right, is that discovered personally, right, is that So, when I switched from So, when I switched from So, when I switched from pursuing a career in science from a pursuing a career in science from a pursuing a career in science from a career in dance, I thought one day I career in dance, I thought one day I career in dance, I thought one day I would stop dancing. Um but I haven't would stop dancing. Um but I haven't would stop dancing. Um but I haven't because it I find it fulfilling for me. because it I find it fulfilling for me. because it I find it fulfilling for me. And there've been periods of time like And there've been periods of time like And there've been periods of time like during the pandemic where I slowed down during the pandemic where I slowed down during the pandemic where I slowed down on dancing and so forth. on dancing and so forth. on dancing and so forth. Um and when you do that, you Um and when you do that, you Um and when you do that, you realize, okay, there are parts of realize, okay, there are parts of realize, okay, there are parts of your body where your muscle tone your body where your muscle tone your body where your muscle tone decreases a little bit in some way, and decreases a little bit in some way, and decreases a little bit in some way, and or you could start to gain weight, or I or you could start to gain weight, or I or you could start to gain weight, or I somehow don't gain weight that easily, somehow don't gain weight that easily, somehow don't gain weight that easily, and I think it's related to my dance, if and I think it's related to my dance, if and I think it's related to my dance, if that's that that's meaningful to your that's that that's meaningful to your that's that that's meaningful to your audience. But what I found is in audience. But what I found is in audience. But what I found is in science, we like to think of a science, we like to think of a science, we like to think of a separation between movement and action separation between movement and action separation between movement and action and cognition. and cognition. and cognition. And there is a separation between And there is a separation between And there is a separation between perception and production. between perception and production. between perception and production. Cognition being perception, production Cognition being perception, production Cognition being perception, production being movement, right? But if the speech being movement, right? But if the speech being movement, right? But if the speech pathway is next to the movement pathway is next to the movement pathway is next to the movement pathways, what I discover is by dancing, pathways, what I discover is by dancing, pathways, what I discover is by dancing, it is helping me it is helping me it is helping me think. It is helping keeping my brain think. It is helping keeping my brain think. It is helping keeping my brain fresh. It's not just moving my muscles. fresh. It's not just moving my muscles. fresh. It's not just moving my muscles. I'm moving or using the circuitry in I'm moving or using the circuitry in I'm moving or using the circuitry in my brain to do control a whole big body. my brain to do control a whole big body. my brain to do control a whole big body. You need a lot of brain tissue to do You need a lot of brain tissue to do You need a lot of brain tissue to do that. And so, I argue, if you want to that. And so, I argue, if you want to that. And so, I argue, if you want to stay cognitively intact into your old age, you better be intact into your old age, you better be intact into your old age, you better be moving. And you better be doing it consistently, And you better be doing it consistently, And you better be doing it consistently, whatever it's dancing, walking, running, whatever it's dancing, walking, running, whatever it's dancing, walking, running, and also practicing speech, and also practicing speech, and also practicing speech, oratory speech and so forth, or singing, oratory speech and so forth, or singing, oratory speech and so forth, or singing, is controlling the brain circuits that is controlling the brain circuits that is controlling the brain circuits that are moving your facial musculature, and are moving your facial musculature, and are moving your facial musculature, and it's going to keep your cognitive it's going to keep your cognitive it's going to keep your cognitive circuits also in tune. And I'm circuits also in tune. And I'm circuits also in tune. And I'm convinced of that from my own personal convinced of that from my own personal convinced of that from my own personal experience. This has been an incredible experience. This has been an incredible experience. This has been an incredible conversation and opportunity for me to conversation and opportunity for me to conversation and opportunity for me to learn. I'm I know I speak for a learn. I'm I know I speak for a learn. I'm I know I speak for a tremendous number of people when I tremendous number of people when I tremendous number of people when I just really want to say thank you for just really want to say thank you for just really want to say thank you for joining us today. You are incredibly joining us today. You are incredibly joining us today. You are incredibly busy. It's clear from your description busy. It's clear from your description busy. It's clear from your description of your science and your knowledge base of your science and your knowledge base of your science and your knowledge base that you are involved in a huge number that you are involved in a huge number that you are involved in a huge number of things. of things. of things. Um very busy. So, thank you for taking Um very busy. So, thank you for taking Um very busy. So, thank you for taking the time to speak to all of us. the time to speak to all of us. the time to speak to all of us. Thank you for the work that you're Thank you for the work that you're Thank you for the work that you're doing. Thank you for inviting me here to doing. Thank you for inviting me here to doing. Thank you for inviting me here to get the word out to the community get the word out to the community get the word out to the community uh of what's going on in the science world. of what's going on in the science world. of what's going on in the science world. Well, we're honored and very grateful to Well, we're honored and very grateful to Well, we're honored and very grateful to you, Eric. Thank you. Love you.