Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and health, and health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and I'm a professor of neurobiology and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of opthalmology at Stamford School of opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all about hearing and balance and how you about hearing and balance and how you about hearing and balance and how you can use your ability to hear specific can use your ability to hear specific can use your ability to hear specific things and your balance system in order things and your balance system in order things and your balance system in order to learn anything faster. The auditory to learn anything faster. The auditory to learn anything faster. The auditory system, meaning the hearing system, and system, meaning the hearing system, and system, meaning the hearing system, and your balance system, which is called the your balance system, which is called the your balance system, which is called the vestibular system, interact with all the other system, interact with all the other system, interact with all the other systems of the brain and body, and used systems of the brain and body, and used systems of the brain and body, and used properly can allow you to learn properly can allow you to learn properly can allow you to learn information more quickly, remember that information more quickly, remember that information more quickly, remember that information longer and with more ease. information longer and with more ease. information longer and with more ease. And you can also improve the way you can And you can also improve the way you can And you can also improve the way you can hear. You can improve your balance. hear. You can improve your balance. hear. You can improve your balance. We're going to talk about tools for all We're going to talk about tools for all We're going to talk about tools for all of that. Can you hear me? Can you hear of that. Can you hear me? Can you hear of that. Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Okay. Well, if you can hear me? Okay. Well, if you can hear me? Okay. Well, if you can hear me, that's amazing because what it means me, that's amazing because what it means me, that's amazing because what it means is that my voice is causing little tiny is that my voice is causing little tiny is that my voice is causing little tiny changes in the air waves wherever you changes in the air waves wherever you changes in the air waves wherever you happen to be and that your ears and happen to be and that your ears and happen to be and that your ears and whatever is contained in those ears and whatever is contained in those ears and whatever is contained in those ears and in your brain can take those sound waves in your brain can take those sound waves in your brain can take those sound waves and make sense of them. And that is an and make sense of them. And that is an and make sense of them. And that is an absolutely fantastic and staggering feat absolutely fantastic and staggering feat absolutely fantastic and staggering feat of biology. And yet we understand a lot of biology. And yet we understand a lot of biology. And yet we understand a lot about how that process works. So what we about how that process works. So what we about how that process works. So what we call ears have a technical name that call ears have a technical name that call ears have a technical name that technical name is oracles but technical name is oracles but technical name is oracles but more often they're called pa the pas p i more often they're called pa the pas p i more often they're called pa the pas p i n a pa and the pas of your ears this n a pa and the pas of your ears this n a pa and the pas of your ears this outer part that is made of cartilage and outer part that is made of cartilage and outer part that is made of cartilage and stuff is arranged such that it can stuff is arranged such that it can stuff is arranged such that it can capture sound in the best way for your capture sound in the best way for your capture sound in the best way for your head size. So the shape of these ears head size. So the shape of these ears head size. So the shape of these ears that we have is such that it amplifies that we have is such that it amplifies that we have is such that it amplifies high frequency sounds. High frequency high frequency sounds. High frequency high frequency sounds. High frequency sounds as the name suggests are the is sounds as the name suggests are the is sounds as the name suggests are the is the squeakier stuff. So we have low the squeakier stuff. So we have low the squeakier stuff. So we have low frequency sounds and high frequency sounds and high frequency sounds and high frequency sounds and everything in between. And sounds and everything in between. And sounds and everything in between. And those sound waves, for those of you that those sound waves, for those of you that those sound waves, for those of you that don't maybe fully conceptualize sound don't maybe fully conceptualize sound don't maybe fully conceptualize sound waves, are literally just fluctuations waves, are literally just fluctuations waves, are literally just fluctuations or shifts in the way that air is moving or shifts in the way that air is moving or shifts in the way that air is moving toward your ear and through space in the toward your ear and through space in the toward your ear and through space in the same way that water can have waves. The same way that water can have waves. The same way that water can have waves. The air can have waves. Okay? So, it's air can have waves. Okay? So, it's air can have waves. Okay? So, it's reverberation of reverberation of reverberation of air. Those come in through your ears and air. Those come in through your ears and air. Those come in through your ears and you have what's called your eardrum. And you have what's called your eardrum. And you have what's called your eardrum. And on the inside of your eard drum, there's on the inside of your eard drum, there's on the inside of your eard drum, there's a little bony thing that's shaped like a little bony thing that's shaped like a little bony thing that's shaped like a little hammer. So attached to that eard little hammer. So attached to that eard little hammer. So attached to that eard drum, which can move back and forth like drum, which can move back and forth like drum, which can move back and forth like a drum. It's like a little membrane. a drum. It's like a little membrane. a drum. It's like a little membrane. You've got this hammer attached to it. You've got this hammer attached to it. You've got this hammer attached to it. And that hammer has three parts. For And that hammer has three parts. For And that hammer has three parts. For those of you that want to know, those of you that want to know, those of you that want to know, those three parts are called malus, incas, and three parts are called malus, incas, and three parts are called malus, incas, and stapes. It's like a but basically you stapes. It's like a but basically you stapes. It's like a but basically you can just think about it as a hammer. So can just think about it as a hammer. So can just think about it as a hammer. So you got this eardrum and then a hammer. you got this eardrum and then a hammer. you got this eardrum and then a hammer. And then that hammer has to hammer on And then that hammer has to hammer on And then that hammer has to hammer on something. And what it does is it something. And what it does is it something. And what it does is it hammers on a little coiled piece of hammers on a little coiled piece of hammers on a little coiled piece of tissue that we call the cookia. So this tissue that we call the cookia. So this tissue that we call the cookia. So this snailshaped structure in your inner ear snailshaped structure in your inner ear snailshaped structure in your inner ear is where sound gets converted into is where sound gets converted into is where sound gets converted into electrical signals that the brain can electrical signals that the brain can electrical signals that the brain can understand. Now the understand. Now the understand. Now the cookia at one end is more rigid than the cookia at one end is more rigid than the cookia at one end is more rigid than the other. So one part can move really other. So one part can move really other. So one part can move really easily and the other part doesn't move easily and the other part doesn't move easily and the other part doesn't move very easily. And that turns out to be very easily. And that turns out to be very easily. And that turns out to be very important for decoding or very important for decoding or very important for decoding or separating sounds that are of low separating sounds that are of low separating sounds that are of low frequency and sounds that are of high frequency and sounds that are of high frequency and sounds that are of high frequency like a shriek or a frequency like a shriek or a frequency like a shriek or a shrill. And that's because within that shrill. And that's because within that shrill. And that's because within that little coiled thing we call the cookia, little coiled thing we call the cookia, little coiled thing we call the cookia, you have all these tiny little what are you have all these tiny little what are you have all these tiny little what are called hair cells. Now they look like called hair cells. Now they look like called hair cells. Now they look like hairs, but they're not at all related to hairs, but they're not at all related to hairs, but they're not at all related to the hairs on your head or elsewhere on the hairs on your head or elsewhere on the hairs on your head or elsewhere on your body. They're just shaped like your body. They're just shaped like your body. They're just shaped like hairs. So we call them hair cells. Those hairs. So we call them hair cells. Those hairs. So we call them hair cells. Those hair cells, if they move, send signals hair cells, if they move, send signals hair cells, if they move, send signals into the brain that a particular sound into the brain that a particular sound into the brain that a particular sound is in our environment. Now, this should is in our environment. Now, this should is in our environment. Now, this should stagger your mind. If it doesn't stagger your mind. If it doesn't stagger your mind. If it doesn't already, it should. Because what this already, it should. Because what this already, it should. Because what this means is that everything that's means is that everything that's means is that everything that's happening around us, whether or not it's happening around us, whether or not it's happening around us, whether or not it's music or voices, all of that is being music or voices, all of that is being music or voices, all of that is being broken down in into its component parts. broken down in into its component parts. broken down in into its component parts. And then your brain is making sense of And then your brain is making sense of And then your brain is making sense of what it means. Your cookia essentially what it means. Your cookia essentially what it means. Your cookia essentially acts as a prism. It takes all the sound acts as a prism. It takes all the sound acts as a prism. It takes all the sound in your environment and it splits up in your environment and it splits up in your environment and it splits up those sounds into different frequencies. those sounds into different frequencies. those sounds into different frequencies. And then the brain takes that And then the brain takes that And then the brain takes that information and puts it back together information and puts it back together information and puts it back together and makes sense of it. So those hair and makes sense of it. So those hair and makes sense of it. So those hair cells in each of your two cookia because cells in each of your two cookia because cells in each of your two cookia because you have two ears you also have two you have two ears you also have two you have two ears you also have two cookia send little wires what we call cookia send little wires what we call cookia send little wires what we call axons that convey their patterns of axons that convey their patterns of axons that convey their patterns of activity into the brain. And there are a activity into the brain. And there are a activity into the brain. And there are a number of different stations within the number of different stations within the number of different stations within the brain that information arrives at before brain that information arrives at before brain that information arrives at before it gets up to the parts of your brain it gets up to the parts of your brain it gets up to the parts of your brain where you are consciously aware. And where you are consciously aware. And where you are consciously aware. And there is a good reason for that, which there is a good reason for that, which there is a good reason for that, which is that more important than knowing what is that more important than knowing what is that more important than knowing what you're hearing, you need to know where you're hearing, you need to know where you're hearing, you need to know where it's coming it's coming it's coming from. And our visual system can help from. And our visual system can help from. And our visual system can help with that. But our auditory and our with that. But our auditory and our with that. But our auditory and our visual system collaborate to help us visual system collaborate to help us visual system collaborate to help us find and locate the position of things find and locate the position of things find and locate the position of things in space. That should come as no in space. That should come as no in space. That should come as no surprise. If you hear somebody talking surprise. If you hear somebody talking surprise. If you hear somebody talking off to your right, you tend to turn to off to your right, you tend to turn to off to your right, you tend to turn to your right, not to your left. If you see your right, not to your left. If you see your right, not to your left. If you see somebody's mouth moving in front of you, somebody's mouth moving in front of you, somebody's mouth moving in front of you, you tend to assume that the sound is you tend to assume that the sound is you tend to assume that the sound is going to come from right in front of going to come from right in front of going to come from right in front of you. Disruptions in this auditory you. Disruptions in this auditory you. Disruptions in this auditory hearing and visual matching are actually hearing and visual matching are actually hearing and visual matching are actually the basis of what's called the basis of what's called the basis of what's called the ventriloquism effect. The ventriloquism effect. The ventriloquism effect. The ventriloquism effect can basically be described in effect can basically be described in effect can basically be described in simple terms as when you essentially simple terms as when you essentially simple terms as when you essentially think that a sound is coming from a think that a sound is coming from a think that a sound is coming from a location that it's not actually coming location that it's not actually coming location that it's not actually coming from. The way you know where things are from. The way you know where things are from. The way you know where things are coming from, what direction a car or a coming from, what direction a car or a coming from, what direction a car or a bus or a person is coming from is bus or a person is coming from is bus or a person is coming from is because the sound lands in one ear because the sound lands in one ear because the sound lands in one ear before the other. And you have stations before the other. And you have stations before the other. And you have stations in your brain and you meaning you have in your brain and you meaning you have in your brain and you meaning you have neurons in your brain that calculate the neurons in your brain that calculate the neurons in your brain that calculate the difference in time of arrival for those difference in time of arrival for those difference in time of arrival for those sound waves in your right versus your sound waves in your right versus your sound waves in your right versus your left ear. And if they arrive at the same left ear. And if they arrive at the same left ear. And if they arrive at the same time, you assume that thing is making time, you assume that thing is making time, you assume that thing is making noise right in front of you. If it's off noise right in front of you. If it's off noise right in front of you. If it's off to your right, you assume it's over on to your right, you assume it's over on to your right, you assume it's over on your right. And if the sound arrives your right. And if the sound arrives your right. And if the sound arrives first to your left ear, you assume quite first to your left ear, you assume quite first to your left ear, you assume quite correctly that the thing is coming correctly that the thing is coming correctly that the thing is coming toward your left ear. But what about up toward your left ear. But what about up toward your left ear. But what about up and down? If you think about it, a sound and down? If you think about it, a sound and down? If you think about it, a sound coming from above is going to land on coming from above is going to land on coming from above is going to land on your right ear and your left ear at the your right ear and your left ear at the your right ear and your left ear at the same time. A sound from below is going to time. A sound from below is going to time. A sound from below is going to land on your right ear and your left ear land on your right ear and your left ear land on your right ear and your left ear at the same time. So the way that we at the same time. So the way that we at the same time. So the way that we know where things are in terms of what's know where things are in terms of what's know where things are in terms of what's called elevation, where they are in the called elevation, where they are in the called elevation, where they are in the up and down up and down up and down plane is by the frequencies. The shape plane is by the frequencies. The shape plane is by the frequencies. The shape of your ears actually modifies the sound of your ears actually modifies the sound of your ears actually modifies the sound depending on whether or not it's coming depending on whether or not it's coming depending on whether or not it's coming straight at you from the floor or from straight at you from the floor or from straight at you from the floor or from high above. Now this all happens very high above. Now this all happens very high above. Now this all happens very fast in subconscious. But now you very fast in subconscious. But now you very fast in subconscious. But now you know why if people really want to hear know why if people really want to hear know why if people really want to hear something, they make a cup around their something, they make a cup around their something, they make a cup around their ear. They essentially make their ear ear. They essentially make their ear ear. They essentially make their ear into more of a fenic fox type ear. If into more of a fenic fox type ear. If into more of a fenic fox type ear. If you've ever seen those cute little fenic you've ever seen those cute little fenic you've ever seen those cute little fenic fox things, they have these big spiky fox things, they have these big spiky fox things, they have these big spiky ears. They kind of look like a French ears. They kind of look like a French ears. They kind of look like a French bulldog, although they're kind of the bulldog, although they're kind of the bulldog, although they're kind of the fox version of the French bulldog. These fox version of the French bulldog. These fox version of the French bulldog. These big tall ears and they have big tall ears and they have big tall ears and they have excellent sound localization. And so excellent sound localization. And so excellent sound localization. And so when people lean in with their ear like when people lean in with their ear like when people lean in with their ear like the with their hand like this, if you're the with their hand like this, if you're the with their hand like this, if you're listening to this, I'm just cupping my listening to this, I'm just cupping my listening to this, I'm just cupping my hand at my ear, I'm giving myself a hand at my ear, I'm giving myself a hand at my ear, I'm giving myself a bigger PA. Okay? And if I do it on the bigger PA. Okay? And if I do it on the bigger PA. Okay? And if I do it on the left side, I do this side. And if I left side, I do this side. And if I left side, I do this side. And if I really want to hear something, I do it really want to hear something, I do it really want to hear something, I do it on both sides. Okay? So this isn't just on both sides. Okay? So this isn't just on both sides. Okay? So this isn't just gesturing. This actually serves a gesturing. This actually serves a gesturing. This actually serves a mechanical role. And actually, if you mechanical role. And actually, if you mechanical role. And actually, if you want to hear where things are coming want to hear where things are coming want to hear where things are coming from with a much greater degree of from with a much greater degree of from with a much greater degree of accuracy, this can actually help because accuracy, this can actually help because accuracy, this can actually help because you're capturing sound waves and you're capturing sound waves and you're capturing sound waves and funneling them better. So, now I want to funneling them better. So, now I want to funneling them better. So, now I want to shift to talking about ways to leverage shift to talking about ways to leverage shift to talking about ways to leverage your hearing system, your auditory your hearing system, your auditory your hearing system, your auditory system, so that you can learn anything, system, so that you can learn anything, system, so that you can learn anything, not just auditory information, but not just auditory information, but not just auditory information, but anything faster. I get a lot of anything faster. I get a lot of anything faster. I get a lot of questions about so-called binaural questions about so-called binaural questions about so-called binaural beats. Binaural beats as their name beats. Binaural beats as their name beats. Binaural beats as their name suggests involve playing one frequency suggests involve playing one frequency suggests involve playing one frequency of sound to one ear and a different of sound to one ear and a different of sound to one ear and a different frequency of sound to the other ear. And frequency of sound to the other ear. And frequency of sound to the other ear. And the idea is that the brain will take the idea is that the brain will take the idea is that the brain will take those two frequencies of sound and those two frequencies of sound and those two frequencies of sound and because the pathways that bring because the pathways that bring because the pathways that bring information from the ears into the brain information from the ears into the brain information from the ears into the brain eventually cross over. They actually eventually cross over. They actually eventually cross over. They actually share that information with both sides share that information with both sides share that information with both sides of the brain that the brain will average of the brain that the brain will average of the brain that the brain will average that information and come up with a sort that information and come up with a sort that information and come up with a sort of intermediate frequency. And the of intermediate frequency. And the of intermediate frequency. And the rationale is that those intermediate rationale is that those intermediate rationale is that those intermediate frequencies place the brain into a state frequencies place the brain into a state frequencies place the brain into a state that is better for learning. And when I that is better for learning. And when I that is better for learning. And when I say better for learning, I want to be say better for learning, I want to be say better for learning, I want to be precise about what I mean. That could precise about what I mean. That could precise about what I mean. That could mean more focus for encoding or mean more focus for encoding or mean more focus for encoding or bringing the information in? We, as you bringing the information in? We, as you bringing the information in? We, as you may have heard me say before, we have to may have heard me say before, we have to may have heard me say before, we have to be alert and focused in order to learn. be alert and focused in order to learn. be alert and focused in order to learn. So, can binaural beats make us more So, can binaural beats make us more So, can binaural beats make us more focused? Can binaural beats allow us to focused? Can binaural beats allow us to focused? Can binaural beats allow us to relax more if we're anxious? So, what do relax more if we're anxious? So, what do relax more if we're anxious? So, what do the scientific data say about binaural the scientific data say about binaural the scientific data say about binaural beats? Science on binaural beats is beats? Science on binaural beats is beats? Science on binaural beats is actually quite extensive and very actually quite extensive and very actually quite extensive and very precise. So sound waves are measured precise. So sound waves are measured precise. So sound waves are measured typically in hertz or kilohertz. I know typically in hertz or kilohertz. I know typically in hertz or kilohertz. I know many of you aren't familiar with many of you aren't familiar with many of you aren't familiar with thinking about things in hertz or thinking about things in hertz or thinking about things in hertz or kilohertz but again just remember those kilohertz but again just remember those kilohertz but again just remember those waves on a pond those ripples on a pond. waves on a pond those ripples on a pond. waves on a pond those ripples on a pond. If they're close together then they are If they're close together then they are If they're close together then they are of high frequency and if they're far of high frequency and if they're far of high frequency and if they're far apart then they are low frequency. So if apart then they are low frequency. So if apart then they are low frequency. So if it's many more kilohertz then it's much it's many more kilohertz then it's much it's many more kilohertz then it's much higher frequency than if it's fewer higher frequency than if it's fewer higher frequency than if it's fewer hertz or kilohertz. And so you may have hertz or kilohertz. And so you may have hertz or kilohertz. And so you may have heard of these things as delta waves or heard of these things as delta waves or heard of these things as delta waves or theta waves or alpha waves or beta waves theta waves or alpha waves or beta waves theta waves or alpha waves or beta waves etc. Delta waves would be big slow etc. Delta waves would be big slow etc. Delta waves would be big slow waves, a low frequency. And indeed, waves, a low frequency. And indeed, waves, a low frequency. And indeed, there is quality evidence from there is quality evidence from there is quality evidence from peer-reviewed studies that tell us that peer-reviewed studies that tell us that peer-reviewed studies that tell us that delta waves like 1 to four hertz, so delta waves like 1 to four hertz, so delta waves like 1 to four hertz, so very low frequency sounds, can help in very low frequency sounds, can help in very low frequency sounds, can help in the transition to sleep and for the transition to sleep and for the transition to sleep and for staying asleep. And that theta rhythms staying asleep. And that theta rhythms staying asleep. And that theta rhythms which are more like 4 to8 hertz can which are more like 4 to8 hertz can which are more like 4 to8 hertz can bring the brain into a state bring the brain into a state bring the brain into a state of subtle sleep or meditation. So deeply of subtle sleep or meditation. So deeply of subtle sleep or meditation. So deeply relaxed but not fully asleep. And you'll relaxed but not fully asleep. And you'll relaxed but not fully asleep. And you'll find evidence that alpha waves 8 to 13 find evidence that alpha waves 8 to 13 find evidence that alpha waves 8 to 13 hertz can increase alertness to a hertz can increase alertness to a hertz can increase alertness to a moderate level. That's a great state for moderate level. That's a great state for moderate level. That's a great state for the brain to be in for recall of the brain to be in for recall of the brain to be in for recall of existing information. Okay. And that existing information. Okay. And that existing information. Okay. And that beta waves 15 to 20 hertz are great for beta waves 15 to 20 hertz are great for beta waves 15 to 20 hertz are great for bringing the brain into focus states for bringing the brain into focus states for bringing the brain into focus states for sustained thought or for incorporating sustained thought or for incorporating sustained thought or for incorporating new information and especially gamma new information and especially gamma new information and especially gamma waves the highest frequency the most waves the highest frequency the most waves the highest frequency the most frequent ripples of sound so to speak 32 frequent ripples of sound so to speak 32 frequent ripples of sound so to speak 32 to 100 hertz for learning and problem to 100 hertz for learning and problem to 100 hertz for learning and problem solving. Here we're talking about the solving. Here we're talking about the solving. Here we're talking about the use of binaural beats in order to use of binaural beats in order to use of binaural beats in order to increase our level of alertness or increase our level of alertness or increase our level of alertness or our level of calmness. Now, that's our level of calmness. Now, that's our level of calmness. Now, that's important to underscore because it's not important to underscore because it's not important to underscore because it's not that there's something fundamentally that there's something fundamentally that there's something fundamentally important about the binaural beats. They important about the binaural beats. They important about the binaural beats. They are yet another way of bringing the are yet another way of bringing the are yet another way of bringing the brain into states of deep relaxation brain into states of deep relaxation brain into states of deep relaxation through low frequency sound or highly through low frequency sound or highly through low frequency sound or highly alert states for focused learning with alert states for focused learning with alert states for focused learning with more high frequency sound. They're more high frequency sound. They're more high frequency sound. They're effective, but it's not that they're effective, but it's not that they're effective, but it's not that they're uniquely special for learning. It's just uniquely special for learning. It's just uniquely special for learning. It's just that they can help some people bring that they can help some people bring that they can help some people bring their brain into the state that allows their brain into the state that allows their brain into the state that allows them to learn them to learn them to learn better. There's very good evidence for better. There's very good evidence for better. There's very good evidence for anxiety reduction from the use of anxiety reduction from the use of anxiety reduction from the use of binaural beats. And what's interesting binaural beats. And what's interesting binaural beats. And what's interesting is the anxiety reduction seems to be is the anxiety reduction seems to be is the anxiety reduction seems to be most effective when the binaural beats are effective when the binaural beats are effective when the binaural beats are bringing the brain into delta. So those bringing the brain into delta. So those bringing the brain into delta. So those slow big waves like sleep, theta and slow big waves like sleep, theta and slow big waves like sleep, theta and alpha states. There's good evidence that alpha states. There's good evidence that alpha states. There's good evidence that binaural beads can be used to treat binaural beads can be used to treat binaural beads can be used to treat pain, chronic pain. But the real boost pain, chronic pain. But the real boost pain, chronic pain. But the real boost from binaural beats appears to be for from binaural beats appears to be for from binaural beats appears to be for anxiety reduction and pain reduction. anxiety reduction and pain reduction. anxiety reduction and pain reduction. Many people like binaural beats and um Many people like binaural beats and um Many people like binaural beats and um say that they benefit from them say that they benefit from them say that they benefit from them especially while studying or learning. I especially while studying or learning. I especially while studying or learning. I think part of the reason for that think part of the reason for that think part of the reason for that relates to the ability to channel our relates to the ability to channel our relates to the ability to channel our focus when we have some background focus when we have some background focus when we have some background noise. And this is something I also get noise. And this is something I also get noise. And this is something I also get asked about a lot. Is it better to asked about a lot. Is it better to asked about a lot. Is it better to listen to music and have background listen to music and have background listen to music and have background noise when studying or is it better to noise when studying or is it better to noise when studying or is it better to have complete silence? Well, there's have complete silence? Well, there's have complete silence? Well, there's actually a quite good literature on this actually a quite good literature on this actually a quite good literature on this as well, but not so much as it relates as well, but not so much as it relates as well, but not so much as it relates to binaural beats, but rather whether or to binaural beats, but rather whether or to binaural beats, but rather whether or not people are listening to music, not people are listening to music, not people are listening to music, so-called white noise, brown noise, so-called white noise, brown noise, so-called white noise, brown noise, believe it or not, there's white noise believe it or not, there's white noise believe it or not, there's white noise and there's brown noise. There's even and there's brown noise. There's even and there's brown noise. There's even pink noise. I want to be very clear that pink noise. I want to be very clear that pink noise. I want to be very clear that white noise has been shown to really white noise has been shown to really white noise has been shown to really enhance brain states for learning in enhance brain states for learning in enhance brain states for learning in certain individuals, in particular in certain individuals, in particular in certain individuals, in particular in adults. But white noise actually can adults. But white noise actually can adults. But white noise actually can have a detrimental effect on auditory have a detrimental effect on auditory have a detrimental effect on auditory learning and maybe even the development learning and maybe even the development learning and maybe even the development of the auditory system in very young of the auditory system in very young of the auditory system in very young children, in particular in infants. So, children, in particular in infants. So, children, in particular in infants. So, first I'd like to talk about the first I'd like to talk about the first I'd like to talk about the beneficial effects of white noise on beneficial effects of white noise on beneficial effects of white noise on learning. There are some really learning. There are some really learning. There are some really excellent studies on this. excellent studies on this. excellent studies on this. The first one that I'd like to just The first one that I'd like to just The first one that I'd like to just highlight is one that's entitled highlight is one that's entitled highlight is one that's entitled lowintensity white noise improves lowintensity white noise improves lowintensity white noise improves performance in auditory working memory performance in auditory working memory performance in auditory working memory task. An fMRI study. This is a study task. An fMRI study. This is a study task. An fMRI study. This is a study that explored whether or not learning that explored whether or not learning that explored whether or not learning could be enhanced by playing white noise could be enhanced by playing white noise could be enhanced by playing white noise in the background. in the background. in the background. But the strength of the study is that But the strength of the study is that But the strength of the study is that they looked at some of the underlying they looked at some of the underlying they looked at some of the underlying neural circuitry and the activation of neural circuitry and the activation of neural circuitry and the activation of the neural circuitry in these people as the neural circuitry in these people as the neural circuitry in these people as they did the learning task. And what it they did the learning task. And what it they did the learning task. And what it essentially illustrates is that white essentially illustrates is that white essentially illustrates is that white noise, provided that white noise is of noise, provided that white noise is of noise, provided that white noise is of low enough intensity, meaning not super low enough intensity, meaning not super low enough intensity, meaning not super loud, it actually could enhance learning loud, it actually could enhance learning loud, it actually could enhance learning to a significant degree. And this has to a significant degree. And this has to a significant degree. And this has been shown now for a huge number of been shown now for a huge number of been shown now for a huge number of different types of learning. I was very different types of learning. I was very different types of learning. I was very um relieved to find or I should say um relieved to find or I should say um relieved to find or I should say excited to find this study published in excited to find this study published in excited to find this study published in the journal of cognitive neuroscience. the journal of cognitive neuroscience. the journal of cognitive neuroscience. This is a 2014 This is a 2014 This is a 2014 paper. White noise improves learning by paper. White noise improves learning by paper. White noise improves learning by modulating activity in dopamineergic modulating activity in dopamineergic modulating activity in dopamineergic midbrain regions and the right superior midbrain regions and the right superior midbrain regions and the right superior temporal sulcus. Okay, I don't expect temporal sulcus. Okay, I don't expect temporal sulcus. Okay, I don't expect you to know what the dopamine midbrain you to know what the dopamine midbrain you to know what the dopamine midbrain region is, but if you're like me, you region is, but if you're like me, you region is, but if you're like me, you probably took highlighted notice of the probably took highlighted notice of the probably took highlighted notice of the word dopamineergic. Dopamine is a neurom word dopamineergic. Dopamine is a neurom word dopamineergic. Dopamine is a neurom modulator meaning it's a chemical that's modulator meaning it's a chemical that's modulator meaning it's a chemical that's released in our brain and body but released in our brain and body but released in our brain and body but mostly in our brain that modulates mostly in our brain that modulates mostly in our brain that modulates meaning controls the likelihood that meaning controls the likelihood that meaning controls the likelihood that certain brain areas will be active and certain brain areas will be active and certain brain areas will be active and other brain areas won't be active and other brain areas won't be active and other brain areas won't be active and dopamine is associated with motivation. dopamine is associated with motivation. dopamine is associated with motivation. Dopamine is associated with craving. But Dopamine is associated with craving. But Dopamine is associated with craving. But what's so interesting to me is that it what's so interesting to me is that it what's so interesting to me is that it appears that white noise itself can appears that white noise itself can appears that white noise itself can raise the what we call the basil the raise the what we call the basil the raise the what we call the basil the baseline levels of dopamine that are baseline levels of dopamine that are baseline levels of dopamine that are being released from this area the being released from this area the being released from this area the substantia So now we're starting substantia So now we're starting substantia So now we're starting to get a more full picture of how to get a more full picture of how to get a more full picture of how particular sounds in our environment can particular sounds in our environment can particular sounds in our environment can increase learning and that's in part I increase learning and that's in part I increase learning and that's in part I believe through the release of dopamine believe through the release of dopamine believe through the release of dopamine from substantia. from substantia. from substantia. So, I'm not trying to shift you away So, I'm not trying to shift you away So, I'm not trying to shift you away from binaural beats if that's your from binaural beats if that's your from binaural beats if that's your thing. But it does appear that turning thing. But it does appear that turning thing. But it does appear that turning on white noise at a low level, but not on white noise at a low level, but not on white noise at a low level, but not too loud can allow you to learn better too loud can allow you to learn better too loud can allow you to learn better because of the ways that it's modulating because of the ways that it's modulating because of the ways that it's modulating your brain chemistry. So, what about your brain chemistry. So, what about your brain chemistry. So, what about white noise and hearing loss in white noise and hearing loss in white noise and hearing loss in development? I know a lot of people with development? I know a lot of people with development? I know a lot of people with children have these kind of noise children have these kind of noise children have these kind of noise machines like sound waves and things machines like sound waves and things machines like sound waves and things like that help the kids sleep. And like that help the kids sleep. And like that help the kids sleep. And uh look, I think um kids getting good uh look, I think um kids getting good uh look, I think um kids getting good sleep and parents getting good sleep is sleep and parents getting good sleep is sleep and parents getting good sleep is vital to uh physical and mental health vital to uh physical and mental health vital to uh physical and mental health and family health. So I certainly and family health. So I certainly and family health. So I certainly sympathize with those needs. sympathize with those needs. sympathize with those needs. However, there are data that indicate However, there are data that indicate However, there are data that indicate that white noise during development can that white noise during development can that white noise during development can be detrimental to the auditory system. I be detrimental to the auditory system. I be detrimental to the auditory system. I don't want to frighten any parents. If don't want to frighten any parents. If don't want to frighten any parents. If you played white noise to your kids, you played white noise to your kids, you played white noise to your kids, this doesn't mean that their auditory this doesn't mean that their auditory this doesn't mean that their auditory system or their speech patterns are system or their speech patterns are system or their speech patterns are going to be disrupted or that their going to be disrupted or that their going to be disrupted or that their interpretation of speech is going to be interpretation of speech is going to be interpretation of speech is going to be disrupted forever. But there are data disrupted forever. But there are data disrupted forever. But there are data published in the journal Science some published in the journal Science some published in the journal Science some years ago showing that when they exposed years ago showing that when they exposed years ago showing that when they exposed very young animals to this white noise, very young animals to this white noise, very young animals to this white noise, it actually disrupted the maps of the it actually disrupted the maps of the it actually disrupted the maps of the auditory world within the brain. So auditory world within the brain. So auditory world within the brain. So auditory information goes up into our auditory information goes up into our auditory information goes up into our cortex into these the essentially the cortex into these the essentially the cortex into these the essentially the outside portion of our brain that's outside portion of our brain that's outside portion of our brain that's responsible for all our all of our responsible for all our all of our responsible for all our all of our higher level cognition, our planning, higher level cognition, our planning, higher level cognition, our planning, our decision-m etc. creativity and up our decision-m etc. creativity and up our decision-m etc. creativity and up there we have what are called tonotopic there we have what are called tonotopic there we have what are called tonotopic maps. What's a tonotopic map? Well maps. What's a tonotopic map? Well maps. What's a tonotopic map? Well remember the cookia how it's coiled and remember the cookia how it's coiled and remember the cookia how it's coiled and at one end it responds to high at one end it responds to high at one end it responds to high frequencies and the other end it frequencies and the other end it frequencies and the other end it responds to low frequencies. sort of responds to low frequencies. sort of responds to low frequencies. sort of like a piano. In the auditory system, we like a piano. In the auditory system, we like a piano. In the auditory system, we have what are called tonotopic maps have what are called tonotopic maps have what are called tonotopic maps where frequency, high frequency to low where frequency, high frequency to low where frequency, high frequency to low frequency, and everything in between is frequency, and everything in between is frequency, and everything in between is organized in a very systematic way. Now, organized in a very systematic way. Now, organized in a very systematic way. Now, our experience of life from the time our experience of life from the time our experience of life from the time we're a baby until the time that we die we're a baby until the time that we die we're a baby until the time that we die is not systematic. We don't hear low is not systematic. We don't hear low is not systematic. We don't hear low frequencies at one part of the room or frequencies at one part of the room or frequencies at one part of the room or at one part of the day and high at one part of the day and high at one part of the day and high frequencies another part of the room, frequencies another part of the room, frequencies another part of the room, another part of the day. They're all another part of the day. They're all another part of the day. They're all intermixed. But if you remember the intermixed. But if you remember the intermixed. But if you remember the cookia separates them out just like a cookia separates them out just like a cookia separates them out just like a prism of light separates out the prism of light separates out the prism of light separates out the different wavelengths of light. The different wavelengths of light. The different wavelengths of light. The cookia separates out the different cookia separates out the different cookia separates out the different frequencies. And the developing brain frequencies. And the developing brain frequencies. And the developing brain takes those separated out frequencies takes those separated out frequencies takes those separated out frequencies and learns this relationship between and learns this relationship between and learns this relationship between itself meaning the child and the outside itself meaning the child and the outside itself meaning the child and the outside world. White noise essentially contains world. White noise essentially contains world. White noise essentially contains no tonotopic information. The no tonotopic information. The no tonotopic information. The frequencies are all intermixed. It's frequencies are all intermixed. It's frequencies are all intermixed. It's just noise. just noise. just noise. So, one of the reasons why hearing a lot So, one of the reasons why hearing a lot So, one of the reasons why hearing a lot of white noise during development for of white noise during development for of white noise during development for long periods of time can be detrimental long periods of time can be detrimental long periods of time can be detrimental to the development of the auditory to the development of the auditory to the development of the auditory system is that these tonotopic maps system is that these tonotopic maps system is that these tonotopic maps don't form normally. At least they don't form normally. At least they don't form normally. At least they don't in experimental animals. in experimental animals. in experimental animals. Now the reason I'm raising this is that Now the reason I'm raising this is that Now the reason I'm raising this is that many people I know in particular friends many people I know in particular friends many people I know in particular friends who have small children they say I want who have small children they say I want who have small children they say I want to use a white noise machine while I to use a white noise machine while I to use a white noise machine while I sleep but is it is it okay for my baby sleep but is it is it okay for my baby sleep but is it is it okay for my baby to use a white noise machine and I to use a white noise machine and I to use a white noise machine and I consulted with various people scientists consulted with various people scientists consulted with various people scientists about this and they said well you know about this and they said well you know about this and they said well you know the baby is also hearing the parents the baby is also hearing the parents the baby is also hearing the parents voices and is hearing music and is voices and is hearing music and is voices and is hearing music and is hearing the dog bark so it's not the hearing the dog bark so it's not the hearing the dog bark so it's not the only thing they're hearing however ever. only thing they're hearing however ever. only thing they're hearing however ever. Every single person that I consulted Every single person that I consulted Every single person that I consulted with said, "But you know, there's with said, "But you know, there's with said, "But you know, there's neuroplasticity during sleep. That's neuroplasticity during sleep. That's neuroplasticity during sleep. That's when the kid is sleeping." And I don't when the kid is sleeping." And I don't when the kid is sleeping." And I don't know that you'd want to expose a child know that you'd want to expose a child know that you'd want to expose a child to white noise the entire night because to white noise the entire night because to white noise the entire night because it might degrade that tonotopic map. It it might degrade that tonotopic map. It it might degrade that tonotopic map. It might not destroy it. It might not might not destroy it. It might not might not destroy it. It might not eliminate it, but it could make it a eliminate it, but it could make it a eliminate it, but it could make it a little less clear. Like sort of taking little less clear. Like sort of taking little less clear. Like sort of taking the keys on the piano and taping a few the keys on the piano and taping a few the keys on the piano and taping a few of them together. Once your auditory of them together. Once your auditory of them together. Once your auditory system has formed, once it's established system has formed, once it's established system has formed, once it's established these tonotopic maps, then the presence these tonotopic maps, then the presence these tonotopic maps, then the presence of background white noise should not be of background white noise should not be of background white noise should not be a problem at all. In fact, it shouldn't a problem at all. In fact, it shouldn't a problem at all. In fact, it shouldn't be a problem at all because you're also be a problem at all because you're also be a problem at all because you're also not attending to it. The idea is that not attending to it. The idea is that not attending to it. The idea is that it's playing at a low enough volume that it's playing at a low enough volume that it's playing at a low enough volume that you kind of forget it in the background you kind of forget it in the background you kind of forget it in the background and that it's supporting learning by and that it's supporting learning by and that it's supporting learning by bringing your brain into a bringing your brain into a bringing your brain into a heightened state of alertness and heightened state of alertness and heightened state of alertness and especially this heightened state of especially this heightened state of especially this heightened state of dopamine, dopamineergic activation of dopamine, dopamineergic activation of dopamine, dopamineergic activation of the brain which will make it easier to the brain which will make it easier to the brain which will make it easier to learn faster and easier to learn the learn faster and easier to learn the learn faster and easier to learn the information. So now I want to talk about information. So now I want to talk about information. So now I want to talk about auditory learning and actually how you auditory learning and actually how you auditory learning and actually how you can get better at learning information can get better at learning information can get better at learning information that you hear, not just information that you hear, not just information that you hear, not just information that you see on a page or motor skill you see on a page or motor skill you see on a page or motor skill learning. So, there's a phenomenon learning. So, there's a phenomenon learning. So, there's a phenomenon called the cocktail party effect. Now, called the cocktail party effect. Now, called the cocktail party effect. Now, even if you've never been to a cocktail even if you've never been to a cocktail even if you've never been to a cocktail party, you've experienced and party, you've experienced and party, you've experienced and participated in what's called the participated in what's called the participated in what's called the cocktail party effect. The cocktail party effect. The cocktail party effect. The cocktail party effect is where you are in an party effect is where you are in an party effect is where you are in an environment that's rich with sound. Many environment that's rich with sound. Many environment that's rich with sound. Many sound waves coming from many different sound waves coming from many different sound waves coming from many different sources, many different things. So in a sources, many different things. So in a sources, many different things. So in a city, in a classroom, in a car that city, in a classroom, in a car that city, in a classroom, in a car that contains people having various contains people having various contains people having various conversations, you somehow need to be conversations, you somehow need to be conversations, you somehow need to be able to attend to specific components of able to attend to specific components of able to attend to specific components of those sound waves. Meaning you need to those sound waves. Meaning you need to those sound waves. Meaning you need to hear certain people and not others. You hear certain people and not others. You hear certain people and not others. You and your brain are exquisitly good at and your brain are exquisitly good at and your brain are exquisitly good at creating a cone of auditory attention, a creating a cone of auditory attention, a creating a cone of auditory attention, a narrow band of attention with which you narrow band of attention with which you narrow band of attention with which you can extract the information you care can extract the information you care can extract the information you care about. and wipe away or erase all the about. and wipe away or erase all the about. and wipe away or erase all the rest. Now, this takes work. It takes rest. Now, this takes work. It takes rest. Now, this takes work. It takes attention. One of the reasons why you attention. One of the reasons why you attention. One of the reasons why you might come home from a loud gathering, might come home from a loud gathering, might come home from a loud gathering, maybe a stadium, a sports event, or a maybe a stadium, a sports event, or a maybe a stadium, a sports event, or a cocktail party for that matter, and feel cocktail party for that matter, and feel cocktail party for that matter, and feel just exhausted is because if you are just exhausted is because if you are just exhausted is because if you are listening to conversations there or listening to conversations there or listening to conversations there or trying to listen to those conversations trying to listen to those conversations trying to listen to those conversations while watching the game, it takes while watching the game, it takes while watching the game, it takes attentional effort. And the brain uses attentional effort. And the brain uses attentional effort. And the brain uses up a lot of up a lot of up a lot of energy just at rest, but it uses up even energy just at rest, but it uses up even energy just at rest, but it uses up even more energy when you are paying strong more energy when you are paying strong more energy when you are paying strong attention to something. Literally attention to something. Literally attention to something. Literally caloric energy, burning up things like caloric energy, burning up things like caloric energy, burning up things like glucose, etc. Even if you're ketogenic, glucose, etc. Even if you're ketogenic, glucose, etc. Even if you're ketogenic, it's burning up energy. So the cocktail it's burning up energy. So the cocktail it's burning up energy. So the cocktail party effect has been studied party effect has been studied party effect has been studied extensively in the field of neuroscience extensively in the field of neuroscience extensively in the field of neuroscience and we now know at a mechanistic level and we now know at a mechanistic level and we now know at a mechanistic level how one accomplishes this feat of how one accomplishes this feat of how one accomplishes this feat of attending to certain sounds despite the attending to certain sounds despite the attending to certain sounds despite the fact that we are being bombarded with fact that we are being bombarded with fact that we are being bombarded with all sorts of other sounds. So there are all sorts of other sounds. So there are all sorts of other sounds. So there are a couple ways that we do this. First of a couple ways that we do this. First of a couple ways that we do this. First of all, much as with our visual system, we all, much as with our visual system, we all, much as with our visual system, we can expand or can expand or can expand or contract our visual field of view. Okay, contract our visual field of view. Okay, contract our visual field of view. Okay, we can do that. We can expand and we can do that. We can expand and we can do that. We can expand and contract our visual field of view. Well, contract our visual field of view. Well, contract our visual field of view. Well, we can expand and contract our auditory we can expand and contract our auditory we can expand and contract our auditory field of view, so to speak, or our field of view, so to speak, or our field of view, so to speak, or our auditory window. we can really hear one auditory window. we can really hear one auditory window. we can really hear one person or a small number of people person or a small number of people person or a small number of people amidst a huge background of chatter amidst a huge background of chatter amidst a huge background of chatter because we pay attention to the onset of because we pay attention to the onset of because we pay attention to the onset of words but also to the offset of words. words but also to the offset of words. words but also to the offset of words. So, one of the more common phenomena So, one of the more common phenomena So, one of the more common phenomena that I think we all experience is you go that I think we all experience is you go that I think we all experience is you go to a party and or you meet somebody new to a party and or you meet somebody new to a party and or you meet somebody new and you say, "Hi, I would say hi, I'm and you say, "Hi, I would say hi, I'm and you say, "Hi, I would say hi, I'm Andrew." And they'd say, "Hi, I'm Andrew." And they'd say, "Hi, I'm Andrew." And they'd say, "Hi, I'm Jeff," for instance. Great, great to Jeff," for instance. Great, great to Jeff," for instance. Great, great to meet you. And then a minute later, I meet you. And then a minute later, I meet you. And then a minute later, I can't remember the guy's name. Now, is can't remember the guy's name. Now, is can't remember the guy's name. Now, is it because I don't care what his name it because I don't care what his name it because I don't care what his name is? No. Somehow, the presence of other is? No. Somehow, the presence of other is? No. Somehow, the presence of other auditory information interfered. It's auditory information interfered. It's auditory information interfered. It's not that my mind was necessarily not that my mind was necessarily not that my mind was necessarily someplace else. It's that the signal to someplace else. It's that the signal to someplace else. It's that the signal to noise, as we say, wasn't high enough. noise, as we say, wasn't high enough. noise, as we say, wasn't high enough. Somehow the way he said it or the way it Somehow the way he said it or the way it Somehow the way he said it or the way it landed on my ears, which is really all landed on my ears, which is really all landed on my ears, which is really all that matters, right? When it when it that matters, right? When it when it that matters, right? When it when it comes down to learning, is such that it comes down to learning, is such that it comes down to learning, is such that it just didn't achieve high enough signal just didn't achieve high enough signal just didn't achieve high enough signal to noise. So the next time you ask to noise. So the next time you ask to noise. So the next time you ask somebody's name, remember, listen to the somebody's name, remember, listen to the somebody's name, remember, listen to the onset of what they say and the offset. onset of what they say and the offset. onset of what they say and the offset. So it would be paying attention to the J So it would be paying attention to the J So it would be paying attention to the J in Jeff and it would be paying attention in Jeff and it would be paying attention in Jeff and it would be paying attention to that F in F. in Jeff, excuse me. All to that F in F. in Jeff, excuse me. All to that F in F. in Jeff, excuse me. All right. And chances are you'll be able to right. And chances are you'll be able to right. And chances are you'll be able to remember that name. Now, I do remember that name. Now, I do remember that name. Now, I do acknowledge that trying to learn every acknowledge that trying to learn every acknowledge that trying to learn every word in a sentence by paying attention word in a sentence by paying attention word in a sentence by paying attention to its onset and offset could actually to its onset and offset could actually to its onset and offset could actually be kind of disruptive to the learning be kind of disruptive to the learning be kind of disruptive to the learning process. So, this would be more for process. So, this would be more for process. So, this would be more for specific attention. Using the specific attention. Using the specific attention. Using the attentional system, we can actually attentional system, we can actually attentional system, we can actually learn much faster and we can actually learn much faster and we can actually learn much faster and we can actually activate neuroplasticity in the adult activate neuroplasticity in the adult activate neuroplasticity in the adult brain. something that's very challenging brain. something that's very challenging brain. something that's very challenging to do and that the auditory system is to do and that the auditory system is to do and that the auditory system is one of the main ways in which we can one of the main ways in which we can one of the main ways in which we can access neuroplasticity more broadly. I'd access neuroplasticity more broadly. I'd access neuroplasticity more broadly. I'd like to now talk about balance and our like to now talk about balance and our like to now talk about balance and our sense of balance which is controlled by sense of balance which is controlled by sense of balance which is controlled by believe it or not our ears and things in believe it or not our ears and things in believe it or not our ears and things in our ears as well as by our brain and our ears as well as by our brain and our ears as well as by our brain and elements of our spinal cord. The reason elements of our spinal cord. The reason elements of our spinal cord. The reason why we're talking about balance and how why we're talking about balance and how why we're talking about balance and how to get better at balancing in the to get better at balancing in the to get better at balancing in the episode about hearing is that all the episode about hearing is that all the episode about hearing is that all the goodies that are going to allow you to goodies that are going to allow you to goodies that are going to allow you to do that are in your do that are in your do that are in your ears. They're also in your brain, but ears. They're also in your brain, but ears. They're also in your brain, but they're mostly in your ears. So, as you they're mostly in your ears. So, as you they're mostly in your ears. So, as you recall from the beginning of this recall from the beginning of this recall from the beginning of this episode, you have two coccia coas that episode, you have two coccia coas that episode, you have two coccia coas that are one on each side of your head. And are one on each side of your head. And are one on each side of your head. And that's a little spiral snail-shaped that's a little spiral snail-shaped that's a little spiral snail-shaped thing that converts sound waves into thing that converts sound waves into thing that converts sound waves into electrical signals that the rest of your electrical signals that the rest of your electrical signals that the rest of your brain can understand. Right next to brain can understand. Right next to brain can understand. Right next to those, you have what are called those, you have what are called those, you have what are called semic-ircular canals. The semic-ircular canals can be canals. The semic-ircular canals can be canals. The semic-ircular canals can be best visualized as thinking about three best visualized as thinking about three best visualized as thinking about three hula hoops with marbles in them. So hula hoops with marbles in them. So hula hoops with marbles in them. So imagine that you have a hula hoop and imagine that you have a hula hoop and imagine that you have a hula hoop and it's not filled with mar marbles all the it's not filled with mar marbles all the it's not filled with mar marbles all the way around. It's just got some marbles way around. It's just got some marbles way around. It's just got some marbles down there at the base. Okay? So, if you down there at the base. Okay? So, if you down there at the base. Okay? So, if you were to move that hula hoop around, one were to move that hula hoop around, one were to move that hula hoop around, one of those hula hoops is positioned of those hula hoops is positioned of those hula hoops is positioned vertically with respect to gravity, but vertically with respect to gravity, but vertically with respect to gravity, but basically it's upright. Another one of basically it's upright. Another one of basically it's upright. Another one of those hula hoops is basically at a 90° those hula hoops is basically at a 90° those hula hoops is basically at a 90° angle, basically parallel to the floor angle, basically parallel to the floor angle, basically parallel to the floor if you're standing up right now, if you're standing up right now, if you're standing up right now, if you're seated. Okay? And the other one you're seated. Okay? And the other one you're seated. Okay? And the other one is kind of tilted about 45 degrees in is kind of tilted about 45 degrees in is kind of tilted about 45 degrees in between those. Now, why is this system between those. Now, why is this system between those. Now, why is this system there? Well, those marbles within each there? Well, those marbles within each there? Well, those marbles within each one of those hula hoops can move one of those hula hoops can move one of those hula hoops can move around, but they'll only move around if around, but they'll only move around if around, but they'll only move around if your head moves in a particular way. And your head moves in a particular way. And your head moves in a particular way. And there are three planes or three ways there are three planes or three ways there are three planes or three ways that your head can move. Your head can that your head can move. Your head can that your head can move. Your head can move up and down like I'm nodding right move up and down like I'm nodding right move up and down like I'm nodding right now. So, that's called pitch. Or I can now. So, that's called pitch. Or I can now. So, that's called pitch. Or I can shake my head no side to side. That's shake my head no side to side. That's shake my head no side to side. That's called yaw. And then there's roll. called yaw. And then there's roll. called yaw. And then there's roll. Tilting the head from side to side. the Tilting the head from side to side. the Tilting the head from side to side. the way that a cute puppy might look at you way that a cute puppy might look at you way that a cute puppy might look at you from side to side. Pitch, yaw, roll are from side to side. Pitch, yaw, roll are from side to side. Pitch, yaw, roll are the movements of the head in each of the movements of the head in each of the movements of the head in each of the three major planes of motion, as we say. three major planes of motion, as we say. three major planes of motion, as we say. And each one of those causes those And each one of those causes those And each one of those causes those marbles to move in one or two of the marbles to move in one or two of the marbles to move in one or two of the various hula hoops. Okay? They aren't various hula hoops. Okay? They aren't various hula hoops. Okay? They aren't actually marbles, by the way. These are actually marbles, by the way. These are actually marbles, by the way. These are little um little kind of like little um little kind of like little um little kind of like little stones, basically, little calcium like stones, basically, little calcium like stones, basically, little calcium like deposits. And when they roll back and deposits. And when they roll back and deposits. And when they roll back and forth, they deflect little hairs, little forth, they deflect little hairs, little forth, they deflect little hairs, little hair cells that aren't like the hair cells that aren't like the hair cells that aren't like the hair cells that we use for measuring sound cells that we use for measuring sound cells that we use for measuring sound waves, but they're basically rolling waves, but they're basically rolling waves, but they're basically rolling past these little hair cells and causing past these little hair cells and causing past these little hair cells and causing them to deflect. And when they deflect them to deflect. And when they deflect them to deflect. And when they deflect downward, the neurons, because hair downward, the neurons, because hair downward, the neurons, because hair cells are neurons, send information up cells are neurons, send information up cells are neurons, send information up to the brain. So if I move my head like to the brain. So if I move my head like to the brain. So if I move my head like this, there's a physical movement of this, there's a physical movement of this, there's a physical movement of these little stones in this hula hoop as these little stones in this hula hoop as these little stones in this hula hoop as I'm referring to it. But they deflect I'm referring to it. But they deflect I'm referring to it. But they deflect these hairs send those hairs which are these hairs send those hairs which are these hairs send those hairs which are neurons. Those hair cells send neurons. Those hair cells send neurons. Those hair cells send information off to the brain. Any animal information off to the brain. Any animal information off to the brain. Any animal that has a jaw has this so-called that has a jaw has this so-called that has a jaw has this so-called balance system which we call the balance system which we call the balance system which we call the vestibular system. One of the more vestibular system. One of the more vestibular system. One of the more important things to know about the important things to know about the important things to know about the vestibular, the balance system, is that vestibular, the balance system, is that vestibular, the balance system, is that it works together with the visual it works together with the visual it works together with the visual system. Let's say I hear something off to my Let's say I hear something off to my Let's say I hear something off to my left and I swing my head over to the left and I swing my head over to the left and I swing my head over to the left to see what it left to see what it left to see what it is. There are two sources of information is. There are two sources of information is. There are two sources of information about where my head is relative to my about where my head is relative to my about where my head is relative to my body. And I need to know that. First of body. And I need to know that. First of body. And I need to know that. First of all, when I quickly move my head to the all, when I quickly move my head to the all, when I quickly move my head to the side, those little stones, as I'm side, those little stones, as I'm side, those little stones, as I'm referring to them, they quickly activate referring to them, they quickly activate referring to them, they quickly activate those hair cells in that one those hair cells in that one those hair cells in that one semic-ircular canal and send a signal semic-ircular canal and send a signal semic-ircular canal and send a signal off to my brain that my head just moved off to my brain that my head just moved off to my brain that my head just moved to the side. but also visual information to the side. but also visual information to the side. but also visual information slid past me my field of view. I slid past me my field of view. I slid past me my field of view. I didn't have to think about it but just didn't have to think about it but just didn't have to think about it but just slid past my field of view. And when slid past my field of view. And when slid past my field of view. And when those two signals those two signals those two signals combine my eyes then lock to a combine my eyes then lock to a combine my eyes then lock to a particular location. Now if this is at particular location. Now if this is at particular location. Now if this is at all complicated, you can actually all complicated, you can actually all complicated, you can actually uncouple these things. It's very easy to uncouple these things. It's very easy to uncouple these things. It's very easy to do. If you get the opportunity, you can do. If you get the opportunity, you can do. If you get the opportunity, you can do this safely wherever you are. You're do this safely wherever you are. You're do this safely wherever you are. You're going to stand up and you're going to going to stand up and you're going to going to stand up and you're going to look forward about 10 12 feet. You can look forward about 10 12 feet. You can look forward about 10 12 feet. You can pick a point on a wall. Stand on one leg pick a point on a wall. Stand on one leg pick a point on a wall. Stand on one leg and lift up the other leg. You can bend and lift up the other leg. You can bend and lift up the other leg. You can bend your knee if you like and just look off your knee if you like and just look off your knee if you like and just look off into the distance about 10 12 into the distance about 10 12 into the distance about 10 12 feet. If you can do that, if you can feet. If you can do that, if you can feet. If you can do that, if you can stand on one leg, now close your stand on one leg, now close your stand on one leg, now close your eyes. Chances are you're going to eyes. Chances are you're going to eyes. Chances are you're going to suddenly feel what scientists call suddenly feel what scientists call suddenly feel what scientists call postural sway. It is very hard to postural sway. It is very hard to postural sway. It is very hard to balance with your eyes closed. You might balance with your eyes closed. You might balance with your eyes closed. You might think, well, and if you think about think, well, and if you think about think, well, and if you think about that, it's like, what? Why is that? that, it's like, what? Why is that? that, it's like, what? Why is that? That's crazy. Why would it be that it's That's crazy. Why would it be that it's That's crazy. Why would it be that it's hard to balance with your eyes closed? hard to balance with your eyes closed? hard to balance with your eyes closed? Well, information about the visual world Well, information about the visual world Well, information about the visual world also feeds back onto this vestibular also feeds back onto this vestibular also feeds back onto this vestibular system. So, the vestibular system system. So, the vestibular system system. So, the vestibular system informs your vision and tells you where informs your vision and tells you where informs your vision and tells you where to move your eyes. And your eyes in to move your eyes. And your eyes in to move your eyes. And your eyes in their positioning tell your balance their positioning tell your balance their positioning tell your balance system, your vestibular system, how it system, your vestibular system, how it system, your vestibular system, how it should function. So, up until now, I've should function. So, up until now, I've should function. So, up until now, I've been talking about balance only in the been talking about balance only in the been talking about balance only in the static sense, like standing on one leg static sense, like standing on one leg static sense, like standing on one leg for instance. But that's a very for instance. But that's a very for instance. But that's a very artificial situation. Even though you artificial situation. Even though you artificial situation. Even though you can train balance that way, most people can train balance that way, most people can train balance that way, most people who want to enhance their sense of who want to enhance their sense of who want to enhance their sense of balance for sport or dance or some other balance for sport or dance or some other balance for sport or dance or some other endeavor want to engage balance in a endeavor want to engage balance in a endeavor want to engage balance in a dynamic way, meaning moving through lots dynamic way, meaning moving through lots dynamic way, meaning moving through lots of different planes of movement. For of different planes of movement. For of different planes of movement. For that, we need to consider that the that, we need to consider that the that, we need to consider that the vestibular system also cares about vestibular system also cares about vestibular system also cares about acceleration. So, it cares about head acceleration. So, it cares about head acceleration. So, it cares about head position. and it cares about eye position. and it cares about eye position. and it cares about eye position and where the eyes are and position and where the eyes are and position and where the eyes are and where you're looking, but it also cares where you're looking, but it also cares where you're looking, but it also cares about what direction you're moving and about what direction you're moving and about what direction you're moving and how fast. And one of the best things how fast. And one of the best things how fast. And one of the best things that you can do to enhance your sense of that you can do to enhance your sense of that you can do to enhance your sense of balance is to start to bring together balance is to start to bring together balance is to start to bring together your visual system, the semic-ircular your visual system, the semic-ircular your visual system, the semic-ircular canals of the inner ear and what we call canals of the inner ear and what we call canals of the inner ear and what we call linear acceleration. So, if I move linear acceleration. So, if I move linear acceleration. So, if I move forward in space rigidly forward in space rigidly forward in space rigidly upright, it's a vastly different upright, it's a vastly different upright, it's a vastly different situation than if I'm leaning to the to situation than if I'm leaning to the to situation than if I'm leaning to the to the side. One of the best ways to cultivate side. One of the best ways to cultivate side. One of the best ways to cultivate a better sense of balance literally a better sense of balance literally a better sense of balance literally within the sense organs and the neurons within the sense organs and the neurons within the sense organs and the neurons and the biology of the brain is to get and the biology of the brain is to get and the biology of the brain is to get into modes where we are accelerating into modes where we are accelerating into modes where we are accelerating forward. Typically, it's forward while forward. Typically, it's forward while forward. Typically, it's forward while also tilted with respect to gravity. also tilted with respect to gravity. also tilted with respect to gravity. Now, this would be the carve on a Now, this would be the carve on a Now, this would be the carve on a skateboard or on a surfboard or a skateboard or on a surfboard or a skateboard or on a surfboard or a snowboard. This would be the taking a snowboard. This would be the taking a snowboard. This would be the taking a corner on a bike while being able to corner on a bike while being able to corner on a bike while being able to lean safely. Of course, lean into the lean safely. Of course, lean into the lean safely. Of course, lean into the turn so that your head is actually turn so that your head is actually turn so that your head is actually tilted with respect to the earth. The tilted with respect to the earth. The tilted with respect to the earth. The head being tilted and the body being head being tilted and the body being head being tilted and the body being tilted while in acceleration, typically tilted while in acceleration, typically tilted while in acceleration, typically forward acceleration, but sometimes side forward acceleration, but sometimes side forward acceleration, but sometimes side to side, has a profound and positive to side, has a profound and positive to side, has a profound and positive effect on our sense of mood and effect on our sense of mood and effect on our sense of mood and well-being. And as I talked about in a well-being. And as I talked about in a well-being. And as I talked about in a previous episode, it can also enhance previous episode, it can also enhance previous episode, it can also enhance our ability to learn information in the our ability to learn information in the our ability to learn information in the period after generating those tilts and period after generating those tilts and period after generating those tilts and the acceleration. And that's because the acceleration. And that's because the acceleration. And that's because the cerebellum has these outputs to these cerebellum has these outputs to these cerebellum has these outputs to these areas of the brain that release these areas of the brain that release these areas of the brain that release these neurom modulators like serotonin and neurom modulators like serotonin and neurom modulators like serotonin and dopamine and they make us feel really dopamine and they make us feel really dopamine and they make us feel really good. Those modes of exercise seem to good. Those modes of exercise seem to good. Those modes of exercise seem to have an outsized effect both on our have an outsized effect both on our have an outsized effect both on our well-being and our ability to translate well-being and our ability to translate well-being and our ability to translate the vestibular balance that we achieve the vestibular balance that we achieve the vestibular balance that we achieve in those endeavors to our ability to in those endeavors to our ability to in those endeavors to our ability to balance while doing other things. So, I balance while doing other things. So, I balance while doing other things. So, I encourage people to get into modes of encourage people to get into modes of encourage people to get into modes of acceleration while tilted every once in acceleration while tilted every once in acceleration while tilted every once in a while, provided you can do it safely. a while, provided you can do it safely. a while, provided you can do it safely. It's an immensely powerful way to build It's an immensely powerful way to build It's an immensely powerful way to build up your skills in the realm of balance. up your skills in the realm of balance. up your skills in the realm of balance. And it's also for most people very, very And it's also for most people very, very And it's also for most people very, very pleasing. It feels really good because pleasing. It feels really good because pleasing. It feels really good because of the chemical relationship between of the chemical relationship between of the chemical relationship between forward acceleration and head tilt and forward acceleration and head tilt and forward acceleration and head tilt and body tilt. Once again, we've covered a body tilt. Once again, we've covered a body tilt. Once again, we've covered a tremendous amount of information. Now tremendous amount of information. Now tremendous amount of information. Now you know how you hear, how you make you know how you hear, how you make you know how you hear, how you make sense of the sounds in your environment, sense of the sounds in your environment, sense of the sounds in your environment, how those come into your ears, and how those come into your ears, and how those come into your ears, and how your brain processes them. In addition, your brain processes them. In addition, your brain processes them. In addition, we talked about things like low-level we talked about things like low-level we talked about things like low-level white noise and even binaural beats, white noise and even binaural beats, white noise and even binaural beats, which can be used to enhance certain which can be used to enhance certain which can be used to enhance certain brain states, certain rhythms within the brain states, certain rhythms within the brain states, certain rhythms within the brain, and even dopamine release in ways brain, and even dopamine release in ways brain, and even dopamine release in ways that allow you to learn better. And we that allow you to learn better. And we that allow you to learn better. And we talked about the balance system and this talked about the balance system and this talked about the balance system and this incredible relationship between your incredible relationship between your incredible relationship between your vestibular apparatus, meaning the vestibular apparatus, meaning the vestibular apparatus, meaning the portions of your inner ear that are portions of your inner ear that are portions of your inner ear that are responsible for balance and your visual responsible for balance and your visual responsible for balance and your visual system and gravity. And you can use system and gravity. And you can use system and gravity. And you can use those to enhance your learning as well those to enhance your learning as well those to enhance your learning as well as well as just to enhance your sense of as well as just to enhance your sense of as well as just to enhance your sense of balance. Last but not least, I'd like to balance. Last but not least, I'd like to balance. Last but not least, I'd like to thank you for your time and attention thank you for your time and attention thank you for your time and attention and desire and willingness to learn and desire and willingness to learn and desire and willingness to learn about vision and balance. And of course, about vision and balance. And of course, about vision and balance. And of course, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]