People are now stacking their GLP-1 as People are now stacking their GLP-1 as People are now stacking their GLP-1 as their insulin sensitivity tool, their insulin sensitivity tool, their insulin sensitivity tool, their growth hormone or their GHR growth hormone or their GHR growth hormone or their GHR &gt;&gt; and their androin modulation therapies &gt;&gt; and their androin modulation therapies &gt;&gt; and their androin modulation therapies as this trinity stack as this trinity stack as this trinity stack &gt;&gt; trinity stuff &gt;&gt; trinity stuff &gt;&gt; trinity stuff &gt;&gt; to get very fit, very healthy quickly. &gt;&gt; to get very fit, very healthy quickly. &gt;&gt; to get very fit, very healthy quickly. So a lot of these transformations you So a lot of these transformations you So a lot of these transformations you see in CEOs and celebrities and stuff is see in CEOs and celebrities and stuff is see in CEOs and celebrities and stuff is using a combination of those three using a combination of those three using a combination of those three things. You know your TRT plus teptide things. You know your TRT plus teptide things. You know your TRT plus teptide or retride whatever it may be and then or retride whatever it may be and then or retride whatever it may be and then using a growth hormone modulation using a growth hormone modulation using a growth hormone modulation whether if you can afford growth hormone whether if you can afford growth hormone whether if you can afford growth hormone or testimon. And you're seeing people or testimon. And you're seeing people or testimon. And you're seeing people lose a lot of fat gain a lot of muscle lose a lot of fat gain a lot of muscle lose a lot of fat gain a lot of muscle in short amounts of time. Is that in short amounts of time. Is that in short amounts of time. Is that healthy? We'll find out. But that is healthy? We'll find out. But that is healthy? We'll find out. But that is like the celebrity protocol. Welcome to like the celebrity protocol. Welcome to like the celebrity protocol. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we the Huberman Lab podcast where we the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools discuss science and science-based tools discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Abu Bakri, an internal today is Dr. Abu Bakri, an internal today is Dr. Abu Bakri, an internal medicine physician who is also extremely medicine physician who is also extremely medicine physician who is also extremely knowledgeable on the science and use of knowledgeable on the science and use of knowledgeable on the science and use of peptides. When I say peptides, I mean peptides. When I say peptides, I mean peptides. When I say peptides, I mean both FDA approved peptides such as the both FDA approved peptides such as the both FDA approved peptides such as the GLP agonist. You probably know these as GLP agonist. You probably know these as GLP agonist. You probably know these as things like Ompic, Monaro, and things like Ompic, Monaro, and things like Ompic, Monaro, and Retatrutide, as well as peptides such as Retatrutide, as well as peptides such as Retatrutide, as well as peptides such as body protection compound 157 or BPC57, body protection compound 157 or BPC57, body protection compound 157 or BPC57, which as you'll learn today has a very which as you'll learn today has a very which as you'll learn today has a very long history of being used in humans for long history of being used in humans for long history of being used in humans for gut health and tissue repair, and many gut health and tissue repair, and many gut health and tissue repair, and many interesting studies in animals interesting studies in animals interesting studies in animals supporting its potential use in humans, supporting its potential use in humans, supporting its potential use in humans, but a minimum of formal studies in but a minimum of formal studies in but a minimum of formal studies in humans, meaning one. We discuss BPC-157, humans, meaning one. We discuss BPC-157, humans, meaning one. We discuss BPC-157, what it does and how, as well as things what it does and how, as well as things what it does and how, as well as things like growth hormone secrets like growth hormone secrets like growth hormone secrets like tessamarellin, MK677 and others. And we tessamarellin, MK677 and others. And we tessamarellin, MK677 and others. And we talk about things like GHK copper, which talk about things like GHK copper, which talk about things like GHK copper, which nowadays many people are using to nowadays many people are using to nowadays many people are using to promote collagen synthesis and repair promote collagen synthesis and repair promote collagen synthesis and repair for aesthetic reasons like improving for aesthetic reasons like improving for aesthetic reasons like improving skin, hair, and so on. We also talk skin, hair, and so on. We also talk skin, hair, and so on. We also talk about peptides that have been studied about peptides that have been studied about peptides that have been studied for the purpose of DNA repair and for the purpose of DNA repair and for the purpose of DNA repair and longevity like epithelen and pinealin longevity like epithelen and pinealin longevity like epithelen and pinealin which also have been touted to improve which also have been touted to improve which also have been touted to improve REM sleep and for improving cognitive REM sleep and for improving cognitive REM sleep and for improving cognitive function. You'll also learn what is function. You'll also learn what is function. You'll also learn what is known and what is not known about these known and what is not known about these known and what is not known about these peptides both in terms of function and peptides both in terms of function and peptides both in terms of function and safety. During today's episode, you will safety. During today's episode, you will safety. During today's episode, you will come to appreciate that Dr. Bachri has come to appreciate that Dr. Bachri has come to appreciate that Dr. Bachri has truly encyclopedic knowledge about these truly encyclopedic knowledge about these truly encyclopedic knowledge about these peptides. He is also formerly trained as peptides. He is also formerly trained as peptides. He is also formerly trained as a physician and as a consequence you a physician and as a consequence you a physician and as a consequence you will learn how to think about peptides will learn how to think about peptides will learn how to think about peptides based on whether or not they have known based on whether or not they have known based on whether or not they have known receptors or not. That turns out to be receptors or not. That turns out to be receptors or not. That turns out to be very important and what their real very important and what their real very important and what their real safety profiles are as well as what safety profiles are as well as what safety profiles are as well as what particular concerns you ought to have if particular concerns you ought to have if particular concerns you ought to have if you are considering using peptides of you are considering using peptides of you are considering using peptides of any kind. As a formerly trained any kind. As a formerly trained any kind. As a formerly trained board-certified physician, he comes at board-certified physician, he comes at board-certified physician, he comes at this topic through the lens of a this topic through the lens of a this topic through the lens of a physician, but also somebody who is very physician, but also somebody who is very physician, but also somebody who is very interested in the current status and interested in the current status and interested in the current status and future of peptide medicine. Today's future of peptide medicine. Today's future of peptide medicine. Today's discussion, thanks to Dr. Bacher, is a discussion, thanks to Dr. Bacher, is a discussion, thanks to Dr. Bacher, is a true masterclass on peptides. By the end true masterclass on peptides. By the end true masterclass on peptides. By the end of today's discussion, I promise you, of today's discussion, I promise you, of today's discussion, I promise you, again, thanks to him, that you will be again, thanks to him, that you will be again, thanks to him, that you will be among the most informed, doctor or among the most informed, doctor or among the most informed, doctor or otherwise, about peptides from the GLPS otherwise, about peptides from the GLPS otherwise, about peptides from the GLPS to BPC57 and all the others that I to BPC57 and all the others that I to BPC57 and all the others that I mentioned, including some that I didn't mentioned, including some that I didn't mentioned, including some that I didn't mention here in the introduction. So, it mention here in the introduction. So, it mention here in the introduction. So, it is a real gift and honor to have this is a real gift and honor to have this is a real gift and honor to have this knowledge presented to all of us. So, knowledge presented to all of us. So, knowledge presented to all of us. So, buckle up. You're about to learn a lot buckle up. You're about to learn a lot buckle up. You're about to learn a lot about peptides. Before we begin, I'd about peptides. Before we begin, I'd about peptides. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science to consumer information about science to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. Abu And now for my discussion with Dr. Abu And now for my discussion with Dr. Abu Bakri. Dr. Abu Bakri, welcome. Good to Bakri. Dr. Abu Bakri, welcome. Good to Bakri. Dr. Abu Bakri, welcome. Good to be here. Peptides, huge topic and huge be here. Peptides, huge topic and huge be here. Peptides, huge topic and huge category of biology and medicine. So, we category of biology and medicine. So, we category of biology and medicine. So, we should start off by breaking this into should start off by breaking this into should start off by breaking this into categories so that people can wrap their categories so that people can wrap their categories so that people can wrap their minds around it because that word minds around it because that word minds around it because that word peptides has come to mean stuff people peptides has come to mean stuff people peptides has come to mean stuff people buy and take and maybe should or buy and take and maybe should or buy and take and maybe should or shouldn't buy and take. But there's a shouldn't buy and take. But there's a shouldn't buy and take. But there's a lot of important and quite simple lot of important and quite simple lot of important and quite simple biology to understand before anyone biology to understand before anyone biology to understand before anyone should even be thinking about any of should even be thinking about any of should even be thinking about any of that. So if I just push the word that. So if I just push the word that. So if I just push the word peptides towards you, how do you carve peptides towards you, how do you carve peptides towards you, how do you carve that up in terms of thinking about it as that up in terms of thinking about it as that up in terms of thinking about it as an MD as a clinician and maybe also put an MD as a clinician and maybe also put an MD as a clinician and maybe also put yourself into the mind of a interested yourself into the mind of a interested yourself into the mind of a interested let's call it a peptide curious person let's call it a peptide curious person let's call it a peptide curious person out there. So scientifically I would say out there. So scientifically I would say out there. So scientifically I would say it's one of the languages of the human it's one of the languages of the human it's one of the languages of the human body right so the body likes these body right so the body likes these body right so the body likes these different languages to communicate different languages to communicate different languages to communicate between cells going from DNA to RNA to between cells going from DNA to RNA to between cells going from DNA to RNA to proteins which are can be broken down as proteins which are can be broken down as proteins which are can be broken down as polyeptides and peptides and peptides polyeptides and peptides and peptides polyeptides and peptides and peptides are one of these languages steroid are one of these languages steroid are one of these languages steroid hormones are another language and then hormones are another language and then hormones are another language and then peptides can be broken down further into peptides can be broken down further into peptides can be broken down further into subcategories whether or not they have subcategories whether or not they have subcategories whether or not they have receptors or they have no receptor receptors or they have no receptor receptors or they have no receptor &gt;&gt; and that kind of changes the clinical &gt;&gt; and that kind of changes the clinical &gt;&gt; and that kind of changes the clinical effects we'll see like the GLP1's which effects we'll see like the GLP1's which effects we'll see like the GLP1's which have a very strong clinical effect have a very strong clinical effect have a very strong clinical effect compared to these obscure peptides like compared to these obscure peptides like compared to these obscure peptides like BBC57, TB500, TB4 that don't have a BBC57, TB500, TB4 that don't have a BBC57, TB500, TB4 that don't have a clear target. clear target. clear target. &gt;&gt; They have receptors but they just have &gt;&gt; They have receptors but they just have &gt;&gt; They have receptors but they just have many of them or they don't even have many of them or they don't even have many of them or they don't even have receptors. &gt;&gt; We don't have a receptor identified for &gt;&gt; We don't have a receptor identified for &gt;&gt; We don't have a receptor identified for BBC57 or TB4. Just stopping you right BBC57 or TB4. Just stopping you right BBC57 or TB4. Just stopping you right there. There's a very interesting there. There's a very interesting there. There's a very interesting distinction. I don't think anyone else distinction. I don't think anyone else distinction. I don't think anyone else has described peptides this way. has described peptides this way. has described peptides this way. &gt;&gt; Let's take BPC57 for the moment. We're &gt;&gt; Let's take BPC57 for the moment. We're &gt;&gt; Let's take BPC57 for the moment. We're going to talk a lot about it today. If going to talk a lot about it today. If going to talk a lot about it today. If it doesn't have a receptor, what are it doesn't have a receptor, what are it doesn't have a receptor, what are some ways that it could impact cells and some ways that it could impact cells and some ways that it could impact cells and organs and so forth? Or is it that there organs and so forth? Or is it that there organs and so forth? Or is it that there are receptors, we just don't know what are receptors, we just don't know what are receptors, we just don't know what they are? they are? they are? &gt;&gt; It could be that the latter that maybe &gt;&gt; It could be that the latter that maybe &gt;&gt; It could be that the latter that maybe the receptor is still elusive or it the receptor is still elusive or it the receptor is still elusive or it could be that it's modifying certain could be that it's modifying certain could be that it's modifying certain proteins that already exist or linking proteins that already exist or linking proteins that already exist or linking different pepi uh proteins together in a different pepi uh proteins together in a different pepi uh proteins together in a more favorable fashion for gene more favorable fashion for gene more favorable fashion for gene transcription. The Russian peptides are transcription. The Russian peptides are transcription. The Russian peptides are all epigenetic modifiers that they bind all epigenetic modifiers that they bind all epigenetic modifiers that they bind to the groove of the DNA in certain to the groove of the DNA in certain to the groove of the DNA in certain spots that either open up or close the spots that either open up or close the spots that either open up or close the chromatin to certain areas of genetic chromatin to certain areas of genetic chromatin to certain areas of genetic expression. And they've modeled this out expression. And they've modeled this out expression. And they've modeled this out &gt;&gt; like a steroid hormone. So steroid &gt;&gt; like a steroid hormone. So steroid &gt;&gt; like a steroid hormone. So steroid hormones bind like they bind to a like hormones bind like they bind to a like hormones bind like they bind to a like the andro receptor binds DHT or the andro receptor binds DHT or the andro receptor binds DHT or testosterone goes into the nucleus turns testosterone goes into the nucleus turns testosterone goes into the nucleus turns on all the androgenic genes. on all the androgenic genes. on all the androgenic genes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like puberty is a good example of &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like puberty is a good example of &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like puberty is a good example of that. &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. So like pinealon &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. So like pinealon &gt;&gt; Yes. Exactly. So like pinealon that we've talked about uh shuttles uh that we've talked about uh shuttles uh that we've talked about uh shuttles uh heat shock proteins with androen heat shock proteins with androen heat shock proteins with androen receptors. &gt;&gt; Got it. So if I just pause us for a &gt;&gt; Got it. So if I just pause us for a &gt;&gt; Got it. So if I just pause us for a second, we should think about this word second, we should think about this word second, we should think about this word peptides in two major categories at peptides in two major categories at peptides in two major categories at least. Yep. least. Yep. least. Yep. &gt;&gt; One is has known receptors &gt;&gt; One is has known receptors &gt;&gt; One is has known receptors &gt;&gt; plural like the GLPS. Y &gt;&gt; plural like the GLPS. Y &gt;&gt; plural like the GLPS. Y &gt;&gt; the other category would be does not &gt;&gt; the other category would be does not &gt;&gt; the other category would be does not have known receptors might have known receptors might have known receptors might have receptors but can definitely impact receptors but can definitely impact receptors but can definitely impact biology in interesting ways or so say biology in interesting ways or so say biology in interesting ways or so say the animal data. the animal data. the animal data. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; A lot of animal data. &gt;&gt; A lot of animal data. &gt;&gt; A lot of animal data. &gt;&gt; All right. I know a lot of people are &gt;&gt; All right. I know a lot of people are &gt;&gt; All right. I know a lot of people are interested in GLPs and I want to go interested in GLPs and I want to go interested in GLPs and I want to go there. But because I know most people there. But because I know most people there. But because I know most people are probably listening to this foremost are probably listening to this foremost are probably listening to this foremost because they want to hear about the because they want to hear about the because they want to hear about the other stuff. Let's start with BPC57. other stuff. Let's start with BPC57. other stuff. Let's start with BPC57. What is it? What do we know about it? What is it? What do we know about it? What is it? What do we know about it? We'll explore safety and what is your We'll explore safety and what is your We'll explore safety and what is your stance on it from the perspective of a stance on it from the perspective of a stance on it from the perspective of a consumer and a clinician. So first of consumer and a clinician. So first of consumer and a clinician. So first of all, what is BPC57? all, what is BPC57? all, what is BPC57? &gt;&gt; The best way to look at it is, you know, &gt;&gt; The best way to look at it is, you know, &gt;&gt; The best way to look at it is, you know, as humans, we've been looking for as humans, we've been looking for as humans, we've been looking for medicines in plants for thousands of medicines in plants for thousands of medicines in plants for thousands of years. And in the last, let's say 150 years. And in the last, let's say 150 years. And in the last, let's say 150 years, we've been looking for medicines years, we've been looking for medicines years, we've been looking for medicines in cells. So animal derived versus plant in cells. So animal derived versus plant in cells. So animal derived versus plant derived medicines is the way to plant derived medicines is the way to plant derived medicines is the way to think about it. You think about aspirin, think about it. You think about aspirin, think about it. You think about aspirin, you think about metformin, the statins, you think about metformin, the statins, you think about metformin, the statins, those were all discovered in you know those were all discovered in you know those were all discovered in you know plant tissues. um stats more so fungi plant tissues. um stats more so fungi plant tissues. um stats more so fungi but you get the point. Now we've been but you get the point. Now we've been but you get the point. Now we've been looking into animal tissues to find looking into animal tissues to find looking into animal tissues to find cures, medicines, treatments. So a group cures, medicines, treatments. So a group cures, medicines, treatments. So a group in Croatia in the '90s looks out for in Croatia in the '90s looks out for in Croatia in the '90s looks out for this peptide called BPC that they this peptide called BPC that they this peptide called BPC that they and eventually named BPC. It's a $40,000 and eventually named BPC. It's a $40,000 and eventually named BPC. It's a $40,000 dolton giant peptide called BPC. BBC7 is dolton giant peptide called BPC. BBC7 is dolton giant peptide called BPC. BBC7 is 15 amino acids from that giant peptide. 15 amino acids from that giant peptide. 15 amino acids from that giant peptide. We don't naturally make BPC157. That's We don't naturally make BPC157. That's We don't naturally make BPC157. That's what you'll commonly hear online. We what you'll commonly hear online. We what you'll commonly hear online. We make BBC the big uh protein. Did this make BBC the big uh protein. Did this make BBC the big uh protein. Did this group go looking for body protection group go looking for body protection group go looking for body protection compound? For those that aren't familiar compound? For those that aren't familiar compound? For those that aren't familiar in the laboratory, you can take a in the laboratory, you can take a in the laboratory, you can take a tissue, grind it up. You can do what's tissue, grind it up. You can do what's tissue, grind it up. You can do what's called fractionation. You can start called fractionation. You can start called fractionation. You can start separating basically cells and tissues separating basically cells and tissues separating basically cells and tissues and liquids according to the size of and liquids according to the size of and liquids according to the size of different proteins. Like different proteins. Like different proteins. Like different filters will bring let just like certain filters will bring let just like certain filters will bring let just like certain filters will let sand through or pebbles filters will let sand through or pebbles filters will let sand through or pebbles through or boulders through. That's kind through or boulders through. That's kind through or boulders through. That's kind of what you do. And then you figure out of what you do. And then you figure out of what you do. And then you figure out what the sequences are and then you what the sequences are and then you what the sequences are and then you throw them on cells or put them into throw them on cells or put them into throw them on cells or put them into animals and you try and figure out what animals and you try and figure out what animals and you try and figure out what they do. Why were they motivated to look they do. Why were they motivated to look they do. Why were they motivated to look for what eventually became BPC? So for what eventually became BPC? So for what eventually became BPC? So Pavlov, the famous uh scientist that Pavlov, the famous uh scientist that Pavlov, the famous uh scientist that would do the dog the experiments on the would do the dog the experiments on the would do the dog the experiments on the dogs with the bell and making the dogs with the bell and making the dogs with the bell and making the dogs salivate. The other work he did was dogs salivate. The other work he did was dogs salivate. The other work he did was on gastric juices of dogs. What he'd do on gastric juices of dogs. What he'd do on gastric juices of dogs. What he'd do is he'd put a hole in the dogs stomachs. is he'd put a hole in the dogs stomachs. is he'd put a hole in the dogs stomachs. He would um feed them food and then get He would um feed them food and then get He would um feed them food and then get the gastric juices and sell that as a the gastric juices and sell that as a the gastric juices and sell that as a medicine. &gt;&gt; That's how he made his money. &gt;&gt; That's how he made his money. &gt;&gt; That's how he made his money. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that was part of his business. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that was part of his business. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that was part of his business. &gt;&gt; So he got a Nobel Prize. He was also &gt;&gt; So he got a Nobel Prize. He was also &gt;&gt; So he got a Nobel Prize. He was also kind of like what did he have a like a kind of like what did he have a like a kind of like what did he have a like a um a call code? It was like enter um a call code? It was like enter um a call code? It was like enter pavlova for discount at checkout. pavlova for discount at checkout. pavlova for discount at checkout. Yeah. Amazing. Yeah. Amazing. Yeah. Amazing. &gt;&gt; So this is BBC before BBC57 exists. &gt;&gt; So this is BBC before BBC57 exists. &gt;&gt; So this is BBC before BBC57 exists. There's probably other peptides and There's probably other peptides and There's probably other peptides and compounds in there, but they found compounds in there, but they found compounds in there, but they found that gastric juices had positive effects that gastric juices had positive effects that gastric juices had positive effects on healing on people that had, you know, on healing on people that had, you know, on healing on people that had, you know, gird and these kind of gird and these kind of gird and these kind of &gt;&gt; Wait, so people were taking BPC in the &gt;&gt; Wait, so people were taking BPC in the &gt;&gt; Wait, so people were taking BPC in the time of Pavlov? time of Pavlov? time of Pavlov? &gt;&gt; They didn't know what BBC was. They were &gt;&gt; They didn't know what BBC was. They were &gt;&gt; They didn't know what BBC was. They were taking gastric juices from dogs taking gastric juices from dogs taking gastric juices from dogs &gt;&gt; for what? &gt;&gt; for what? &gt;&gt; for what? &gt;&gt; GI distress, GI discomfort. Uh some &gt;&gt; GI distress, GI discomfort. Uh some &gt;&gt; GI distress, GI discomfort. Uh some people were trying for wound healing. people were trying for wound healing. people were trying for wound healing. There was a big push in this era for There was a big push in this era for There was a big push in this era for like finding animal tissues and putting like finding animal tissues and putting like finding animal tissues and putting them into humans. That science fizzled them into humans. That science fizzled them into humans. That science fizzled out. At the same time, there's a out. At the same time, there's a out. At the same time, there's a scientist Hansely that's coming up with scientist Hansely that's coming up with scientist Hansely that's coming up with uh the stress adaptation theory and he uh the stress adaptation theory and he uh the stress adaptation theory and he notices that animals are stressed out. notices that animals are stressed out. notices that animals are stressed out. Three things happens to them. Their Three things happens to them. Their Three things happens to them. Their adrenals get really big so they make adrenals get really big so they make adrenals get really big so they make more cortisol. Their gastric lining gets more cortisol. Their gastric lining gets more cortisol. Their gastric lining gets destroyed and then their thymus gland destroyed and then their thymus gland destroyed and then their thymus gland and their lymphatics shrink down. And he and their lymphatics shrink down. And he and their lymphatics shrink down. And he has this published paper where you he has this published paper where you he has this published paper where you have clear adrenal from a stressed have clear adrenal from a stressed have clear adrenal from a stressed animal versus a non-stressed animal. A animal versus a non-stressed animal. A animal versus a non-stressed animal. A thymus from an animal that's stressed thymus from an animal that's stressed thymus from an animal that's stressed versus not. So this group is looking and versus not. So this group is looking and versus not. So this group is looking and thinking hey Pavlov had this gastric thinking hey Pavlov had this gastric thinking hey Pavlov had this gastric juice. Hansely said that there was juice. Hansely said that there was juice. Hansely said that there was damage when during stress there must be damage when during stress there must be damage when during stress there must be some kind of cytorotective or some kind of cytorotective or some kind of cytorotective or organoprotective compound in the gut. organoprotective compound in the gut. organoprotective compound in the gut. The stomach is a very rich endocrine uh The stomach is a very rich endocrine uh The stomach is a very rich endocrine uh tissue. It makes ghrelin all these other tissue. It makes ghrelin all these other tissue. It makes ghrelin all these other hormones. So they're like there must be hormones. So they're like there must be hormones. So they're like there must be something else in the gut juice that something else in the gut juice that something else in the gut juice that protects the gut lining from further protects the gut lining from further protects the gut lining from further damage. &gt;&gt; Were people drinking the gastric juices &gt;&gt; Were people drinking the gastric juices &gt;&gt; Were people drinking the gastric juices of dogs? Were they injecting them? of dogs? Were they injecting them? of dogs? Were they injecting them? &gt;&gt; Drinking was mo mostly what they did. &gt;&gt; Drinking was mo mostly what they did. &gt;&gt; Drinking was mo mostly what they did. And it was supposed to be a medical And it was supposed to be a medical And it was supposed to be a medical elixir presumably. It had many elixir presumably. It had many elixir presumably. It had many things in it, many peptides. Not things in it, many peptides. Not things in it, many peptides. Not &gt;&gt; this pepsia and like upset stomach and &gt;&gt; this pepsia and like upset stomach and &gt;&gt; this pepsia and like upset stomach and this kind of stuff is what people were this kind of stuff is what people were this kind of stuff is what people were thinking. &gt;&gt; Do the reports point to the fact that it &gt;&gt; Do the reports point to the fact that it &gt;&gt; Do the reports point to the fact that it might have worked independent of what might have worked independent of what might have worked independent of what was sold on uh Dr. Pavlov's non-existent was sold on uh Dr. Pavlov's non-existent was sold on uh Dr. Pavlov's non-existent website. &gt;&gt; This was in like the early 1900s. And &gt;&gt; This was in like the early 1900s. And &gt;&gt; This was in like the early 1900s. And then uh Soia was what 1930s then uh Soia was what 1930s then uh Soia was what 1930s &gt;&gt; I think. So yeah, 100 years ago. &gt;&gt; I think. So yeah, 100 years ago. &gt;&gt; I think. So yeah, 100 years ago. &gt;&gt; Someone will correct us if we're wrong. &gt;&gt; Someone will correct us if we're wrong. &gt;&gt; Someone will correct us if we're wrong. And this other group in Croatia And this other group in Croatia And this other group in Croatia &gt;&gt; was 91. &gt;&gt; was 91. &gt;&gt; was 91. &gt;&gt; 91. Okay, &gt;&gt; 91. Okay, &gt;&gt; 91. Okay, &gt;&gt; their first paper talks about this like, &gt;&gt; their first paper talks about this like, &gt;&gt; their first paper talks about this like, hey, there must be some kind of hey, there must be some kind of hey, there must be some kind of compound. They they identified the big compound. They they identified the big compound. They they identified the big 40 Dalton protein BPC. And then they 40 Dalton protein BPC. And then they 40 Dalton protein BPC. And then they were like, what's causing they were like, what's causing they were like, what's causing the actual biological effects? They the actual biological effects? They the actual biological effects? They identified BPC57, the 15 amino acid identified BPC57, the 15 amino acid identified BPC57, the 15 amino acid peptide that's causing all these peptide that's causing all these peptide that's causing all these effects. There's actually more peptides effects. There's actually more peptides effects. There's actually more peptides in gastric juices that some other in gastric juices that some other in gastric juices that some other scientists may or may not have already scientists may or may not have already scientists may or may not have already identified. This field of peptides going identified. This field of peptides going identified. This field of peptides going to be very interesting because almost to be very interesting because almost to be very interesting because almost every organ has a signature of peptides. every organ has a signature of peptides. every organ has a signature of peptides. Like if you think back Dr. Vladimir Like if you think back Dr. Vladimir Like if you think back Dr. Vladimir Vulvich in 1850s 1880s finds carnosine Vulvich in 1850s 1880s finds carnosine Vulvich in 1850s 1880s finds carnosine and carnitine in muscle of cattle. So and carnitine in muscle of cattle. So and carnitine in muscle of cattle. So you can think that the first peptides you can think that the first peptides you can think that the first peptides that are found are carnosine and then that are found are carnosine and then that are found are carnosine and then carnitine is the amino acid that's that carnitine is the amino acid that's that carnitine is the amino acid that's that have positive effects on strength have positive effects on strength have positive effects on strength training and performance and different training and performance and different training and performance and different effects there. But that was the whole effects there. But that was the whole effects there. But that was the whole idea is like hey there's muscle peptides idea is like hey there's muscle peptides idea is like hey there's muscle peptides that may have muscle effects, right? Gut that may have muscle effects, right? Gut that may have muscle effects, right? Gut peptides might have gut effects. peptides might have gut effects. peptides might have gut effects. &gt;&gt; So this Croatian group um isolates this &gt;&gt; So this Croatian group um isolates this &gt;&gt; So this Croatian group um isolates this 15 amino acid kind of mini segment Yep. 15 amino acid kind of mini segment Yep. 15 amino acid kind of mini segment Yep. of BPC. They and others start injecting of BPC. They and others start injecting of BPC. They and others start injecting into mice inducing injuries to nerve to into mice inducing injuries to nerve to into mice inducing injuries to nerve to tendon. Maybe describe a few of those tendon. Maybe describe a few of those tendon. Maybe describe a few of those effects. I' I'm familiar with that effects. I' I'm familiar with that effects. I' I'm familiar with that literature, but I can tell that you are literature, but I can tell that you are literature, but I can tell that you are far more familiar with it. So, what are far more familiar with it. So, what are far more familiar with it. So, what are some of the impressive effects that they some of the impressive effects that they some of the impressive effects that they observed that led to where we are today? observed that led to where we are today? observed that led to where we are today? So, they did all kinds of horrible So, they did all kinds of horrible So, they did all kinds of horrible things to these mice. They would, you things to these mice. They would, you things to these mice. They would, you know, sever tendons and then give them know, sever tendons and then give them know, sever tendons and then give them BPC through oral or injectable BPC through oral or injectable BPC through oral or injectable intraparitinal uh administrations and intraparitinal uh administrations and intraparitinal uh administrations and they'd have faster healing times. They they'd have faster healing times. They they'd have faster healing times. They would sever ACL of the mice. they would sever ACL of the mice. they would sever ACL of the mice. they would uh do burn wounds. So when a patient has uh do burn wounds. So when a patient has uh do burn wounds. So when a patient has a burn wound in like the ICU, they end a burn wound in like the ICU, they end a burn wound in like the ICU, they end up having crazy gastric ulcers, but if up having crazy gastric ulcers, but if up having crazy gastric ulcers, but if they were able to put BBC on topically they were able to put BBC on topically they were able to put BBC on topically for the mouse, they would have no for the mouse, they would have no for the mouse, they would have no gastric ulcers. They name it as this gastric ulcers. They name it as this gastric ulcers. They name it as this anti-stress compound is how they anti-stress compound is how they anti-stress compound is how they look at it. Now, when they do that they look at it. Now, when they do that they look at it. Now, when they do that Achilles paper on the mice, that's what Achilles paper on the mice, that's what Achilles paper on the mice, that's what explodes the bodybuilder interest and explodes the bodybuilder interest and explodes the bodybuilder interest and leads us to today where we are like, oh, leads us to today where we are like, oh, leads us to today where we are like, oh, MSK injuries must be BPC, tendons and MSK injuries must be BPC, tendons and MSK injuries must be BPC, tendons and muscle injuries. But the and muscle injuries. But the and muscle injuries. But the original idea of BBC was to use it as a original idea of BBC was to use it as a original idea of BBC was to use it as a gastric treatment, not to use it as a gastric treatment, not to use it as a gastric treatment, not to use it as a muscoskeleletal. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor eight. Eightle acknowledge our sponsor eight. Eightle acknowledge our sponsor eight. Eightle makes smart mattress covers with makes smart mattress covers with makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking cooling, heating, and sleep tracking cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure capacity. One of the best ways to ensure capacity. One of the best ways to ensure you get a great night's sleep is to make you get a great night's sleep is to make you get a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sure that the temperature of your sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall asleep that's because in order to fall asleep that's because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body and stay deeply asleep, your body and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an eightle mattress been sleeping on an eightle mattress been sleeping on an eightle mattress cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has cover for nearly 5 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. The latest eight quality of my sleep. The latest eight quality of my sleep. The latest eight model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It has so many incredible features. For has so many incredible features. For has so many incredible features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called autopilot, which is an AI engine that autopilot, which is an AI engine that autopilot, which is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns and then learns your sleep patterns and then learns your sleep patterns and then adjusts the temperature of your sleeping adjusts the temperature of your sleeping adjusts the temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleep environment across different sleep environment across different sleep stages. It'll even elevate your head if stages. It'll even elevate your head if stages. It'll even elevate your head if you're snoring, and it makes other you're snoring, and it makes other you're snoring, and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd shifts to optimize your sleep. If you'd like to try eight, go to like to try eight, go to like to try eight, go to eight.com/huberman to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. to get up to $350 off the new Pod 5. Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, Eight ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's 8.com/huberman that's 8.com/huberman that's 8.com/huberman to save up to $350. Today's episode is to save up to $350. Today's episode is to save up to $350. Today's episode is also brought to us by Lingo. Lingo is an also brought to us by Lingo. Lingo is an also brought to us by Lingo. Lingo is an everyday wearable that tracks your everyday wearable that tracks your everyday wearable that tracks your glucose 247. Glucose drives a lot of key glucose 247. Glucose drives a lot of key glucose 247. Glucose drives a lot of key processes that support energy, body processes that support energy, body processes that support energy, body composition, and long-term health. When composition, and long-term health. When composition, and long-term health. When glucose is constantly spiking and glucose is constantly spiking and glucose is constantly spiking and crashing, that's where we can start to crashing, that's where we can start to crashing, that's where we can start to see metabolic dysfunction. And over see metabolic dysfunction. And over see metabolic dysfunction. And over time, that can even progress to time, that can even progress to time, that can even progress to pre-diabetes. Right now, about 115 pre-diabetes. Right now, about 115 pre-diabetes. Right now, about 115 million adults in the US have million adults in the US have million adults in the US have pre-diabetes. Most don't know it, and a pre-diabetes. Most don't know it, and a pre-diabetes. Most don't know it, and a higher percentage of men have it than higher percentage of men have it than higher percentage of men have it than women do. Often, there aren't clear women do. Often, there aren't clear women do. Often, there aren't clear symptoms of pre-diabetes early on, so symptoms of pre-diabetes early on, so symptoms of pre-diabetes early on, so people don't tend to look into it. But people don't tend to look into it. But people don't tend to look into it. But the fact is that metabolic health is the fact is that metabolic health is the fact is that metabolic health is shaping how your body functions every shaping how your body functions every shaping how your body functions every day, whether you feel it or not. day, whether you feel it or not. day, whether you feel it or not. Tracking your glucose with Lingo can Tracking your glucose with Lingo can Tracking your glucose with Lingo can help you see how food, activity, and help you see how food, activity, and help you see how food, activity, and stress impact your glucose throughout stress impact your glucose throughout stress impact your glucose throughout the day. I personally have used Lingo the day. I personally have used Lingo the day. I personally have used Lingo and it's been an invaluable tool for and it's been an invaluable tool for and it's been an invaluable tool for improving my metabolic health. If you improving my metabolic health. If you improving my metabolic health. If you would like to try Lingo, Hubberman Lab would like to try Lingo, Hubberman Lab would like to try Lingo, Hubberman Lab listeners in the US and UK can save 10% listeners in the US and UK can save 10% listeners in the US and UK can save 10% on a four-week plan. Just visit on a four-week plan. Just visit on a four-week plan. Just visit hellingo.com/huberman for more information. Terms and for more information. Terms and for more information. Terms and conditions apply. Again, that's conditions apply. Again, that's conditions apply. Again, that's hellingo.com/huberman. &gt;&gt; Let me pause you here. People are &gt;&gt; Let me pause you here. People are &gt;&gt; Let me pause you here. People are probably saying, should I take it or probably saying, should I take it or probably saying, should I take it or should I? Just hang in there, folks, should I? Just hang in there, folks, should I? Just hang in there, folks, because this is really, really because this is really, really because this is really, really important. What is so striking to me important. What is so striking to me important. What is so striking to me about BPC and by the way that's not an about BPC and by the way that's not an about BPC and by the way that's not an endorsement for BPC. Just what's so endorsement for BPC. Just what's so endorsement for BPC. Just what's so striking to me because my lab worked for striking to me because my lab worked for striking to me because my lab worked for a long time on optic nerve repair and a long time on optic nerve repair and a long time on optic nerve repair and neural regeneration. Nerves don't like neural regeneration. Nerves don't like neural regeneration. Nerves don't like to regenerate in the central nervous to regenerate in the central nervous to regenerate in the central nervous system. Peripheral nervous system they system. Peripheral nervous system they system. Peripheral nervous system they do it they do it slowly but they do it. do it they do it slowly but they do it. do it they do it slowly but they do it. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Not in the central nervous system. Ask &gt;&gt; Not in the central nervous system. Ask &gt;&gt; Not in the central nervous system. Ask anyone who's had a stroke or an optic anyone who's had a stroke or an optic anyone who's had a stroke or an optic nerve injury. It's a tough road at best. nerve injury. It's a tough road at best. nerve injury. It's a tough road at best. There are data that I've seen with my There are data that I've seen with my There are data that I've seen with my own eyes that show that, you know, you own eyes that show that, you know, you own eyes that show that, you know, you can accelerate can accelerate can accelerate healing of tendon, of ligament, of nerve healing of tendon, of ligament, of nerve healing of tendon, of ligament, of nerve pathways &gt;&gt; in animals. Yes. &gt;&gt; in animals. Yes. &gt;&gt; in animals. Yes. &gt;&gt; In animals. Yes. Thank you. And that it &gt;&gt; In animals. Yes. Thank you. And that it &gt;&gt; In animals. Yes. Thank you. And that it just generally promotes quote unquote just generally promotes quote unquote just generally promotes quote unquote repair. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; That's kind of weird. &gt;&gt; That's kind of weird. &gt;&gt; That's kind of weird. &gt;&gt; It is weird, &gt;&gt; It is weird, &gt;&gt; It is weird, &gt;&gt; right? Because I could spend the next 10 &gt;&gt; right? Because I could spend the next 10 &gt;&gt; right? Because I could spend the next 10 hours or more telling you about all the hours or more telling you about all the hours or more telling you about all the ways that people have tried to get ways that people have tried to get ways that people have tried to get nerves to regenerate and couldn't. And nerves to regenerate and couldn't. And nerves to regenerate and couldn't. And as you point out, this thing doesn't as you point out, this thing doesn't as you point out, this thing doesn't really have one specific at least known really have one specific at least known really have one specific at least known receptor. &gt;&gt; So the data on the gut make a lot of &gt;&gt; So the data on the gut make a lot of &gt;&gt; So the data on the gut make a lot of sense. This is after all a gut peptide. sense. This is after all a gut peptide. sense. This is after all a gut peptide. It makes sense that gut peptide It makes sense that gut peptide It makes sense that gut peptide could get lots of places in the body, could get lots of places in the body, could get lots of places in the body, right? &gt;&gt; But what is it doing mechanistically if &gt;&gt; But what is it doing mechanistically if &gt;&gt; But what is it doing mechanistically if we know to support regeneration or we know to support regeneration or we know to support regeneration or replenishment of all these different replenishment of all these different replenishment of all these different tissue types? Because a neuron is a very tissue types? Because a neuron is a very tissue types? Because a neuron is a very different cell type than, you know, a different cell type than, you know, a different cell type than, you know, a fiberblast or one of the bits of fiberblast or one of the bits of fiberblast or one of the bits of collagen that make up different collagen that make up different collagen that make up different connective tissues. It's modulating a connective tissues. It's modulating a connective tissues. It's modulating a lot of these growth and healing pathways lot of these growth and healing pathways lot of these growth and healing pathways like in the models of damaging the like in the models of damaging the like in the models of damaging the endothelial layer or the epithelial endothelial layer or the epithelial endothelial layer or the epithelial layer of different tissues. You'll get layer of different tissues. You'll get layer of different tissues. You'll get more veg f signaling. So that's the more veg f signaling. So that's the more veg f signaling. So that's the vascular endothelial growth factor. So vascular endothelial growth factor. So vascular endothelial growth factor. So get more blood vessels andises being get more blood vessels andises being get more blood vessels andises being formed which creates a lot of the formed which creates a lot of the formed which creates a lot of the controversy around BBC safety. You'll controversy around BBC safety. You'll controversy around BBC safety. You'll get cell migration especially when get cell migration especially when get cell migration especially when coupled with TB500 and TB4. you'll get, coupled with TB500 and TB4. you'll get, coupled with TB500 and TB4. you'll get, you know, more access of the healing you know, more access of the healing you know, more access of the healing factors to the area through androgenic factors to the area through androgenic factors to the area through androgenic pathways. On top of that, you'll get an pathways. On top of that, you'll get an pathways. On top of that, you'll get an anti-stress effect. So, the other big anti-stress effect. So, the other big anti-stress effect. So, the other big thing that they did was they'd give thing that they did was they'd give thing that they did was they'd give corticosteroids with BPC57 to these corticosteroids with BPC57 to these corticosteroids with BPC57 to these mice. And usually when you have a wound mice. And usually when you have a wound mice. And usually when you have a wound and you give corticosteroids, the and you give corticosteroids, the and you give corticosteroids, the corticosteroids will slow or even stop corticosteroids will slow or even stop corticosteroids will slow or even stop the wound healing from happening. When the wound healing from happening. When the wound healing from happening. When BPC was administered, the BPC was administered, the BPC was administered, the healing was either the same or even healing was either the same or even healing was either the same or even better. &gt;&gt; Is BPC considered anti-inflammatory? &gt;&gt; Is BPC considered anti-inflammatory? &gt;&gt; Is BPC considered anti-inflammatory? Because based on what you just said, it Because based on what you just said, it Because based on what you just said, it almost seems like it helps maintain some almost seems like it helps maintain some almost seems like it helps maintain some of the pro-inflammatory response. Some of the pro-inflammatory response. Some of the pro-inflammatory response. Some people might be thinking, why would you people might be thinking, why would you people might be thinking, why would you want inflammation? What Dr. Bockery just want inflammation? What Dr. Bockery just want inflammation? What Dr. Bockery just said is if you block inflammation with said is if you block inflammation with said is if you block inflammation with cortosteroids, &gt;&gt; you aren't going to call in the signals &gt;&gt; you aren't going to call in the signals &gt;&gt; you aren't going to call in the signals to repair tissues. So lowering to repair tissues. So lowering to repair tissues. So lowering inflammation is a dicey thing that maybe inflammation is a dicey thing that maybe inflammation is a dicey thing that maybe we set aside for later in the we set aside for later in the we set aside for later in the conversation if we have time. But is it conversation if we have time. But is it conversation if we have time. But is it thought that BPC is lowering thought that BPC is lowering thought that BPC is lowering inflammation or is just somehow hitting inflammation or is just somehow hitting inflammation or is just somehow hitting the gas pedal on all these regenerative the gas pedal on all these regenerative the gas pedal on all these regenerative restorative biological processes? restorative biological processes? restorative biological processes? &gt;&gt; It's more putting the gas pedal on these &gt;&gt; It's more putting the gas pedal on these &gt;&gt; It's more putting the gas pedal on these processes to bring in the immune system, processes to bring in the immune system, processes to bring in the immune system, the healing factors. For example, in one the healing factors. For example, in one the healing factors. For example, in one tendon model, they noticed that it tendon model, they noticed that it tendon model, they noticed that it increased the amount of growth hormone increased the amount of growth hormone increased the amount of growth hormone receptors on the tendon. So receptors on the tendon. So receptors on the tendon. So theoretically, this would allow more theoretically, this would allow more theoretically, this would allow more growth hormone to dock in and cause the growth hormone to dock in and cause the growth hormone to dock in and cause the outgrowth of the tendon and the and the outgrowth of the tendon and the and the outgrowth of the tendon and the and the regrowth of it. So there's that theory regrowth of it. So there's that theory regrowth of it. So there's that theory there. downstream it'll modulate uh there. downstream it'll modulate uh there. downstream it'll modulate uh nitric oxide synthesis. So that's a big nitric oxide synthesis. So that's a big nitric oxide synthesis. So that's a big thing when it comes to wound healing thing when it comes to wound healing thing when it comes to wound healing because you need to dilate the blood because you need to dilate the blood because you need to dilate the blood vessels, you need to call in different vessels, you need to call in different vessels, you need to call in different cells. So it's really changing the way cells. So it's really changing the way cells. So it's really changing the way cells behave at that level, but that's cells behave at that level, but that's cells behave at that level, but that's only for like the tendon side of it. only for like the tendon side of it. only for like the tendon side of it. They also did weird things on the They also did weird things on the They also did weird things on the neurological side like they would make neurological side like they would make neurological side like they would make these mice drunk, okay? And they would these mice drunk, okay? And they would these mice drunk, okay? And they would then give them BBC and they'd get less then give them BBC and they'd get less then give them BBC and they'd get less drunk and when they go through mazes. drunk and when they go through mazes. drunk and when they go through mazes. &gt;&gt; Oh boy. &gt;&gt; Oh boy. &gt;&gt; Oh boy. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; We did not just recommend you take BBC &gt;&gt; We did not just recommend you take BBC &gt;&gt; We did not just recommend you take BBC with alcohol. want to be very clear. Um, with alcohol. want to be very clear. Um, with alcohol. want to be very clear. Um, but people are going, you know, we'll do but people are going, you know, we'll do but people are going, you know, we'll do their own interpretation. So, I'm being their own interpretation. So, I'm being their own interpretation. So, I'm being semi facicious, but very interesting. semi facicious, but very interesting. semi facicious, but very interesting. &gt;&gt; And then also, they would give them get &gt;&gt; And then also, they would give them get &gt;&gt; And then also, they would give them get the mice drunk and then have them the mice drunk and then have them the mice drunk and then have them withdraw from alcohol and like withdraw from alcohol and like withdraw from alcohol and like withdrawal is deadly. If we have a withdrawal is deadly. If we have a withdrawal is deadly. If we have a patient in the hospital that patient in the hospital that patient in the hospital that withdrawals, they could die during that withdrawals, they could die during that withdrawals, they could die during that withdrawal if they're not given withdrawal if they're not given withdrawal if they're not given benzoasipines. They got BPC and they benzoasipines. They got BPC and they benzoasipines. They got BPC and they didn't have the withdrawal symptoms. I'm didn't have the withdrawal symptoms. I'm didn't have the withdrawal symptoms. I'm like, what's going on here? This is a like, what's going on here? This is a like, what's going on here? This is a very interesting compound. I think it very interesting compound. I think it very interesting compound. I think it gets it gets all the hype for the MSK gets it gets all the hype for the MSK gets it gets all the hype for the MSK stuff, but I think the neurological stuff, but I think the neurological stuff, but I think the neurological neuroscychiatric, let's say, and then neuroscychiatric, let's say, and then neuroscychiatric, let's say, and then gastric effects are way more interesting gastric effects are way more interesting gastric effects are way more interesting when it comes to that because it's when it comes to that because it's when it comes to that because it's modulating the gut brain access in an modulating the gut brain access in an modulating the gut brain access in an interesting way. We'll have people come interesting way. We'll have people come interesting way. We'll have people come to us and they're like, "My aderall is to us and they're like, "My aderall is to us and they're like, "My aderall is not working since I've been taking oral not working since I've been taking oral not working since I've been taking oral BPC." Are they happy with that effect? BPC." Are they happy with that effect? BPC." Are they happy with that effect? &gt;&gt; No, they're not happy. They're very mad &gt;&gt; No, they're not happy. They're very mad &gt;&gt; No, they're not happy. They're very mad because like it seems like it's blunting because like it seems like it's blunting because like it seems like it's blunting their aderall. their aderall. their aderall. &gt;&gt; So, it's doing something from dopanergic &gt;&gt; So, it's doing something from dopanergic &gt;&gt; So, it's doing something from dopanergic signaling both on both sides, both signaling both on both sides, both signaling both on both sides, both withdrawal uh when it comes to like the withdrawal uh when it comes to like the withdrawal uh when it comes to like the gapurgic side, but also the peak of gapurgic side, but also the peak of gapurgic side, but also the peak of signaling. So if you like peruse Reddit, signaling. So if you like peruse Reddit, signaling. So if you like peruse Reddit, which you should never do, um you'll which you should never do, um you'll which you should never do, um you'll find all these anhidonia discussions find all these anhidonia discussions find all these anhidonia discussions about BBC, people feel like depressed about BBC, people feel like depressed about BBC, people feel like depressed and low energy. and low energy. and low energy. &gt;&gt; Incredible seems to be &gt;&gt; Incredible seems to be &gt;&gt; Incredible seems to be &gt;&gt; in terms of effects in animals and &gt;&gt; in terms of effects in animals and &gt;&gt; in terms of effects in animals and anecdotal reports in humans because I anecdotal reports in humans because I anecdotal reports in humans because I think both your and my excitement about think both your and my excitement about think both your and my excitement about this might be occupying a substantial this might be occupying a substantial this might be occupying a substantial amount of the force field here. Let's do amount of the force field here. Let's do amount of the force field here. Let's do something that normally I would do in a something that normally I would do in a something that normally I would do in a few minutes. I'm going to ask you some few minutes. I'm going to ask you some few minutes. I'm going to ask you some very direct questions about this and you very direct questions about this and you very direct questions about this and you and I don't hold you responsible as and I don't hold you responsible as and I don't hold you responsible as being like BPC uh you know spokesperson being like BPC uh you know spokesperson being like BPC uh you know spokesperson but here you are. Um that's Pavlov's but here you are. Um that's Pavlov's but here you are. Um that's Pavlov's job. Um and he's dead. job. Um and he's dead. job. Um and he's dead. Are there any known adverse events of Are there any known adverse events of Are there any known adverse events of from people taking BPC known and from people taking BPC known and from people taking BPC known and documented? Okay. adverse events where documented? Okay. adverse events where documented? Okay. adverse events where it's unrelated to uh contamination or it's unrelated to uh contamination or it's unrelated to uh contamination or something of that sort. something of that sort. something of that sort. &gt;&gt; In the literature, when it comes to um &gt;&gt; In the literature, when it comes to um &gt;&gt; In the literature, when it comes to um the animal data, they've injected the animal data, they've injected the animal data, they've injected animals with, you know, a thousand times animals with, you know, a thousand times animals with, you know, a thousand times the dose of BPC with no real adverse the dose of BPC with no real adverse the dose of BPC with no real adverse effects. So there's we don't even know effects. So there's we don't even know effects. So there's we don't even know the LD50 of BPC, which makes it hard for the LD50 of BPC, which makes it hard for the LD50 of BPC, which makes it hard for it to become an FDA approved. it to become an FDA approved. it to become an FDA approved. &gt;&gt; Maybe define LD50. &gt;&gt; Maybe define LD50. &gt;&gt; Maybe define LD50. &gt;&gt; LD50 is the dose of which would kill &gt;&gt; LD50 is the dose of which would kill &gt;&gt; LD50 is the dose of which would kill 50% of the animals if it was 50% of the animals if it was 50% of the animals if it was administered to them. So we don't even administered to them. So we don't even administered to them. So we don't even know what that is. And that's actually know what that is. And that's actually know what that is. And that's actually an important number as you know an important number as you know an important number as you know barbaric as it sounds to determine for barbaric as it sounds to determine for barbaric as it sounds to determine for any drug. What's the LD50 for caffeine? any drug. What's the LD50 for caffeine? any drug. What's the LD50 for caffeine? What's the LD50 for aspirin? What's the What's the LD50 for aspirin? What's the What's the LD50 for aspirin? What's the L? This is every drug you take folks on L? This is every drug you take folks on L? This is every drug you take folks on or off the counter you know prescription or off the counter you know prescription or off the counter you know prescription or non-prescription has gone through or non-prescription has gone through or non-prescription has gone through LD50 testing in animals. LD50 testing in animals. LD50 testing in animals. &gt;&gt; To be a clinician to prescribe this, we &gt;&gt; To be a clinician to prescribe this, we &gt;&gt; To be a clinician to prescribe this, we need to know what that is which need to know what that is which need to know what that is which limits us. Now there was two very small limits us. Now there was two very small limits us. Now there was two very small phase one and phase 2 trials on rectal phase one and phase 2 trials on rectal phase one and phase 2 trials on rectal BPC enemas um in the early 2000s from BPC enemas um in the early 2000s from BPC enemas um in the early 2000s from that same coration group. So that's the that same coration group. So that's the that same coration group. So that's the big concern of BBC. all the data comes big concern of BBC. all the data comes big concern of BBC. all the data comes from one group. So people can be from one group. So people can be from one group. So people can be skeptical. There's a couple of Chinese skeptical. There's a couple of Chinese skeptical. There's a couple of Chinese groups that have also replicated some of groups that have also replicated some of groups that have also replicated some of their work. But uh those groups wanted their work. But uh those groups wanted their work. But uh those groups wanted to try to treat ulcerative colitis. It's to try to treat ulcerative colitis. It's to try to treat ulcerative colitis. It's a very you know miserable condition of a very you know miserable condition of a very you know miserable condition of where the immune system attacks the where the immune system attacks the where the immune system attacks the lining of the gut in multiple spots. Uh lining of the gut in multiple spots. Uh lining of the gut in multiple spots. Uh and they use enemas of BPC up to like 80 and they use enemas of BPC up to like 80 and they use enemas of BPC up to like 80 milligrams which is much more than milligrams which is much more than milligrams which is much more than people would take. people would take. people would take. &gt;&gt; Most people are injecting microgram. &gt;&gt; Most people are injecting microgram. &gt;&gt; Most people are injecting microgram. Yes. 100 or 200 micrograms per day or Yes. 100 or 200 micrograms per day or Yes. 100 or 200 micrograms per day or something. Maybe more but you're talking something. Maybe more but you're talking something. Maybe more but you're talking about 80 milligrams. about 80 milligrams. about 80 milligrams. &gt;&gt; Yeah. erectile enemas. They did a phase &gt;&gt; Yeah. erectile enemas. They did a phase &gt;&gt; Yeah. erectile enemas. They did a phase one and phase two trial. one and phase two trial. one and phase two trial. &gt;&gt; They're doing this daily or they do it &gt;&gt; They're doing this daily or they do it &gt;&gt; They're doing this daily or they do it once. &gt;&gt; They did it for a few weeks. Um and then &gt;&gt; They did it for a few weeks. Um and then &gt;&gt; They did it for a few weeks. Um and then they reme-measured. They had it was they reme-measured. They had it was they reme-measured. They had it was placebo controlled. The data is not placebo controlled. The data is not placebo controlled. The data is not available. The abstracts are only available. The abstracts are only available. The abstracts are only available. So that that's what also available. So that that's what also available. So that that's what also gives us some pause when we're going to gives us some pause when we're going to gives us some pause when we're going to you know push that forward especially you know push that forward especially you know push that forward especially when the legal discussions are happening when the legal discussions are happening when the legal discussions are happening here in the next few months uh on BPC. U here in the next few months uh on BPC. U here in the next few months uh on BPC. U the first the phase one trial showed no the first the phase one trial showed no the first the phase one trial showed no adverse effects. U they and they didn't adverse effects. U they and they didn't adverse effects. U they and they didn't even have BPC in the systemic system even have BPC in the systemic system even have BPC in the systemic system too. That's that's a key point to know too. That's that's a key point to know too. That's that's a key point to know that orally administered or rectally that orally administered or rectally that orally administered or rectally administered BPC doesn't seem to go administered BPC doesn't seem to go administered BPC doesn't seem to go systemic. maybe define that a little bit systemic. maybe define that a little bit systemic. maybe define that a little bit more specifically. more specifically. more specifically. &gt;&gt; If you take aspirin and then you measure &gt;&gt; If you take aspirin and then you measure &gt;&gt; If you take aspirin and then you measure blood aspirin levels, you'll notice the blood aspirin levels, you'll notice the blood aspirin levels, you'll notice the levels go up. When they measured BBC levels go up. When they measured BBC levels go up. When they measured BBC levels, BBC157 levels in these uh levels, BBC157 levels in these uh levels, BBC157 levels in these uh individuals, they didn't find it in the individuals, they didn't find it in the individuals, they didn't find it in the blood. So, either it was broken down blood. So, either it was broken down blood. So, either it was broken down very quickly or it stayed locally to the very quickly or it stayed locally to the very quickly or it stayed locally to the lining of the gastric tissues. lining of the gastric tissues. lining of the gastric tissues. &gt;&gt; That raises a question for me. Let's say &gt;&gt; That raises a question for me. Let's say &gt;&gt; That raises a question for me. Let's say somebody doesn't quote unquote take any somebody doesn't quote unquote take any somebody doesn't quote unquote take any BPC57 by enema or otherwise. If I were BPC57 by enema or otherwise. If I were BPC57 by enema or otherwise. If I were to just draw your blood right now, uh to just draw your blood right now, uh to just draw your blood right now, uh there's BPC57 in there in the bigger there's BPC57 in there in the bigger there's BPC57 in there in the bigger protein, &gt;&gt; the bigger the bigger BPC protein. I &gt;&gt; the bigger the bigger BPC protein. I &gt;&gt; the bigger the bigger BPC protein. I don't you wouldn't find don't you wouldn't find don't you wouldn't find &gt;&gt; is it circulating or is it or is it &gt;&gt; is it circulating or is it or is it &gt;&gt; is it circulating or is it or is it contain or is it restricted to the gut? contain or is it restricted to the gut? contain or is it restricted to the gut? &gt;&gt; We don't have that data. &gt;&gt; We don't have that data. &gt;&gt; We don't have that data. &gt;&gt; Well, that's incredible, right? Because &gt;&gt; Well, that's incredible, right? Because &gt;&gt; Well, that's incredible, right? Because we're talking about these effects all we're talking about these effects all we're talking about these effects all over the body. We don't even know if it over the body. We don't even know if it over the body. We don't even know if it leaves the gut. leaves the gut. leaves the gut. &gt;&gt; No, but in well, the injectable is going &gt;&gt; No, but in well, the injectable is going &gt;&gt; No, but in well, the injectable is going to go systemic. to go systemic. to go systemic. &gt;&gt; And most people are going to take if &gt;&gt; And most people are going to take if &gt;&gt; And most people are going to take if they're decide to do this, they're going they're decide to do this, they're going they're decide to do this, they're going to take an oral or an injectable. to take an oral or an injectable. to take an oral or an injectable. They're either going to inject local to They're either going to inject local to They're either going to inject local to the injury if they can the injury if they can the injury if they can &gt;&gt; or an interparitinial. &gt;&gt; or an interparitinial. &gt;&gt; or an interparitinial. They found fragments of the 15. Like They found fragments of the 15. Like They found fragments of the 15. Like there's a paper in 2024 that there's a paper in 2024 that there's a paper in 2024 that looked at this and they could figure out looked at this and they could figure out looked at this and they could figure out if somebody had BPC administered for if somebody had BPC administered for if somebody had BPC administered for doping reasons cuz it's on the water doping reasons cuz it's on the water doping reasons cuz it's on the water list now. So they could figure out if list now. So they could figure out if list now. So they could figure out if someone had taken BPC. someone had taken BPC. someone had taken BPC. &gt;&gt; Got it. &gt;&gt; Got it. &gt;&gt; Got it. &gt;&gt; But there we don't know like we don't we &gt;&gt; But there we don't know like we don't we &gt;&gt; But there we don't know like we don't we need to know the dynamics. We don't know need to know the dynamics. We don't know need to know the dynamics. We don't know where it goes, how it goes, where it goes, how it goes, where it goes, how it goes, &gt;&gt; and we don't know the results in terms &gt;&gt; and we don't know the results in terms &gt;&gt; and we don't know the results in terms of what those 80 mgram enemas of BPC of what those 80 mgram enemas of BPC of what those 80 mgram enemas of BPC did for the colitis. did for the colitis. did for the colitis. &gt;&gt; In the phase one trial, it was just a &gt;&gt; In the phase one trial, it was just a &gt;&gt; In the phase one trial, it was just a safety uh there was no adverse effects. safety uh there was no adverse effects. safety uh there was no adverse effects. in the phase two trial was very small in the phase two trial was very small in the phase two trial was very small like 40 patients there was at least a like 40 patients there was at least a like 40 patients there was at least a positive signal on the ulcer colitis positive signal on the ulcer colitis positive signal on the ulcer colitis &gt;&gt; and this was done in the United States &gt;&gt; and this was done in the United States &gt;&gt; and this was done in the United States or this was in Croatia okay so to be or this was in Croatia okay so to be or this was in Croatia okay so to be quite direct on the one hand you have quite direct on the one hand you have quite direct on the one hand you have groups um who I think are mostly groups um who I think are mostly groups um who I think are mostly well-intentioned saying hey 80 millig of well-intentioned saying hey 80 millig of well-intentioned saying hey 80 millig of BPC by way of enema did not cause any BPC by way of enema did not cause any BPC by way of enema did not cause any adverse events and that's the phase one adverse events and that's the phase one adverse events and that's the phase one that you described that you described that you described &gt;&gt; if we believe their data is right &gt;&gt; if we believe their data is right &gt;&gt; if we believe their data is right &gt;&gt; on the opposite side many people &gt;&gt; on the opposite side many people &gt;&gt; on the opposite side many people especially in the United States and you especially in the United States and you especially in the United States and you know in Northern Europe where the know in Northern Europe where the know in Northern Europe where the regulations tend to be similarish right regulations tend to be similarish right regulations tend to be similarish right as compared to elsewhere in the world as compared to elsewhere in the world as compared to elsewhere in the world would say well yeah but that study was would say well yeah but that study was would say well yeah but that study was in Croatia now I have many Croatian in Croatia now I have many Croatian in Croatia now I have many Croatian friends that's not a knock on Croatia friends that's not a knock on Croatia friends that's not a knock on Croatia why would it be that the clinical trials why would it be that the clinical trials why would it be that the clinical trials in Croatia would hold less weight this in Croatia would hold less weight this in Croatia would hold less weight this is this is a dicey area but I think it's is this is a dicey area but I think it's is this is a dicey area but I think it's important because you'll hear this oh important because you'll hear this oh important because you'll hear this oh those are Chinese peptides those are those are Chinese peptides those are those are Chinese peptides those are Russian studies Russian studies Russian studies Yeah. And you know, I mean to me, you Yeah. And you know, I mean to me, you Yeah. And you know, I mean to me, you know, the question is, know, the question is, know, the question is, &gt;&gt; was it good science? Was it done &gt;&gt; was it good science? Was it done &gt;&gt; was it good science? Was it done carefully? Would it pass muster for a carefully? Would it pass muster for a carefully? Would it pass muster for a phase one in the United States? phase one in the United States? phase one in the United States? &gt;&gt; That's a good question. The groups seem &gt;&gt; That's a good question. The groups seem &gt;&gt; That's a good question. The groups seem to be very robust and they do really to be very robust and they do really to be very robust and they do really good randomized control, double blind good randomized control, double blind good randomized control, double blind placebo control trials. I think we're placebo control trials. I think we're placebo control trials. I think we're very uh United Statescentric. We view very uh United Statescentric. We view very uh United Statescentric. We view ourselves as the premier science and we ourselves as the premier science and we ourselves as the premier science and we are the premier science. So people kind are the premier science. So people kind are the premier science. So people kind of trust that more and there may be you of trust that more and there may be you of trust that more and there may be you know perverse incentives when it comes know perverse incentives when it comes know perverse incentives when it comes to different government bodies and like to different government bodies and like to different government bodies and like you know Soviet era research that might you know Soviet era research that might you know Soviet era research that might be you know pro fabrication when it be you know pro fabrication when it be you know pro fabrication when it comes to certain compounds that makes comes to certain compounds that makes comes to certain compounds that makes people hesitant because there's a lot of people hesitant because there's a lot of people hesitant because there's a lot of like these Soviet era compounds that are like these Soviet era compounds that are like these Soviet era compounds that are not peptides or some of them are not peptides or some of them are not peptides or some of them are peptides they're fantastic they sound peptides they're fantastic they sound peptides they're fantastic they sound they sound amazing but when they get they sound amazing but when they get they sound amazing but when they get tested maybe they're not as potent as tested maybe they're not as potent as tested maybe they're not as potent as the Soviet data would suggest. I always the Soviet data would suggest. I always the Soviet data would suggest. I always thought that the Russian stuff was like thought that the Russian stuff was like thought that the Russian stuff was like the really potent stuff that they didn't the really potent stuff that they didn't the really potent stuff that they didn't want anyone else to know about that kind want anyone else to know about that kind want anyone else to know about that kind of way goes the other way, right? of way goes the other way, right? of way goes the other way, right? &gt;&gt; It could go both ways. I mean, but they &gt;&gt; It could go both ways. I mean, but they &gt;&gt; It could go both ways. I mean, but they were they were more interested in were they were more interested in were they were more interested in performance. They wanted better performance. They wanted better performance. They wanted better astronauts, better Olympians, better astronauts, better Olympians, better astronauts, better Olympians, better soldiers. We care more about, you know, soldiers. We care more about, you know, soldiers. We care more about, you know, a profit drug model that gets people on a profit drug model that gets people on a profit drug model that gets people on a subscription for with the monthly a subscription for with the monthly a subscription for with the monthly drug, unfortunately. drug, unfortunately. drug, unfortunately. &gt;&gt; Sometimes it heals people, but &gt;&gt; Sometimes it heals people, but &gt;&gt; Sometimes it heals people, but &gt;&gt; So nowadays, is BPC57 legal in the &gt;&gt; So nowadays, is BPC57 legal in the &gt;&gt; So nowadays, is BPC57 legal in the United States? Like if I wanted to go United States? Like if I wanted to go United States? Like if I wanted to go online and buy BPC7, I can do it, right? online and buy BPC7, I can do it, right? online and buy BPC7, I can do it, right? legal legally for research purposes legal legally for research purposes legal legally for research purposes only. &gt;&gt; I thought now under the new regulations &gt;&gt; I thought now under the new regulations &gt;&gt; I thought now under the new regulations uh recently passed that you can get it uh recently passed that you can get it uh recently passed that you can get it from a compounding pharmacy or from a compounding pharmacy or from a compounding pharmacy or &gt;&gt; technically not just yet. &gt;&gt; technically not just yet. &gt;&gt; technically not just yet. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; And it depends on medical boards to &gt;&gt; And it depends on medical boards to &gt;&gt; And it depends on medical boards to break it down. BBC157 never got FDA to break it down. BBC157 never got FDA to break it down. BBC157 never got FDA approved, right? So it gets into these approved, right? So it gets into these approved, right? So it gets into these compounding pharmacy lists. There's a compounding pharmacy lists. There's a compounding pharmacy lists. There's a category 1, two, and three. Category one category 1, two, and three. Category one category 1, two, and three. Category one means the FDA thinks like, hey, this is means the FDA thinks like, hey, this is means the FDA thinks like, hey, this is not an approved drug, but we're okay not an approved drug, but we're okay not an approved drug, but we're okay with you compounding this and you're with you compounding this and you're with you compounding this and you're okay to push that forward. Category okay to push that forward. Category okay to push that forward. Category 2, it's like do not compound. In late 2, it's like do not compound. In late 2, it's like do not compound. In late 2024, BPC57 and like 20 other 2024, BPC57 and like 20 other 2024, BPC57 and like 20 other peptides got moved to this category 2 peptides got moved to this category 2 peptides got moved to this category 2 list. Since about 2017 to 2024, people list. Since about 2017 to 2024, people list. Since about 2017 to 2024, people have been prescribing BPC and these have been prescribing BPC and these have been prescribing BPC and these alternative medicine anti-aging alternative medicine anti-aging alternative medicine anti-aging practices. It gets removed from that practices. It gets removed from that practices. It gets removed from that list. Of course, you know, list. Of course, you know, list. Of course, you know, compoundingies reabel it as PDA, pedeka compoundingies reabel it as PDA, pedeka compoundingies reabel it as PDA, pedeka peptide arginate, peptide arginate, peptide arginate, &gt;&gt; but it's the same thing. &gt;&gt; but it's the same thing. &gt;&gt; but it's the same thing. &gt;&gt; It's the same exact thing. &gt;&gt; It's the same exact thing. &gt;&gt; It's the same exact thing. &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Really? &gt;&gt; Yes. One of them will be an acetate, one &gt;&gt; Yes. One of them will be an acetate, one &gt;&gt; Yes. One of them will be an acetate, one of them will be an arginate, but the PDA of them will be an arginate, but the PDA of them will be an arginate, but the PDA is BBC57. Because there are many is BBC57. Because there are many is BBC57. Because there are many people selling compounded people selling compounded people selling compounded pentadcaeptide. &gt;&gt; Pentecate. That's the That's the That's the &gt;&gt; arginate. Okay. I think the acetate one &gt;&gt; arginate. Okay. I think the acetate one &gt;&gt; arginate. Okay. I think the acetate one is the one that's on the phase the is the one that's on the phase the is the one that's on the phase the category 2 list. Now just in April of category 2 list. Now just in April of category 2 list. Now just in April of this year it got removed from the this year it got removed from the this year it got removed from the category 2 list and it's not yet on the category 2 list and it's not yet on the category 2 list and it's not yet on the category 1 list which would allow category 1 list which would allow category 1 list which would allow physicians to prescribe it physicians to prescribe it physicians to prescribe it &gt;&gt; through compoundingies. Now but they can &gt;&gt; through compoundingies. Now but they can &gt;&gt; through compoundingies. Now but they can prescribe the PDA version. prescribe the PDA version. prescribe the PDA version. &gt;&gt; People are prescribing PDA. Yes. &gt;&gt; People are prescribing PDA. Yes. &gt;&gt; People are prescribing PDA. Yes. &gt;&gt; Now, now state medical boards view that &gt;&gt; Now, now state medical boards view that &gt;&gt; Now, now state medical boards view that very differently. very differently. very differently. &gt;&gt; Like I got a letter from one of the &gt;&gt; Like I got a letter from one of the &gt;&gt; Like I got a letter from one of the licensed in many states. One of these licensed in many states. One of these licensed in many states. One of these states reached out to me. It's like you states reached out to me. It's like you states reached out to me. It's like you cannot prescribe not me directly to the cannot prescribe not me directly to the cannot prescribe not me directly to the general public of people in that general public of people in that general public of people in that state you cannot prescribe non-FDA state you cannot prescribe non-FDA state you cannot prescribe non-FDA approved peptides no matter what. approved peptides no matter what. approved peptides no matter what. &gt;&gt; So there's controversy there. Even if &gt;&gt; So there's controversy there. Even if &gt;&gt; So there's controversy there. Even if the FDA says okay we're okay with you the FDA says okay we're okay with you the FDA says okay we're okay with you prescribing it. Is your medical board in prescribing it. Is your medical board in prescribing it. Is your medical board in that state going to be okay with it? So that state going to be okay with it? So that state going to be okay with it? So it's state by state by state laws. it's state by state by state laws. it's state by state by state laws. &gt;&gt; What about with tellahalth? So, &gt;&gt; What about with tellahalth? So, &gt;&gt; What about with tellahalth? So, somebody's on the east coast in a state somebody's on the east coast in a state somebody's on the east coast in a state that um allows them to write a script that um allows them to write a script that um allows them to write a script for let's just call it BBC cuz it's for let's just call it BBC cuz it's for let's just call it BBC cuz it's effectively what it is or this other effectively what it is or this other effectively what it is or this other thing where they kind of wriggle through thing where they kind of wriggle through thing where they kind of wriggle through the regulation. Can they send that to the regulation. Can they send that to the regulation. Can they send that to California or to Wisconsin or California or to Wisconsin or California or to Wisconsin or someplace else if the patient is there? someplace else if the patient is there? someplace else if the patient is there? &gt;&gt; The tele health laws go into effect &gt;&gt; The tele health laws go into effect &gt;&gt; The tele health laws go into effect where the patient is. where the patient is. where the patient is. &gt;&gt; So, if let's say in California it's not &gt;&gt; So, if let's say in California it's not &gt;&gt; So, if let's say in California it's not allowed to have BPC according to the allowed to have BPC according to the allowed to have BPC according to the state board of pharmacy or whoever uh state board of pharmacy or whoever uh state board of pharmacy or whoever uh bans that. Even if you're a New York bans that. Even if you're a New York bans that. Even if you're a New York doctor that's licensed in California doctor that's licensed in California doctor that's licensed in California that would be against the California that would be against the California that would be against the California Medical Board and they would ask you if Medical Board and they would ask you if Medical Board and they would ask you if they found out to stand in front of they found out to stand in front of they found out to stand in front of them. Now, are boards cracking down on them. Now, are boards cracking down on them. Now, are boards cracking down on this? Not really. There's a couple this? Not really. There's a couple this? Not really. There's a couple states that are cracking down on people states that are cracking down on people states that are cracking down on people and people know to avoid those states, and people know to avoid those states, and people know to avoid those states, but it's going to be very dicey over the but it's going to be very dicey over the but it's going to be very dicey over the next few years. next few years. next few years. &gt;&gt; Okay. Couple of questions. anecdata. We &gt;&gt; Okay. Couple of questions. anecdata. We &gt;&gt; Okay. Couple of questions. anecdata. We don't want to place too much on it, but don't want to place too much on it, but don't want to place too much on it, but the big kind of rumor out there that the big kind of rumor out there that the big kind of rumor out there that pricked up my years a few years ago was pricked up my years a few years ago was pricked up my years a few years ago was when I heard that some athlete before when I heard that some athlete before when I heard that some athlete before the summer Olympics, this was two summer the summer Olympics, this was two summer the summer Olympics, this was two summer Olympics ago, um, from Eastern Europe, Olympics ago, um, from Eastern Europe, Olympics ago, um, from Eastern Europe, had a complete Achilles transsection. had a complete Achilles transsection. had a complete Achilles transsection. Not just a tear or a pull, but when we Not just a tear or a pull, but when we Not just a tear or a pull, but when we think about nerves and tendons, we think about nerves and tendons, we think about nerves and tendons, we think like complete cut the whole way through. like complete cut the whole way through. like complete cut the whole way through. And the rumor was they took BPC-157 And the rumor was they took BPC-157 And the rumor was they took BPC-157 locally injected locally injected locally injected &gt;&gt; for a few months and they podiummed in &gt;&gt; for a few months and they podiummed in &gt;&gt; for a few months and they podiummed in the Olympics. Yep. They still got a the Olympics. Yep. They still got a the Olympics. Yep. They still got a medal. &gt;&gt; Familiar with that story. &gt;&gt; Familiar with that story. &gt;&gt; Familiar with that story. &gt;&gt; That was the that was the story that &gt;&gt; That was the that was the story that &gt;&gt; That was the that was the story that kind of got out there that I feel kind of got out there that I feel kind of got out there that I feel &gt;&gt; kind of catalyzed this movement of BPC &gt;&gt; kind of catalyzed this movement of BPC &gt;&gt; kind of catalyzed this movement of BPC out of these niche communities and in out of these niche communities and in out of these niche communities and in started it toward the public started it toward the public started it toward the public awareness that leads to you sitting here awareness that leads to you sitting here awareness that leads to you sitting here today among other things. We also you today among other things. We also you today among other things. We also you have a lot of other knowledge but we're have a lot of other knowledge but we're have a lot of other knowledge but we're restricting to BPC now. So restricting to BPC now. So restricting to BPC now. So &gt;&gt; do we have verification of that story? &gt;&gt; do we have verification of that story? &gt;&gt; do we have verification of that story? &gt;&gt; No. No, I think that story was uh &gt;&gt; No. No, I think that story was uh &gt;&gt; No. No, I think that story was uh hearsay. I don't think they wanted to hearsay. I don't think they wanted to hearsay. I don't think they wanted to reveal what they actually did. I don't reveal what they actually did. I don't reveal what they actually did. I don't think they only did BPC57. They'd be think they only did BPC57. They'd be think they only did BPC57. They'd be stupid if they did. They should have, stupid if they did. They should have, stupid if they did. They should have, you know, all the best and latest you know, all the best and latest you know, all the best and latest greatest treatments, whether exome, stem greatest treatments, whether exome, stem greatest treatments, whether exome, stem cells, other peptides, anything that cells, other peptides, anything that cells, other peptides, anything that wasn't banned. And by the way, I should wasn't banned. And by the way, I should wasn't banned. And by the way, I should say BPC57 was not on the banned say BPC57 was not on the banned say BPC57 was not on the banned substances list at that time. It was so substances list at that time. It was so substances list at that time. It was so unknown. Just like there are compounds unknown. Just like there are compounds unknown. Just like there are compounds right now that athletes right now that athletes right now that athletes &gt;&gt; are using and not just in the enhanced &gt;&gt; are using and not just in the enhanced &gt;&gt; are using and not just in the enhanced games in preparation for the Olympics. games in preparation for the Olympics. games in preparation for the Olympics. I'm not saying they're all doping, but I'm not saying they're all doping, but I'm not saying they're all doping, but there it's a common practice that there it's a common practice that there it's a common practice that athletes will forage into things that athletes will forage into things that athletes will forage into things that can help them that are not yet on the can help them that are not yet on the can help them that are not yet on the band substances list. band substances list. band substances list. &gt;&gt; And I mean, good luck proving that BBC &gt;&gt; And I mean, good luck proving that BBC &gt;&gt; And I mean, good luck proving that BBC was injected, you know, a week ago was injected, you know, a week ago was injected, you know, a week ago &gt;&gt; because by the time the peptides already &gt;&gt; because by the time the peptides already &gt;&gt; because by the time the peptides already gone out of your system. So, or at least gone out of your system. So, or at least gone out of your system. So, or at least we think based on the phmicamics that we think based on the phmicamics that we think based on the phmicamics that we understand now. understand now. understand now. &gt;&gt; U that story was run with from the &gt;&gt; U that story was run with from the &gt;&gt; U that story was run with from the research community. They use it as a research community. They use it as a research community. They use it as a marketing tool to sell more BPC157 marketing tool to sell more BPC157 marketing tool to sell more BPC157 because what happened in the in the because what happened in the in the because what happened in the in the field is the GOP ones come online, you field is the GOP ones come online, you field is the GOP ones come online, you know, late 2021 and 2022 with Ozek and know, late 2021 and 2022 with Ozek and know, late 2021 and 2022 with Ozek and WGO V, they get the FDA approval for WGO V, they get the FDA approval for WGO V, they get the FDA approval for weight loss. There's not enough of a weight loss. There's not enough of a weight loss. There's not enough of a supply from the traditional supply from the traditional supply from the traditional pharmaceutical versions of the GLP1s. pharmaceutical versions of the GLP1s. pharmaceutical versions of the GLP1s. So, people start looking elsewhere to So, people start looking elsewhere to So, people start looking elsewhere to get their weight loss drugs. I know get their weight loss drugs. I know get their weight loss drugs. I know people that would drive down to Mexico people that would drive down to Mexico people that would drive down to Mexico to pick up pens because a pharmacy in to pick up pens because a pharmacy in to pick up pens because a pharmacy in the United States would cost, you know, the United States would cost, you know, the United States would cost, you know, $1,500 for an Osmic pen. Pharmacy in $1,500 for an Osmic pen. Pharmacy in $1,500 for an Osmic pen. Pharmacy in Mexico, 1 hour drive. Mexico, 1 hour drive. Mexico, 1 hour drive. &gt;&gt; Same drug. &gt;&gt; Same drug. &gt;&gt; Same drug. &gt;&gt; Same exact drug. How much relative cost? &gt;&gt; Same exact drug. How much relative cost? &gt;&gt; Same exact drug. How much relative cost? &gt;&gt; 150 versus 1500. &gt;&gt; 150 versus 1500. &gt;&gt; 150 versus 1500. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; Wow. &gt;&gt; So 10x. &gt;&gt; So 10x. &gt;&gt; So 10x. &gt;&gt; And this is the thing that Trump has &gt;&gt; And this is the thing that Trump has &gt;&gt; And this is the thing that Trump has been, you know, very vocal about like been, you know, very vocal about like been, you know, very vocal about like that we that we're getting overcharged that we that we're getting overcharged that we that we're getting overcharged for drugs here. for drugs here. for drugs here. &gt;&gt; We we definitely are. And the Trump RX &gt;&gt; We we definitely are. And the Trump RX &gt;&gt; We we definitely are. And the Trump RX has lowered a lot of these prices, by has lowered a lot of these prices, by has lowered a lot of these prices, by the way, for a lot of these drugs. the way, for a lot of these drugs. the way, for a lot of these drugs. Now, that time there was a shortage of Now, that time there was a shortage of Now, that time there was a shortage of semiglutide and then eventually semiglutide and then eventually semiglutide and then eventually zepatide. So the compound pharmacy game zepatide. So the compound pharmacy game zepatide. So the compound pharmacy game shifted into making these drugs, shifted into making these drugs, shifted into making these drugs, compounded versions. So they're not the compounded versions. So they're not the compounded versions. So they're not the FDA approved versions, but when there's FDA approved versions, but when there's FDA approved versions, but when there's a shortage of a medication, the a shortage of a medication, the a shortage of a medication, the compounders are allowed to make these compounders are allowed to make these compounders are allowed to make these drugs to meet the shortage. And in fact, drugs to meet the shortage. And in fact, drugs to meet the shortage. And in fact, the FDA was reaching out to these people the FDA was reaching out to these people the FDA was reaching out to these people telling them to do it. Like Brigham was telling them to do it. Like Brigham was telling them to do it. Like Brigham was talking to him last week at the Hands talking to him last week at the Hands talking to him last week at the Hands Games. He's like, "Yeah, the FDA told us Games. He's like, "Yeah, the FDA told us Games. He's like, "Yeah, the FDA told us to make this stuff and then they're to make this stuff and then they're to make this stuff and then they're getting us in trouble." getting us in trouble." getting us in trouble." &gt;&gt; This is Brigham Beller who runs ways to &gt;&gt; This is Brigham Beller who runs ways to &gt;&gt; This is Brigham Beller who runs ways to Well, and Well, and Well, and &gt;&gt; he ran a pharmacy for a long time, &gt;&gt; he ran a pharmacy for a long time, &gt;&gt; he ran a pharmacy for a long time, right? Compounding pharmacy. Yeah. We've right? Compounding pharmacy. Yeah. We've right? Compounding pharmacy. Yeah. We've never actually met in person. One of the never actually met in person. One of the never actually met in person. One of the best ones. best ones. best ones. &gt;&gt; It's not an ad fories. We have no I have &gt;&gt; It's not an ad fories. We have no I have &gt;&gt; It's not an ad fories. We have no I have no business relationship to bring. no business relationship to bring. no business relationship to bring. &gt;&gt; So if there's a shortage, compounding &gt;&gt; So if there's a shortage, compounding &gt;&gt; So if there's a shortage, compounding can jump in the game. can jump in the game. can jump in the game. &gt;&gt; Yes. And they did and they jumped in &gt;&gt; Yes. And they did and they jumped in &gt;&gt; Yes. And they did and they jumped in very hard very hard very hard &gt;&gt; on the GLPs. &gt;&gt; on the GLPs. &gt;&gt; on the GLPs. &gt;&gt; Yes. And they made a lot of money off &gt;&gt; Yes. And they made a lot of money off &gt;&gt; Yes. And they made a lot of money off the GLP ones. Like this was, you know, the GLP ones. Like this was, you know, the GLP ones. Like this was, you know, billions of dollars being made. billions of dollars being made. billions of dollars being made. &gt;&gt; Were they selling them for less than &gt;&gt; Were they selling them for less than &gt;&gt; Were they selling them for less than standard pharma was selling? standard pharma was selling? standard pharma was selling? &gt;&gt; They were less than the ozic pens. &gt;&gt; They were less than the ozic pens. &gt;&gt; They were less than the ozic pens. Unfortunately, what would happen is the Unfortunately, what would happen is the Unfortunately, what would happen is the provider had the discretion on the provider had the discretion on the provider had the discretion on the price. So all these providers also were price. So all these providers also were price. So all these providers also were making a lot of money. making a lot of money. making a lot of money. &gt;&gt; Who's the quote unquote provider? The &gt;&gt; Who's the quote unquote provider? The &gt;&gt; Who's the quote unquote provider? The physician. &gt;&gt; The physician or the NP or the PA. &gt;&gt; The physician or the NP or the PA. &gt;&gt; The physician or the NP or the PA. &gt;&gt; Uh &gt;&gt; Uh &gt;&gt; Uh &gt;&gt; who takes the difference? &gt;&gt; who takes the difference? &gt;&gt; who takes the difference? &gt;&gt; The clinician, which is I don't think is &gt;&gt; The clinician, which is I don't think is &gt;&gt; The clinician, which is I don't think is legal in most states. legal in most states. legal in most states. &gt;&gt; Wait a second. Maybe not even federal. &gt;&gt; Wait a second. Maybe not even federal. &gt;&gt; Wait a second. Maybe not even federal. &gt;&gt; Wait a second. So, let's say I wanted to &gt;&gt; Wait a second. So, let's say I wanted to &gt;&gt; Wait a second. So, let's say I wanted to take a Wiggoi. Yes. take a Wiggoi. Yes. take a Wiggoi. Yes. &gt;&gt; And there's a shortage. I can't get it &gt;&gt; And there's a shortage. I can't get it &gt;&gt; And there's a shortage. I can't get it from who's the big manufacturer. from who's the big manufacturer. from who's the big manufacturer. Nova Norris doesn't have enough. Nova Norris doesn't have enough. Nova Norris doesn't have enough. &gt;&gt; My doctor says, "Listen, you need this." &gt;&gt; My doctor says, "Listen, you need this." &gt;&gt; My doctor says, "Listen, you need this." Yes. &gt;&gt; And I say, "How much is it?" And they &gt;&gt; And I say, "How much is it?" And they &gt;&gt; And I say, "How much is it?" And they say, "Well, 1,500 um $1,500, but it say, "Well, 1,500 um $1,500, but it say, "Well, 1,500 um $1,500, but it turns out the compounding pharmacy turns out the compounding pharmacy turns out the compounding pharmacy &gt;&gt; through a different doctor, a more &gt;&gt; through a different doctor, a more &gt;&gt; through a different doctor, a more benevolent doctor. benevolent doctor. benevolent doctor. &gt;&gt; There you go. &gt;&gt; There you go. &gt;&gt; There you go. &gt;&gt; Could have prescribed it to me for I &gt;&gt; Could have prescribed it to me for I &gt;&gt; Could have prescribed it to me for I could get for maybe $300. In the case could get for maybe $300. In the case could get for maybe $300. In the case where I'm paying 1,500, it's going to my where I'm paying 1,500, it's going to my where I'm paying 1,500, it's going to my physician unbeknownst to me. I don't physician unbeknownst to me. I don't physician unbeknownst to me. I don't it's I'm cloaked from the process. it's I'm cloaked from the process. it's I'm cloaked from the process. &gt;&gt; If you're getting the Nova Nordisk &gt;&gt; If you're getting the Nova Nordisk &gt;&gt; If you're getting the Nova Nordisk pen, the physician is not involved. pen, the physician is not involved. pen, the physician is not involved. &gt;&gt; No, I'm talking about if I'm if I'm &gt;&gt; No, I'm talking about if I'm if I'm &gt;&gt; No, I'm talking about if I'm if I'm drifted towards a compounded version. drifted towards a compounded version. drifted towards a compounded version. So the most of the times when it So the most of the times when it So the most of the times when it comes to compoundies, which I don't comes to compoundies, which I don't comes to compoundies, which I don't think is a is a good practice, the think is a is a good practice, the think is a is a good practice, the clinician gets a price from the clinician gets a price from the clinician gets a price from the pharmacy. So the pharmacy will tell you, pharmacy. So the pharmacy will tell you, pharmacy. So the pharmacy will tell you, hey, a vial of semiglutide costs 150 hey, a vial of semiglutide costs 150 hey, a vial of semiglutide costs 150 bucks. &gt;&gt; This clinician can now sell that vial to &gt;&gt; This clinician can now sell that vial to &gt;&gt; This clinician can now sell that vial to the patient sell. It's really they're the patient sell. It's really they're the patient sell. It's really they're charging an administrative fee, right? charging an administrative fee, right? charging an administrative fee, right? Right? It's not a sale cuz technically Right? It's not a sale cuz technically Right? It's not a sale cuz technically you can't sell medications like that. you can't sell medications like that. you can't sell medications like that. They will sell it to you for $200 or They will sell it to you for $200 or They will sell it to you for $200 or $800. Okay. If I want to ask my $800. Okay. If I want to ask my $800. Okay. If I want to ask my physician, &gt;&gt; how much are you getting the drug for &gt;&gt; how much are you getting the drug for &gt;&gt; how much are you getting the drug for from because I know which pharmacy it's from because I know which pharmacy it's from because I know which pharmacy it's going to come from. It's going to come going to come from. It's going to come going to come from. It's going to come in a vile says like Upstate or Tailor in a vile says like Upstate or Tailor in a vile says like Upstate or Tailor Made or what's Brigham's pharmacy? Made or what's Brigham's pharmacy? Made or what's Brigham's pharmacy? &gt;&gt; Revive. &gt;&gt; Revive. &gt;&gt; Revive. &gt;&gt; Revive. It's coming from Revive. What &gt;&gt; Revive. It's coming from Revive. What &gt;&gt; Revive. It's coming from Revive. What are you paying for this from Revive? are you paying for this from Revive? are you paying for this from Revive? &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; And then what are you going to charge &gt;&gt; And then what are you going to charge &gt;&gt; And then what are you going to charge me? And I can assume the difference is me? And I can assume the difference is me? And I can assume the difference is going to my clinician. going to my clinician. going to my clinician. &gt;&gt; It's going to the clinician all. &gt;&gt; It's going to the clinician all. &gt;&gt; It's going to the clinician all. &gt;&gt; All right. Sorry clinicians, the game is &gt;&gt; All right. Sorry clinicians, the game is &gt;&gt; All right. Sorry clinicians, the game is up. Patients are now going to ask and up. Patients are now going to ask and up. Patients are now going to ask and you have every right to ask as far as you have every right to ask as far as you have every right to ask as far as I'm concerned. I'm concerned. I'm concerned. &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz what's going to happen with &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz what's going to happen with &gt;&gt; Yeah, cuz what's going to happen with the BBC and all these other peptides the BBC and all these other peptides the BBC and all these other peptides moving is there's going to be teleahalth moving is there's going to be teleahalth moving is there's going to be teleahalth platforms on every on every corner now platforms on every on every corner now platforms on every on every corner now that are going to be like, "Hey, BBC that are going to be like, "Hey, BBC that are going to be like, "Hey, BBC 199, BBC 299," and they're going to like 199, BBC 299," and they're going to like 199, BBC 299," and they're going to like check out and there's going to be a check out and there's going to be a check out and there's going to be a doctor somewhere in a room that's going doctor somewhere in a room that's going doctor somewhere in a room that's going to stamp the prescription, but it's just to stamp the prescription, but it's just to stamp the prescription, but it's just a, you know, e-commerce. It supplements a, you know, e-commerce. It supplements a, you know, e-commerce. It supplements with a with a stamp of a doctor, which with a with a stamp of a doctor, which with a with a stamp of a doctor, which is not good medical care at all. is not good medical care at all. is not good medical care at all. &gt;&gt; Okay. To balance this a bit, the route &gt;&gt; Okay. To balance this a bit, the route &gt;&gt; Okay. To balance this a bit, the route that many people have gone for about a that many people have gone for about a that many people have gone for about a decade now, but primarily in the last decade now, but primarily in the last decade now, but primarily in the last three to five years, was to go to these three to five years, was to go to these three to five years, was to go to these for research purposes only, what we for research purposes only, what we for research purposes only, what we would call gray market. Let's just name would call gray market. Let's just name would call gray market. Let's just name names because they're out of business names because they're out of business names because they're out of business now anyway. They've shuttered now anyway. They've shuttered now anyway. They've shuttered themselves. Peptide sciences till a few themselves. Peptide sciences till a few themselves. Peptide sciences till a few years ago, you could go on there, you years ago, you could go on there, you years ago, you could go on there, you could buy pretty much any peptide. It could buy pretty much any peptide. It could buy pretty much any peptide. It would say for research purposes only, would say for research purposes only, would say for research purposes only, not for animal or human use. not for animal or human use. not for animal or human use. &gt;&gt; Yes. And you sign that many times. And &gt;&gt; Yes. And you sign that many times. And &gt;&gt; Yes. And you sign that many times. And when you paid them, you would have to when you paid them, you would have to when you paid them, you would have to Venmo them. Venmo them. Venmo them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Or you could do it through zel. Yes. &gt;&gt; Or you could do it through zel. Yes. &gt;&gt; Or you could do it through zel. Yes. &gt;&gt; But they would ask that you not send it &gt;&gt; But they would ask that you not send it &gt;&gt; But they would ask that you not send it to a Peptide Sciences account. It was to a Peptide Sciences account. It was to a Peptide Sciences account. It was like some random name and the names kept like some random name and the names kept like some random name and the names kept changing. So everyone knew they were in changing. So everyone knew they were in changing. So everyone knew they were in on something like this. By the way, I on something like this. By the way, I on something like this. By the way, I want to be very clear. I ended up I want to be very clear. I ended up I want to be very clear. I ended up getting these things, right? I was too getting these things, right? I was too getting these things, right? I was too frightened to take them later. I have frightened to take them later. I have frightened to take them later. I have taken BPC. I've tried it. I don't take taken BPC. I've tried it. I don't take taken BPC. I've tried it. I don't take it currently, but I've tried it currently, but I've tried it currently, but I've tried it through a compounding pharmacy. So I through a compounding pharmacy. So I through a compounding pharmacy. So I just want to be very clear what that just want to be very clear what that just want to be very clear what that experience was about. experience was about. experience was about. &gt;&gt; So eventually they actually got payment &gt;&gt; So eventually they actually got payment &gt;&gt; So eventually they actually got payment processors like the this market processors like the this market processors like the this market evolved with the desire. Okay, there's evolved with the desire. Okay, there's evolved with the desire. Okay, there's maybe I'd say 5 to10 billion dollars on maybe I'd say 5 to10 billion dollars on maybe I'd say 5 to10 billion dollars on gray market peptides being spent in the gray market peptides being spent in the gray market peptides being spent in the United States in 2025 and that's going United States in 2025 and that's going United States in 2025 and that's going to grow this year. to grow this year. to grow this year. &gt;&gt; So here's my question. Standard pharma &gt;&gt; So here's my question. Standard pharma &gt;&gt; So here's my question. Standard pharma we know goes through of all the things we know goes through of all the things we know goes through of all the things we're talking about the most stringent we're talking about the most stringent we're talking about the most stringent process. You may hate pharma folks or process. You may hate pharma folks or process. You may hate pharma folks or whatever. That's you're right. But the whatever. That's you're right. But the whatever. That's you're right. But the stuff that you get that's the stuff that you get that's the stuff that you get that's non-generic from Novanoris, from Eli non-generic from Novanoris, from Eli non-generic from Novanoris, from Eli Liy, you can be certain based on the Liy, you can be certain based on the Liy, you can be certain based on the product packaging that it's as clean as product packaging that it's as clean as product packaging that it's as clean as it gets, as pure as it gets. it gets, as pure as it gets. it gets, as pure as it gets. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; Compoundingies are a mix. It depends on &gt;&gt; Compoundingies are a mix. It depends on &gt;&gt; Compoundingies are a mix. It depends on the compounding pharmacy. the compounding pharmacy. the compounding pharmacy. &gt;&gt; Do we know that gray market peptides had &gt;&gt; Do we know that gray market peptides had &gt;&gt; Do we know that gray market peptides had problems? Because there are people out problems? Because there are people out problems? Because there are people out there right now who are certainly not there right now who are certainly not there right now who are certainly not physicians. people like Robert Breedlove physicians. people like Robert Breedlove physicians. people like Robert Breedlove who's best known for like his work in who's best known for like his work in who's best known for like his work in crypto who's also now like very open crypto who's also now like very open crypto who's also now like very open about the fact that he's taken all these about the fact that he's taken all these about the fact that he's taken all these peptides and anabolics and things and I peptides and anabolics and things and I peptides and anabolics and things and I heard him online the other day saying heard him online the other day saying heard him online the other day saying literally that he's tested the gray literally that he's tested the gray literally that he's tested the gray market for research purposes only market for research purposes only market for research purposes only peptides and compared them to the peptides and compared them to the peptides and compared them to the compounding pharmacy versions and compounding pharmacy versions and compounding pharmacy versions and they're identical. Now he's not a they're identical. Now he's not a they're identical. Now he's not a physician and I don't think he's lying physician and I don't think he's lying physician and I don't think he's lying but many people are taking that sort of but many people are taking that sort of but many people are taking that sort of evidence and saying oh I'll just get it evidence and saying oh I'll just get it evidence and saying oh I'll just get it from gray market sources. As a from gray market sources. As a from gray market sources. As a physician, what is your stance on this? what is your stance on this? what is your stance on this? &gt;&gt; So, the API for all these active &gt;&gt; So, the API for all these active &gt;&gt; So, the API for all these active pharmaceutical ingredients comes from pharmaceutical ingredients comes from pharmaceutical ingredients comes from China. There are no such thing as China. There are no such thing as China. There are no such thing as Americanmade peptides. It gets finished Americanmade peptides. It gets finished Americanmade peptides. It gets finished here. So, the API, here. So, the API, here. So, the API, &gt;&gt; they're all from China. &gt;&gt; they're all from China. &gt;&gt; they're all from China. &gt;&gt; Everything's from China. the raw &gt;&gt; Everything's from China. the raw &gt;&gt; Everything's from China. the raw materials &gt;&gt; the raw materials like the semiglutide &gt;&gt; the raw materials like the semiglutide &gt;&gt; the raw materials like the semiglutide you're getting from a compounding you're getting from a compounding you're getting from a compounding pharmacy or a research pep peptide pharmacy or a research pep peptide pharmacy or a research pep peptide website ratide included comes from China website ratide included comes from China website ratide included comes from China and then gets either the raw and then gets either the raw and then gets either the raw material gets you know packaged here material gets you know packaged here material gets you know packaged here &gt;&gt; raw materials or synthesized compound &gt;&gt; raw materials or synthesized compound &gt;&gt; raw materials or synthesized compound because there's a big difference between because there's a big difference between because there's a big difference between getting like the raw materials for getting like the raw materials for getting like the raw materials for something and getting the thing something and getting the thing something and getting the thing &gt;&gt; the synthesized semiglutide &gt;&gt; the synthesized semiglutide &gt;&gt; the synthesized semiglutide &gt;&gt; gets made in China it'd be very &gt;&gt; gets made in China it'd be very &gt;&gt; gets made in China it'd be very expensive to make it here there are expensive to make it here there are expensive to make it here there are people starting to look at that cuz people starting to look at that cuz people starting to look at that cuz that's the next you know thing in that's the next you know thing in that's the next you know thing in the in the arms race to make American the in the arms race to make American the in the arms race to make American peptides, right? peptides, right? peptides, right? &gt;&gt; So, they're all Chinese peptides. &gt;&gt; So, they're all Chinese peptides. &gt;&gt; So, they're all Chinese peptides. &gt;&gt; Everything's Chinese peptides. &gt;&gt; Everything's Chinese peptides. &gt;&gt; Everything's Chinese peptides. &gt;&gt; There's no uh Guatemalan peptides. &gt;&gt; There's no uh Guatemalan peptides. &gt;&gt; There's no uh Guatemalan peptides. There's no There's no There's no &gt;&gt; China is the best at it at doing it. &gt;&gt; China is the best at it at doing it. &gt;&gt; China is the best at it at doing it. Now, the compoundingies Now, the compoundingies Now, the compoundingies vary in grading. Some of them are really vary in grading. Some of them are really vary in grading. Some of them are really good. They do all the testing, good. They do all the testing, good. They do all the testing, sterility. They have very good quality sterility. They have very good quality sterility. They have very good quality control. So, you get a good product, but control. So, you get a good product, but control. So, you get a good product, but they usually have to compound it with they usually have to compound it with they usually have to compound it with something else to get by the regulations something else to get by the regulations something else to get by the regulations like they'll add in a B12 or a B6 to say like they'll add in a B12 or a B6 to say like they'll add in a B12 or a B6 to say like the patient had nausea from the like the patient had nausea from the like the patient had nausea from the traditional semiglutide. we can compound traditional semiglutide. we can compound traditional semiglutide. we can compound them with B12 or B6 to get around the them with B12 or B6 to get around the them with B12 or B6 to get around the nausea and that's that that's meets the nausea and that's that that's meets the nausea and that's that that's meets the patient rule because there's two ways to patient rule because there's two ways to patient rule because there's two ways to get compounded medications. Either a get compounded medications. Either a get compounded medications. Either a shortage or there's a unique need that shortage or there's a unique need that shortage or there's a unique need that the patient has. the patient has. the patient has. &gt;&gt; Do we know that compounding with &gt;&gt; Do we know that compounding with &gt;&gt; Do we know that compounding with something else actually deals with the something else actually deals with the something else actually deals with the nausea or is that just it slight? It nausea or is that just it slight? It nausea or is that just it slight? It might help some people. might help some people. might help some people. &gt;&gt; Got it. &gt;&gt; Got it. &gt;&gt; Got it. &gt;&gt; Anecdotally, people will say that they &gt;&gt; Anecdotally, people will say that they &gt;&gt; Anecdotally, people will say that they respond better to the pens like the respond better to the pens like the respond better to the pens like the actual pharma pens than to the compared actual pharma pens than to the compared actual pharma pens than to the compared to the compounded stuff. The research to the compounded stuff. The research to the compounded stuff. The research stuff is all over the place. Like some stuff is all over the place. Like some stuff is all over the place. Like some of it could be better than compounded of it could be better than compounded of it could be better than compounded stuff. It could be the wrong substance. stuff. It could be the wrong substance. stuff. It could be the wrong substance. Like there's a there's a guy went viral Like there's a there's a guy went viral Like there's a there's a guy went viral on Twitter a few weeks ago. He got rid on Twitter a few weeks ago. He got rid on Twitter a few weeks ago. He got rid of two tide started getting darker. He's of two tide started getting darker. He's of two tide started getting darker. He's like, I don't think I'm injecting reat. like, I don't think I'm injecting reat. like, I don't think I'm injecting reat. Got it. Got it. Got it. &gt;&gt; Yes. He was melan. He was injecting &gt;&gt; Yes. He was melan. He was injecting &gt;&gt; Yes. He was melan. He was injecting melan too. melan too. melan too. &gt;&gt; And folks, I realize that we're &gt;&gt; And folks, I realize that we're &gt;&gt; And folks, I realize that we're going places that not even I predicted going places that not even I predicted going places that not even I predicted we would go, but this is super we would go, but this is super we would go, but this is super informative. So all of the raw materials informative. So all of the raw materials informative. So all of the raw materials are coming from the same source. Yes. are coming from the same source. Yes. are coming from the same source. Yes. Then they're getting filtered into these Then they're getting filtered into these Then they're getting filtered into these different let's just call them different let's just call them different let's just call them &gt;&gt; stringency bins. Standard pharma, quote &gt;&gt; stringency bins. Standard pharma, quote &gt;&gt; stringency bins. Standard pharma, quote unquote big pharma being the most unquote big pharma being the most unquote big pharma being the most stringent. &gt;&gt; Yeah, some of the raw materials are &gt;&gt; Yeah, some of the raw materials are &gt;&gt; Yeah, some of the raw materials are overseas, like I think Lily's opening overseas, like I think Lily's opening overseas, like I think Lily's opening some China factories. Some of it's here. some China factories. Some of it's here. some China factories. Some of it's here. &gt;&gt; Okay. Some are going into compoundingies &gt;&gt; Okay. Some are going into compoundingies &gt;&gt; Okay. Some are going into compoundingies and compoundingies, I think it's fair to and compoundingies, I think it's fair to and compoundingies, I think it's fair to say, have varying levels of stringency. say, have varying levels of stringency. say, have varying levels of stringency. Some are going to be excellent, some are Some are going to be excellent, some are Some are going to be excellent, some are good, some are going to be lousy. good, some are going to be lousy. good, some are going to be lousy. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; Fair. Okay. the quoteunquote gray market &gt;&gt; Fair. Okay. the quoteunquote gray market &gt;&gt; Fair. Okay. the quoteunquote gray market peptides, the ones where it's peptides, the ones where it's peptides, the ones where it's quoteunquote for research purposes only, quoteunquote for research purposes only, quoteunquote for research purposes only, but I made the joke on X a few weeks but I made the joke on X a few weeks but I made the joke on X a few weeks ago, like how many of you are running ago, like how many of you are running ago, like how many of you are running experiments in your home, not on experiments in your home, not on experiments in your home, not on animals. Were you doing cell culture at animals. Were you doing cell culture at animals. Were you doing cell culture at home? Like, come on. home? Like, come on. home? Like, come on. I know what's involved in doing cell I know what's involved in doing cell I know what's involved in doing cell culture. You're not. No one's doing this culture. You're not. No one's doing this culture. You're not. No one's doing this at home. at home. at home. &gt;&gt; So, those presumably also come in &gt;&gt; So, those presumably also come in &gt;&gt; So, those presumably also come in anywhere from excellent to dreadful. anywhere from excellent to dreadful. anywhere from excellent to dreadful. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Um, but we don't know which are which. &gt;&gt; Um, but we don't know which are which. &gt;&gt; Um, but we don't know which are which. Nope. &gt;&gt; We don't know that. &gt;&gt; We don't know that. &gt;&gt; We don't know that. &gt;&gt; And batch to batch. That's the big &gt;&gt; And batch to batch. That's the big &gt;&gt; And batch to batch. That's the big problem. &gt;&gt; Gotcha. Okay. So, it is risky to get re &gt;&gt; Gotcha. Okay. So, it is risky to get re &gt;&gt; Gotcha. Okay. So, it is risky to get re for research purposes. I mean, like for research purposes. I mean, like for research purposes. I mean, like that's the majority of way people are that's the majority of way people are that's the majority of way people are consuming peptides. Unfortunately, we consuming peptides. Unfortunately, we consuming peptides. Unfortunately, we should just because of the move should just because of the move should just because of the move in 2024 to get these from the category in 2024 to get these from the category in 2024 to get these from the category one to the category 2 list and make them one to the category 2 list and make them one to the category 2 list and make them banned quote unquote. That opened up banned quote unquote. That opened up banned quote unquote. That opened up this gray market zone. Like the gray this gray market zone. Like the gray this gray market zone. Like the gray market existed for the last 15, 20 market existed for the last 15, 20 market existed for the last 15, 20 years. Bodybuilders would, you know, years. Bodybuilders would, you know, years. Bodybuilders would, you know, have anecdotes about BPC157. They'd have anecdotes about BPC157. They'd have anecdotes about BPC157. They'd inject it post, you know, post squats inject it post, you know, post squats inject it post, you know, post squats for different injuries. Nobody really for different injuries. Nobody really for different injuries. Nobody really cared about it. It was with the GLP-1s cared about it. It was with the GLP-1s cared about it. It was with the GLP-1s and then the banning of the peptides and then the banning of the peptides and then the banning of the peptides plus this, you know, anti- medicine kick plus this, you know, anti- medicine kick plus this, you know, anti- medicine kick that's been happening over the last five that's been happening over the last five that's been happening over the last five years &gt;&gt; since the pandemic. &gt;&gt; since the pandemic. &gt;&gt; since the pandemic. &gt;&gt; Yes. Since the pandemic that people are &gt;&gt; Yes. Since the pandemic that people are &gt;&gt; Yes. Since the pandemic that people are like, you know what, I want to inject like, you know what, I want to inject like, you know what, I want to inject this because it gives them a sense of this because it gives them a sense of this because it gives them a sense of autonomy or they feel like their bro autonomy or they feel like their bro autonomy or they feel like their bro recommended it. Like I said, the best recommended it. Like I said, the best recommended it. Like I said, the best job in 2025 was to be a peptide job in 2025 was to be a peptide job in 2025 was to be a peptide affiliate. Like people made my yearly affiliate. Like people made my yearly affiliate. Like people made my yearly salary in a month selling peptides salary in a month selling peptides salary in a month selling peptides illegally on TikTok. illegally on TikTok. illegally on TikTok. &gt;&gt; And I will say because for people that &gt;&gt; And I will say because for people that &gt;&gt; And I will say because for people that think it's just bro science, it's also think it's just bro science, it's also think it's just bro science, it's also gal science. I will tell you, I don't gal science. I will tell you, I don't gal science. I will tell you, I don't even know this a term. Um, someone needs even know this a term. Um, someone needs even know this a term. Um, someone needs to come up with a better term. Um, my to come up with a better term. Um, my to come up with a better term. Um, my understanding and not from Reddit is understanding and not from Reddit is understanding and not from Reddit is that more than half of the peptide that more than half of the peptide that more than half of the peptide market is female. market is female. market is female. &gt;&gt; Oh, that's right. &gt;&gt; Oh, that's right. &gt;&gt; Oh, that's right. &gt;&gt; You know, there's this perception that &gt;&gt; You know, there's this perception that &gt;&gt; You know, there's this perception that it's like, you know, only guys who like it's like, you know, only guys who like it's like, you know, only guys who like to lift weights and want to be jacked to lift weights and want to be jacked to lift weights and want to be jacked and, you know, jacked and tan or and, you know, jacked and tan or and, you know, jacked and tan or whatever, they say, you know, no. No. whatever, they say, you know, no. No. whatever, they say, you know, no. No. Especially when we start getting into Especially when we start getting into Especially when we start getting into things like GHKU copper and we start things like GHKU copper and we start things like GHKU copper and we start talking about things for collagen and talking about things for collagen and talking about things for collagen and skin rejuvenation. There's a big peptide skin rejuvenation. There's a big peptide skin rejuvenation. There's a big peptide market in towards women. I actually market in towards women. I actually market in towards women. I actually think in the long run it's going to think in the long run it's going to think in the long run it's going to exceed at least financially peptide exceed at least financially peptide exceed at least financially peptide market in men. market in men. market in men. &gt;&gt; I think it already has because like &gt;&gt; I think it already has because like &gt;&gt; I think it already has because like soccer moms have become like affiliates soccer moms have become like affiliates soccer moms have become like affiliates like you know Amway and Herbal Life like you know Amway and Herbal Life like you know Amway and Herbal Life was the big thing 20 years ago. Now was the big thing 20 years ago. Now was the big thing 20 years ago. Now soccer moms just do peptide affiliation. soccer moms just do peptide affiliation. soccer moms just do peptide affiliation. &gt;&gt; Where are they getting their peptides? &gt;&gt; Where are they getting their peptides? &gt;&gt; Where are they getting their peptides? &gt;&gt; Research research grade websites. The &gt;&gt; Research research grade websites. The &gt;&gt; Research research grade websites. The &gt;&gt; gray market. Okay. We already know that &gt;&gt; gray market. Okay. We already know that &gt;&gt; gray market. Okay. We already know that they're not uh recommended, but what they're not uh recommended, but what they're not uh recommended, but what about black market? What what about black market? What what about black market? What what would be considered black market? would be considered black market? would be considered black market? &gt;&gt; Black market is like if you bought it &gt;&gt; Black market is like if you bought it &gt;&gt; Black market is like if you bought it directly from China like it's very directly from China like it's very directly from China like it's very cheap. Like a vial of BPC costs five cheap. Like a vial of BPC costs five cheap. Like a vial of BPC costs five bucks to make. Like now someone will bucks to make. Like now someone will bucks to make. Like now someone will sell it to you for $1.99 plus depending sell it to you for $1.99 plus depending sell it to you for $1.99 plus depending on where. But black market is either on where. But black market is either on where. But black market is either like you know your friend in China on like you know your friend in China on like you know your friend in China on WhatsApp sent you a vial of BPC. Do not WhatsApp sent you a vial of BPC. Do not WhatsApp sent you a vial of BPC. Do not do this or someone synthesize claims do this or someone synthesize claims do this or someone synthesize claims they synthesize it in their bathtub. they synthesize it in their bathtub. they synthesize it in their bathtub. Like just like the underground gear like Like just like the underground gear like Like just like the underground gear like all the steroids that were in the '9s all the steroids that were in the '9s all the steroids that were in the '9s and the 2000s. It's like, who knows what and the 2000s. It's like, who knows what and the 2000s. It's like, who knows what that is. that is. that is. &gt;&gt; What's so interesting to me is with &gt;&gt; What's so interesting to me is with &gt;&gt; What's so interesting to me is with steroids, it went from bodybuilding steroids, it went from bodybuilding steroids, it went from bodybuilding community to eventually hormone community to eventually hormone community to eventually hormone replacement. It was like TRT or what I replacement. It was like TRT or what I replacement. It was like TRT or what I call TRT plus cuz a lot of guys are call TRT plus cuz a lot of guys are call TRT plus cuz a lot of guys are taking a lot more than that. Some are taking a lot more than that. Some are taking a lot more than that. Some are taking less, some are most are taking less, some are most are taking less, some are most are taking more, some are taking what they're more, some are taking what they're more, some are taking what they're prescribed. And then HRT be has become prescribed. And then HRT be has become prescribed. And then HRT be has become very popular in women. So now HRT is very popular in women. So now HRT is very popular in women. So now HRT is kind of like a thing that it's not like, kind of like a thing that it's not like, kind of like a thing that it's not like, oh my goodness, like so and so is taking oh my goodness, like so and so is taking oh my goodness, like so and so is taking estrogen replacement or testo. It's not estrogen replacement or testo. It's not estrogen replacement or testo. It's not a big deal. Peptides is different not a big deal. Peptides is different not a big deal. Peptides is different because it came, you know, the big because it came, you know, the big because it came, you know, the big explosion in this came through the GLPs. explosion in this came through the GLPs. explosion in this came through the GLPs. And I would argue, I'd love your opinion And I would argue, I'd love your opinion And I would argue, I'd love your opinion on this, why so many people are now on this, why so many people are now on this, why so many people are now peptide curious is because people peptide curious is because people peptide curious is because people because of the GLPs are now also very because of the GLPs are now also very because of the GLPs are now also very comfortable &gt;&gt; injecting themselves. Like like 5 years &gt;&gt; injecting themselves. Like like 5 years &gt;&gt; injecting themselves. Like like 5 years ago, if you're like, you're going to ago, if you're like, you're going to ago, if you're like, you're going to inject yourself, people like, oh my god. inject yourself, people like, oh my god. inject yourself, people like, oh my god. Then they realize it's like this little Then they realize it's like this little Then they realize it's like this little tiny pin. It hurts less than a, you tiny pin. It hurts less than a, you tiny pin. It hurts less than a, you know, Texan mosquikito bite. People are know, Texan mosquikito bite. People are know, Texan mosquikito bite. People are doing it on their skin and like, you doing it on their skin and like, you doing it on their skin and like, you know, and somebody's, you know, your know, and somebody's, you know, your know, and somebody's, you know, your girlfriend or wife is doing it as if girlfriend or wife is doing it as if girlfriend or wife is doing it as if it's nothing. And, you know, like heroin it's nothing. And, you know, like heroin it's nothing. And, you know, like heroin addicts or diabetics, addicts or diabetics, addicts or diabetics, &gt;&gt; right? You're not going introvenous. So, &gt;&gt; right? You're not going introvenous. So, &gt;&gt; right? You're not going introvenous. So, that changed everything that changed everything that changed everything that dstigmatized it. Now, dstigmatized it. Now, dstigmatized it. Now, &gt;&gt; to be fair, I want to touch on &gt;&gt; to be fair, I want to touch on &gt;&gt; to be fair, I want to touch on &gt;&gt; the question about adverse events. &gt;&gt; the question about adverse events. &gt;&gt; the question about adverse events. Again, &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; we're going to spend a couple minutes &gt;&gt; we're going to spend a couple minutes &gt;&gt; we're going to spend a couple minutes talking about some incredible things talking about some incredible things talking about some incredible things that we've seen and heard about BPC57 in that we've seen and heard about BPC57 in that we've seen and heard about BPC57 in terms of its positive effects. terms of its positive effects. terms of its positive effects. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; the concern I've always had was the &gt;&gt; the concern I've always had was the &gt;&gt; the concern I've always had was the angioenesis, the growth of vasculature. angioenesis, the growth of vasculature. angioenesis, the growth of vasculature. If somebody happens to have a little If somebody happens to have a little If somebody happens to have a little tumor or what will eventually become a tumor or what will eventually become a tumor or what will eventually become a tumor sitting on their liver or in their tumor sitting on their liver or in their tumor sitting on their liver or in their gut or in their pancreas, in theory, it gut or in their pancreas, in theory, it gut or in their pancreas, in theory, it could vascularize that tumor and cause could vascularize that tumor and cause could vascularize that tumor and cause it to grow more quickly. Is there any it to grow more quickly. Is there any it to grow more quickly. Is there any evidence that that's actually happened? evidence that that's actually happened? evidence that that's actually happened? I want to be very clear. I'm not loading I want to be very clear. I'm not loading I want to be very clear. I'm not loading this question because it sounds like I'm this question because it sounds like I'm this question because it sounds like I'm kind of like leading the witness when I kind of like leading the witness when I kind of like leading the witness when I say that. I want to know. Y say that. I want to know. Y say that. I want to know. Y &gt;&gt; I'm not currently taking BPC57. I'm &gt;&gt; I'm not currently taking BPC57. I'm &gt;&gt; I'm not currently taking BPC57. I'm fortunately I don't have an injury at fortunately I don't have an injury at fortunately I don't have an injury at the moment. So that would be the only the moment. So that would be the only the moment. So that would be the only condition which I'd take it unless you condition which I'd take it unless you condition which I'd take it unless you told me there are other reasons. But I told me there are other reasons. But I told me there are other reasons. But I don't want to give myself that risk don't want to give myself that risk don't want to give myself that risk &gt;&gt; that risk. And I think most people don't &gt;&gt; that risk. And I think most people don't &gt;&gt; that risk. And I think most people don't want to give themselves that risk. So want to give themselves that risk. So want to give themselves that risk. So what is the realistic risk based on what is the realistic risk based on what is the realistic risk based on observations in humans or animals? Have observations in humans or animals? Have observations in humans or animals? Have we ever seen tumors grow more quickly? we ever seen tumors grow more quickly? we ever seen tumors grow more quickly? &gt;&gt; No. Like for example, most compounds if &gt;&gt; No. Like for example, most compounds if &gt;&gt; No. Like for example, most compounds if they're, you know, carcinogenic, we will they're, you know, carcinogenic, we will they're, you know, carcinogenic, we will see that signature in the animals like see that signature in the animals like see that signature in the animals like you know with cardarine GW uh was a drug you know with cardarine GW uh was a drug you know with cardarine GW uh was a drug that was very was very promising because that was very was very promising because that was very was very promising because it had you know diabetic implications it had you know diabetic implications it had you know diabetic implications for metabolism and now it's a for metabolism and now it's a for metabolism and now it's a bodybuilder drug that they use for more bodybuilder drug that they use for more bodybuilder drug that they use for more cardio. What is this? cardio. What is this? cardio. What is this? &gt;&gt; Cardarine GW. Mhm. Uh you might have &gt;&gt; Cardarine GW. Mhm. Uh you might have &gt;&gt; Cardarine GW. Mhm. Uh you might have seen on the Reddits and those forums, seen on the Reddits and those forums, seen on the Reddits and those forums, but people use it for I stay out of but people use it for I stay out of but people use it for I stay out of Reddit. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Good. Uh increases your cardio um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Good. Uh increases your cardio um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Good. Uh increases your cardio um capacity. Got so banned on the water capacity. Got so banned on the water capacity. Got so banned on the water list of course, but it was it had list of course, but it was it had list of course, but it was it had promise for treating diabetics because promise for treating diabetics because promise for treating diabetics because it changed metabolism in the liver. It it changed metabolism in the liver. It it changed metabolism in the liver. It had a signal of cancer in animal data. had a signal of cancer in animal data. had a signal of cancer in animal data. So that whole thing was scrapped. So that whole thing was scrapped. So that whole thing was scrapped. &gt;&gt; There's no signal from the animal &gt;&gt; There's no signal from the animal &gt;&gt; There's no signal from the animal literature on BPC57 for you know literature on BPC57 for you know literature on BPC57 for you know cancers. Now that all that literature cancers. Now that all that literature cancers. Now that all that literature comes from one group. So we have to be comes from one group. So we have to be comes from one group. So we have to be very careful. that one creation group very careful. that one creation group very careful. that one creation group that tells you that that's it's the that tells you that that's it's the that tells you that that's it's the safest thing in the world. safest thing in the world. safest thing in the world. &gt;&gt; All the animal data come from one group. &gt;&gt; All the animal data come from one group. &gt;&gt; All the animal data come from one group. &gt;&gt; Almost all of it. &gt;&gt; Almost all of it. &gt;&gt; Almost all of it. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Almost all of it. Very few. Like there's &gt;&gt; Almost all of it. Very few. Like there's &gt;&gt; Almost all of it. Very few. Like there's a couple of Chinese studies on BBC57. a couple of Chinese studies on BBC57. a couple of Chinese studies on BBC57. Now there's starting to become more Now there's starting to become more Now there's starting to become more interest here. Like I think it's a phase interest here. Like I think it's a phase interest here. Like I think it's a phase two trial on hamstrings happening here two trial on hamstrings happening here two trial on hamstrings happening here in the United States. in the United States. in the United States. &gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. Humans. Yes. Phase two. &gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. Humans. Yes. Phase two. &gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. Humans. Yes. Phase two. &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh we talked to a group, an &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh we talked to a group, an &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh we talked to a group, an orthopedic group somewhere on the East orthopedic group somewhere on the East orthopedic group somewhere on the East Coast. They they wanted to do a BBC Coast. They they wanted to do a BBC Coast. They they wanted to do a BBC trial. So we consulted with them to kind trial. So we consulted with them to kind trial. So we consulted with them to kind of Great. of Great. of Great. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So it's going to happen. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So it's going to happen. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So it's going to happen. Especially if it moves to this category Especially if it moves to this category Especially if it moves to this category one list and people can be prescribed one list and people can be prescribed one list and people can be prescribed it. At least we can get like a phase 4 it. At least we can get like a phase 4 it. At least we can get like a phase 4 trial where it's being prescribed and we trial where it's being prescribed and we trial where it's being prescribed and we can see what's happening to the people can see what's happening to the people can see what's happening to the people as they're getting it as they're getting it as they're getting it &gt;&gt; and we can, you know, aggregate all this &gt;&gt; and we can, you know, aggregate all this &gt;&gt; and we can, you know, aggregate all this anecdata into one place ideally and anecdata into one place ideally and anecdata into one place ideally and report on it. So that's something we're report on it. So that's something we're report on it. So that's something we're working on in the in the background. working on in the in the background. working on in the in the background. &gt;&gt; Is that something you personally working &gt;&gt; Is that something you personally working &gt;&gt; Is that something you personally working on aggregating all this all this data on aggregating all this all this data on aggregating all this all this data together into a anyone nest study to put together into a anyone nest study to put together into a anyone nest study to put it all together because all the ane it all together because all the ane it all together because all the ane data exists but like put it together data exists but like put it together data exists but like put it together somewhere at least we can see what the somewhere at least we can see what the somewhere at least we can see what the signals are. For example, on Reddit, signals are. For example, on Reddit, signals are. For example, on Reddit, you'll find signals of hematomas getting you'll find signals of hematomas getting you'll find signals of hematomas getting worse, which makes sense with the with worse, which makes sense with the with worse, which makes sense with the with the VEGF pathway. the VEGF pathway. the VEGF pathway. &gt;&gt; I've heard this. So, a friend and &gt;&gt; I've heard this. So, a friend and &gt;&gt; I've heard this. So, a friend and physician who is, I would say, peptide physician who is, I would say, peptide physician who is, I would say, peptide curious/positive told me that when he takes BPC-157 for, told me that when he takes BPC-157 for, told me that when he takes BPC-157 for, you know, a shoulder or knee or you know, a shoulder or knee or you know, a shoulder or knee or whatever, that angiomas on his face, um, whatever, that angiomas on his face, um, whatever, that angiomas on his face, um, the sort of spiderweb angiomas, not the sort of spiderweb angiomas, not the sort of spiderweb angiomas, not the formal term, forgive me, derms, but, um, formal term, forgive me, derms, but, um, formal term, forgive me, derms, but, um, get worse. That's his personal get worse. That's his personal get worse. That's his personal observation. I think a lot of people observation. I think a lot of people observation. I think a lot of people don't want that. It makes sense though don't want that. It makes sense though don't want that. It makes sense though if it's promoting angioenesis if it's promoting angioenesis if it's promoting angioenesis &gt;&gt; based on the mechanism it does make &gt;&gt; based on the mechanism it does make &gt;&gt; based on the mechanism it does make sense. Now BBC157 is not a uniform sense. Now BBC157 is not a uniform sense. Now BBC157 is not a uniform androgenis um upregulator. In some androgenis um upregulator. In some androgenis um upregulator. In some models it decreases vef in a melanoma models it decreases vef in a melanoma models it decreases vef in a melanoma model a cell line. model a cell line. model a cell line. &gt;&gt; So it might be potentially anti-cancer &gt;&gt; So it might be potentially anti-cancer &gt;&gt; So it might be potentially anti-cancer but we need to test it. but we need to test it. but we need to test it. &gt;&gt; We don't know and which is what's really &gt;&gt; We don't know and which is what's really &gt;&gt; We don't know and which is what's really unfortunate about this compound. It's unfortunate about this compound. It's unfortunate about this compound. It's very promising. It has all this cool very promising. It has all this cool very promising. It has all this cool literature in animals and we just don't literature in animals and we just don't literature in animals and we just don't know when it comes to the one. know when it comes to the one. know when it comes to the one. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. And and we'd love &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. And and we'd love &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. And and we'd love to know because like if it does work to know because like if it does work to know because like if it does work like I could see a million use cases in like I could see a million use cases in like I could see a million use cases in the ICU that we could use, you know, the ICU that we could use, you know, the ICU that we could use, you know, BBC157 to really help people out BBC157 to really help people out BBC157 to really help people out especially during the critical illness especially during the critical illness especially during the critical illness because like in ICU people get gastric because like in ICU people get gastric because like in ICU people get gastric ulcers. Like if we knew that it would ulcers. Like if we knew that it would ulcers. Like if we knew that it would work, I would love to give them an work, I would love to give them an work, I would love to give them an infusion of BBC157 and that's the future infusion of BBC157 and that's the future infusion of BBC157 and that's the future I could see happening. But we need data. I could see happening. But we need data. I could see happening. But we need data. As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long discovered it way back in 2012, long before I had a podcast, and I've been before I had a podcast, and I've been before I had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. AG1 is, to my taking it every day since. AG1 is, to my taking it every day since. AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most knowledge, the highest quality and most knowledge, the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to into a single scoop that's easy to into a single scoop that's easy to drink, and tastes great. It's designed drink, and tastes great. It's designed drink, and tastes great. It's designed to support things like gut health, to support things like gut health, to support things like gut health, immune health, and overall energy. And immune health, and overall energy. And immune health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps it does so by helping to fill any gaps it does so by helping to fill any gaps that you might have in your daily that you might have in your daily that you might have in your daily nutrition. And of course, we should all nutrition. And of course, we should all nutrition. And of course, we should all eat highquality whole foods, but most of eat highquality whole foods, but most of eat highquality whole foods, but most of us are probably not getting enough us are probably not getting enough us are probably not getting enough prebiotics, vitamins, and minerals, and prebiotics, vitamins, and minerals, and prebiotics, vitamins, and minerals, and AG1 ensures that those gaps are filled. AG1 ensures that those gaps are filled. AG1 ensures that those gaps are filled. I get asked all the time by people if I get asked all the time by people if I get asked all the time by people if they were to take just one supplement, they were to take just one supplement, they were to take just one supplement, what would my recommendation for that what would my recommendation for that what would my recommendation for that supplement be? And my answer is always supplement be? And my answer is always supplement be? And my answer is always AG1 because it's just been so critical AG1 because it's just been so critical AG1 because it's just been so critical for supporting all aspects of my for supporting all aspects of my for supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental health, and physical health, mental health, and physical health, mental health, and performance by covering those performance by covering those performance by covering those nutritional, what we call foundational nutritional, what we call foundational nutritional, what we call foundational bases. And I know from my own experience bases. And I know from my own experience bases. And I know from my own experience and from everyone I've heard that I and from everyone I've heard that I and from everyone I've heard that I recommended it to that they simply feel recommended it to that they simply feel recommended it to that they simply feel much better in a number of different much better in a number of different much better in a number of different ways when they take it regularly. If ways when they take it regularly. If ways when they take it regularly. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drink a1.com/huberman drink a1.com/huberman drink a1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a week supply time, AG1 is giving away a week supply time, AG1 is giving away a week supply of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2 with your subscription. AGZ is something that your subscription. AGZ is something that your subscription. AGZ is something that I help design. It tastes great, and it's I help design. It tastes great, and it's I help design. It tastes great, and it's the only sleep supplement I take. It has the only sleep supplement I take. It has the only sleep supplement I take. It has a collection of different things in it a collection of different things in it a collection of different things in it that has dramatically improved my sleep. that has dramatically improved my sleep. that has dramatically improved my sleep. Both my slowwave deep sleep and my rapid Both my slowwave deep sleep and my rapid Both my slowwave deep sleep and my rapid eye movement sleep and I absolutely love eye movement sleep and I absolutely love eye movement sleep and I absolutely love it. Again, that's drinkagg.com/huberman it. Again, that's drinkagg.com/huberman it. Again, that's drinkagg.com/huberman to get a week supply of AGZ and a bottle to get a week supply of AGZ and a bottle to get a week supply of AGZ and a bottle of D3K2 with your subscription. When is of D3K2 with your subscription. When is of D3K2 with your subscription. When is there going to be a formal randomized there going to be a formal randomized there going to be a formal randomized control trial on BPC and who holds the control trial on BPC and who holds the control trial on BPC and who holds the patent? &gt;&gt; There's multiple patents on BPC 157 &gt;&gt; There's multiple patents on BPC 157 &gt;&gt; There's multiple patents on BPC 157 depending on which salt they're in. The depending on which salt they're in. The depending on which salt they're in. The patent has been passed around a couple patent has been passed around a couple patent has been passed around a couple of times to through different places. of times to through different places. of times to through different places. Unfortunately, the company that had the Unfortunately, the company that had the Unfortunately, the company that had the patent under the pled got acquired by patent under the pled got acquired by patent under the pled got acquired by TAVA. TA is this generic pharmaceutical TAVA. TA is this generic pharmaceutical TAVA. TA is this generic pharmaceutical company and they don't they make, you company and they don't they make, you company and they don't they make, you know, Aderall. So, they have know, Aderall. So, they have know, Aderall. So, they have they're making tons of money making they're making tons of money making they're making tons of money making Aderal. They don't really care about Aderal. They don't really care about Aderal. They don't really care about PPC157. So, they have one of the PPC157. So, they have one of the PPC157. So, they have one of the patents. The other patent expires in patents. The other patent expires in patents. The other patent expires in like 10 years. I think Cric still has like 10 years. I think Cric still has like 10 years. I think Cric still has it. Dr. Crick is the guy behind it. Dr. Crick is the guy behind it. Dr. Crick is the guy behind BBC157. He's BBC157. He's BBC157. He's &gt;&gt; he's in Croatia. &gt;&gt; he's in Croatia. &gt;&gt; he's in Croatia. &gt;&gt; He's in Croatia. Yeah. &gt;&gt; He's in Croatia. Yeah. &gt;&gt; He's in Croatia. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Would Tava um sell the patent? &gt;&gt; Would Tava um sell the patent? &gt;&gt; Would Tava um sell the patent? &gt;&gt; I'm sure they would if someone made an &gt;&gt; I'm sure they would if someone made an &gt;&gt; I'm sure they would if someone made an offer. The the problem is I don't I offer. The the problem is I don't I offer. The the problem is I don't I don't see the purpose of even having the don't see the purpose of even having the don't see the purpose of even having the patent because you can add on one chain patent because you can add on one chain patent because you can add on one chain to the amino acid. This is the problem to the amino acid. This is the problem to the amino acid. This is the problem with peptides. This is what Luli with peptides. This is what Luli with peptides. This is what Luli Eli Liy is coming into when it comes to Eli Liy is coming into when it comes to Eli Liy is coming into when it comes to making rea is that patent laws for making rea is that patent laws for making rea is that patent laws for peptides kind of suck because you can peptides kind of suck because you can peptides kind of suck because you can add on one amino acid. You can modify add on one amino acid. You can modify add on one amino acid. You can modify one thing on it and suddenly it's a one thing on it and suddenly it's a one thing on it and suddenly it's a different compound. different compound. different compound. &gt;&gt; This is true for other pharmaceuticals. &gt;&gt; This is true for other pharmaceuticals. &gt;&gt; This is true for other pharmaceuticals. Like I'm familiar with some of the Like I'm familiar with some of the Like I'm familiar with some of the ketamine and ibeane trials and there's a ketamine and ibeane trials and there's a ketamine and ibeane trials and there's a company that took ibagane and basically company that took ibagane and basically company that took ibagane and basically added a magnesium component to it and added a magnesium component to it and added a magnesium component to it and you can make that a completely new drug. you can make that a completely new drug. you can make that a completely new drug. I'm not saying that doesn't work. I I'm not saying that doesn't work. I I'm not saying that doesn't work. I think they have a good rationale for think they have a good rationale for think they have a good rationale for doing that. But so this game of sort of doing that. But so this game of sort of doing that. But so this game of sort of protecting patents rough and plus protecting patents rough and plus protecting patents rough and plus millions of people have already used millions of people have already used millions of people have already used BPC157 through research use only BPC157 through research use only BPC157 through research use only websites. So I think millions is fair. websites. So I think millions is fair. websites. So I think millions is fair. But now how do you reel that back? Like But now how do you reel that back? Like But now how do you reel that back? Like it's already the cat's out of the bag. it's already the cat's out of the bag. it's already the cat's out of the bag. So like there's no financial incentive So like there's no financial incentive So like there's no financial incentive to run the giant study to run the giant study to run the giant study &gt;&gt; unless like we crowdfund it as you &gt;&gt; unless like we crowdfund it as you &gt;&gt; unless like we crowdfund it as you know peptide curious people know peptide curious people know peptide curious people &gt;&gt; within the category of um interesting uh &gt;&gt; within the category of um interesting uh &gt;&gt; within the category of um interesting uh anecdotal data. Y anecdotal data. Y anecdotal data. Y &gt;&gt; and in your role as a physician, I &gt;&gt; and in your role as a physician, I &gt;&gt; and in your role as a physician, I realize you're not suggesting these realize you're not suggesting these realize you're not suggesting these things, but you have a different things, but you have a different things, but you have a different picture of this stuff at the level of picture of this stuff at the level of picture of this stuff at the level of mechanism and you're a clinician that mechanism and you're a clinician that mechanism and you're a clinician that works with, you know, truly FDA approved works with, you know, truly FDA approved works with, you know, truly FDA approved drugs and you're I want you to drugs and you're I want you to drugs and you're I want you to share with folks. I said it in the share with folks. I said it in the share with folks. I said it in the introduction, but internal medicine introduction, but internal medicine introduction, but internal medicine means that you spend your days what means that you spend your days what means that you spend your days what &gt;&gt; I'm on the on the wards of the hospital &gt;&gt; I'm on the on the wards of the hospital &gt;&gt; I'm on the on the wards of the hospital admitting patients from the ER to the admitting patients from the ER to the admitting patients from the ER to the floor to the ICU, managing very complex floor to the ICU, managing very complex floor to the ICU, managing very complex disease ranging from, you know, a simple disease ranging from, you know, a simple disease ranging from, you know, a simple pneumonia to a coronary artery bypass pneumonia to a coronary artery bypass pneumonia to a coronary artery bypass patient. So, yeah, patient. So, yeah, patient. So, yeah, &gt;&gt; that whole spectrum. &gt;&gt; that whole spectrum. &gt;&gt; that whole spectrum. &gt;&gt; Okay. So that lens applied to this as &gt;&gt; Okay. So that lens applied to this as &gt;&gt; Okay. So that lens applied to this as much as one can would you say that like much as one can would you say that like much as one can would you say that like of the reports that you've heard of the reports that you've heard of the reports that you've heard directly from people you trust and from directly from people you trust and from directly from people you trust and from people that who are not incentivized to people that who are not incentivized to people that who are not incentivized to say these things like oh you know it say these things like oh you know it say these things like oh you know it made me happier you know their skin made me happier you know their skin made me happier you know their skin looked better all the things that one looked better all the things that one looked better all the things that one can find in it with an affiliate code can find in it with an affiliate code can find in it with an affiliate code attached to it of those what do you attached to it of those what do you attached to it of those what do you think are the most interesting think are the most interesting think are the most interesting potentially valid claims potentially valid claims potentially valid claims and I asked that because If we were and I asked that because If we were and I asked that because If we were going to fund a clinical trial, we need going to fund a clinical trial, we need going to fund a clinical trial, we need to pick an end point or a couple of end to pick an end point or a couple of end to pick an end point or a couple of end points. Is it going to be recovery from points. Is it going to be recovery from points. Is it going to be recovery from injury? If so, what kinds of injuries? injury? If so, what kinds of injuries? injury? If so, what kinds of injuries? Is it going to be the gastric stuff? Is it going to be the gastric stuff? Is it going to be the gastric stuff? Is it mood interaction with dopamine it mood interaction with dopamine it mood interaction with dopamine receptors? I mean, I've heard so many receptors? I mean, I've heard so many receptors? I mean, I've heard so many different things. If we had a chunk of different things. If we had a chunk of different things. If we had a chunk of money and we're going to we're going to money and we're going to we're going to money and we're going to we're going to design a study and have someone else do design a study and have someone else do design a study and have someone else do it so it's truly independent. Like what it so it's truly independent. Like what it so it's truly independent. Like what are the top three to five outcomes that are the top three to five outcomes that are the top three to five outcomes that you've heard that you have a good you've heard that you have a good you've heard that you have a good feeling there's quote unquote something feeling there's quote unquote something feeling there's quote unquote something there? &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; And then we narrow it down to maybe one &gt;&gt; And then we narrow it down to maybe one &gt;&gt; And then we narrow it down to maybe one or two for sake of the study. What or two for sake of the study. What or two for sake of the study. What are those five? I would say to complete are those five? I would say to complete are those five? I would say to complete the phase one, phase two on the ulcer of the phase one, phase two on the ulcer of the phase one, phase two on the ulcer of colitis, do that phase three trial on colitis, do that phase three trial on colitis, do that phase three trial on proven that it has benefits for proven that it has benefits for proven that it has benefits for ulcerative colitis. And I don't think we ulcerative colitis. And I don't think we ulcerative colitis. And I don't think we need to use enema. We could probably need to use enema. We could probably need to use enema. We could probably have an encapsulated version that have an encapsulated version that have an encapsulated version that releases deeper into the intestines. releases deeper into the intestines. releases deeper into the intestines. &gt;&gt; So fix the gut, fix the ulcered gut. &gt;&gt; So fix the gut, fix the ulcered gut. &gt;&gt; So fix the gut, fix the ulcered gut. &gt;&gt; Yes. In conjunction with that, you could &gt;&gt; Yes. In conjunction with that, you could &gt;&gt; Yes. In conjunction with that, you could do a trial on like, you know, gird. do a trial on like, you know, gird. do a trial on like, you know, gird. That's a simple condition. A lot of That's a simple condition. A lot of That's a simple condition. A lot of people have it randomized to BPC157 oral people have it randomized to BPC157 oral people have it randomized to BPC157 oral capsules versus pentopresol. capsules versus pentopresol. capsules versus pentopresol. &gt;&gt; Okay. And you're basing this on the fact &gt;&gt; Okay. And you're basing this on the fact &gt;&gt; Okay. And you're basing this on the fact that you've seen and heard that people that you've seen and heard that people that you've seen and heard that people who have gird get better, feel better who have gird get better, feel better who have gird get better, feel better when they take it. Okay. And it could be when they take it. Okay. And it could be when they take it. Okay. And it could be placebo. &gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, anecdotally, when I &gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, anecdotally, when I &gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, anecdotally, when I travel, I have a bottle of BPC orally. travel, I have a bottle of BPC orally. travel, I have a bottle of BPC orally. &gt;&gt; Why is that? &gt;&gt; Why is that? &gt;&gt; Why is that? &gt;&gt; I don't get, you know, travelers &gt;&gt; I don't get, you know, travelers &gt;&gt; I don't get, you know, travelers diarrhea or or, you know, diarrhea or or, you know, diarrhea or or, you know, &gt;&gt; when I, you know, eat exotic foods on in &gt;&gt; when I, you know, eat exotic foods on in &gt;&gt; when I, you know, eat exotic foods on in random places. My friends all get sick random places. My friends all get sick random places. My friends all get sick and I happen not to. Anecdote, right? and I happen not to. Anecdote, right? and I happen not to. Anecdote, right? But that's interesting. There seems to But that's interesting. There seems to But that's interesting. There seems to be some kind of gut protective effect. be some kind of gut protective effect. be some kind of gut protective effect. And that's what they noticed in the And that's what they noticed in the And that's what they noticed in the mice literature. they would have an mice literature. they would have an mice literature. they would have an offending agent into the gut and they'd offending agent into the gut and they'd offending agent into the gut and they'd notice that there would be protection notice that there would be protection notice that there would be protection deeper down in the in the gastric tract deeper down in the in the gastric tract deeper down in the in the gastric tract from that offending agent because if you from that offending agent because if you from that offending agent because if you think about it the gut is the most think about it the gut is the most think about it the gut is the most vulnerable part of the body like it's vulnerable part of the body like it's vulnerable part of the body like it's open to the outside world it's a tube open to the outside world it's a tube open to the outside world it's a tube that runs through you can eat something that runs through you can eat something that runs through you can eat something and it could completely destroy you so and it could completely destroy you so and it could completely destroy you so you have to have some kind of mechanisms you have to have some kind of mechanisms you have to have some kind of mechanisms the prostaglandins uh the you know all the prostaglandins uh the you know all the prostaglandins uh the you know all these different hormones that are made these different hormones that are made these different hormones that are made potentially BPC17 is part of this robust potentially BPC17 is part of this robust potentially BPC17 is part of this robust armory that the gut has to protect armory that the gut has to protect armory that the gut has to protect itself from further injuries. Mhm. What itself from further injuries. Mhm. What itself from further injuries. Mhm. What are some things outside the gut or are some things outside the gut or are some things outside the gut or indirect from the gut that are also indirect from the gut that are also indirect from the gut that are also compelling? &gt;&gt; So, I would love to see some &gt;&gt; So, I would love to see some &gt;&gt; So, I would love to see some neuroscychiatric um BBC studies when it neuroscychiatric um BBC studies when it neuroscychiatric um BBC studies when it comes to um addictions. There's enough comes to um addictions. There's enough comes to um addictions. There's enough anecdot about people talking about anecdot about people talking about anecdot about people talking about addictions and like hey I don't need addictions and like hey I don't need addictions and like hey I don't need to crave insert drug here not to crave insert drug here not to crave insert drug here not recommending that anyone tries that out recommending that anyone tries that out recommending that anyone tries that out but for alcohol or whatever it may be. but for alcohol or whatever it may be. but for alcohol or whatever it may be. Do you think that is likely due to the Do you think that is likely due to the Do you think that is likely due to the we're speculating but likely due to a um we're speculating but likely due to a um we're speculating but likely due to a um interference with the reinforcing interference with the reinforcing interference with the reinforcing properties just like earlier you said properties just like earlier you said properties just like earlier you said people are getting less drunk so people are getting less drunk so people are getting less drunk so people are getting less high becomes less are getting less high becomes less are getting less high becomes less reinforcing or is it somehow touching reinforcing or is it somehow touching reinforcing or is it somehow touching the craving mechanisms themselves? the craving mechanisms themselves? the craving mechanisms themselves? &gt;&gt; It's probably touching the craving &gt;&gt; It's probably touching the craving &gt;&gt; It's probably touching the craving mechanism through the gutb brain access mechanism through the gutb brain access mechanism through the gutb brain access because I don't think it's going because I don't think it's going because I don't think it's going systemic either. I think it's systemic either. I think it's systemic either. I think it's locally in the gut shutting down the locally in the gut shutting down the locally in the gut shutting down the neurons from if you think neurons from if you think neurons from if you think about it if BBC is what they claim it is about it if BBC is what they claim it is about it if BBC is what they claim it is right and that's a big if that if you right and that's a big if that if you right and that's a big if that if you have a noxious agent going into your gut have a noxious agent going into your gut have a noxious agent going into your gut your body has to have a mechanism to your body has to have a mechanism to your body has to have a mechanism to lock down you know protect your lock down you know protect your lock down you know protect your vital organs right so is BPC part of vital organs right so is BPC part of vital organs right so is BPC part of this giant transduction pathway to this giant transduction pathway to this giant transduction pathway to protect your vital organs your brain protect your vital organs your brain protect your vital organs your brain your heart your kidneys from further your heart your kidneys from further your heart your kidneys from further damage we had uh Dr. Diego Borquez, I damage we had uh Dr. Diego Borquez, I damage we had uh Dr. Diego Borquez, I can never pronounce his last name, can never pronounce his last name, can never pronounce his last name, forgive me, Diego, who's out at Duke, forgive me, Diego, who's out at Duke, forgive me, Diego, who's out at Duke, who's really the world expert on these who's really the world expert on these who's really the world expert on these neuropod cells in the gut that signal neuropod cells in the gut that signal neuropod cells in the gut that signal through the noto's gangling up the Vegas through the noto's gangling up the Vegas through the noto's gangling up the Vegas noto's ganglion to either promote or noto's ganglion to either promote or noto's ganglion to either promote or suppress release of dopamine to make you suppress release of dopamine to make you suppress release of dopamine to make you either approach or avoid certain foods. either approach or avoid certain foods. either approach or avoid certain foods. Very, very interesting. I would be more Very, very interesting. I would be more Very, very interesting. I would be more than happy to than happy to than happy to &gt;&gt; encourage his lab, even if get funds for &gt;&gt; encourage his lab, even if get funds for &gt;&gt; encourage his lab, even if get funds for his lab, to do something on this. What his lab, to do something on this. What his lab, to do something on this. What are some other categories of interesting are some other categories of interesting are some other categories of interesting effects that deserve effects that deserve effects that deserve &gt;&gt; careful study? &gt;&gt; careful study? &gt;&gt; careful study? &gt;&gt; Yep. So we need to see what BBC does on &gt;&gt; Yep. So we need to see what BBC does on &gt;&gt; Yep. So we need to see what BBC does on the muscular skeletal system. Like the muscular skeletal system. Like the muscular skeletal system. Like that's what the hype is. That's where that's what the hype is. That's where that's what the hype is. That's where everybody's is going. So as I look everybody's is going. So as I look everybody's is going. So as I look through like what model I would look through like what model I would look through like what model I would look for, you want something that's not very for, you want something that's not very for, you want something that's not very vascularized but could be improved if vascularized but could be improved if vascularized but could be improved if the blood flow was good like a tendon the blood flow was good like a tendon the blood flow was good like a tendon injury. So perhaps you know a bicep injury. So perhaps you know a bicep injury. So perhaps you know a bicep tricep tendon type of uh postsurgical tricep tendon type of uh postsurgical tricep tendon type of uh postsurgical outcome. So like you get your bicep outcome. So like you get your bicep outcome. So like you get your bicep tendon um torn, you get a repair, you tendon um torn, you get a repair, you tendon um torn, you get a repair, you get BBC either inoperatively or get BBC either inoperatively or get BBC either inoperatively or postoperatively and you see if that postoperatively and you see if that postoperatively and you see if that person heals faster because idea is not person heals faster because idea is not person heals faster because idea is not to use BBC. It's not going to magically to use BBC. It's not going to magically to use BBC. It's not going to magically reattach an ACL that's torn, right? But reattach an ACL that's torn, right? But reattach an ACL that's torn, right? But can it further accelerate the healing can it further accelerate the healing can it further accelerate the healing from an ACL surgery so you come back in from an ACL surgery so you come back in from an ACL surgery so you come back in 6 months rather than 12 months? That's 6 months rather than 12 months? That's 6 months rather than 12 months? That's the big question the big question the big question &gt;&gt; and that's what like a lot of athletes &gt;&gt; and that's what like a lot of athletes &gt;&gt; and that's what like a lot of athletes are using BBC157 for that use. are using BBC157 for that use. are using BBC157 for that use. &gt;&gt; Has ever anyone ever done the one limb &gt;&gt; Has ever anyone ever done the one limb &gt;&gt; Has ever anyone ever done the one limb versus opposite limb control experiment? versus opposite limb control experiment? versus opposite limb control experiment? I mean I know that people take it orally I mean I know that people take it orally I mean I know that people take it orally or inject it systemically like under the or inject it systemically like under the or inject it systemically like under the skin or into the muscle goes skin or into the muscle goes skin or into the muscle goes systemically in the bloodstream if you systemically in the bloodstream if you systemically in the bloodstream if you apply it that way. Um if you can get to apply it that way. Um if you can get to apply it that way. Um if you can get to the injury site sometimes people will the injury site sometimes people will the injury site sometimes people will inject locally inject locally inject locally &gt;&gt; but it seems that the challenge is that &gt;&gt; but it seems that the challenge is that &gt;&gt; but it seems that the challenge is that let's say you have you know uh you know let's say you have you know uh you know let's say you have you know uh you know tendonitis in one elbow and tendonitis in one elbow and tendonitis in one elbow and tendonitis in the other elbow you could inject into in the other elbow you could inject into in the other elbow you could inject into your left elbow not and not your right your left elbow not and not your right your left elbow not and not your right but there's going to be systemic but there's going to be systemic but there's going to be systemic transfer so it's hard to do that transfer so it's hard to do that transfer so it's hard to do that internal control experiment. Yeah, I internal control experiment. Yeah, I internal control experiment. Yeah, I know. I've had I've used BBC for one know. I've had I've used BBC for one know. I've had I've used BBC for one injury and I've had results on a injury and I've had results on a injury and I've had results on a different injury. different injury. different injury. &gt;&gt; Positive results. &gt;&gt; Positive results. &gt;&gt; Positive results. &gt;&gt; I had positive results. I'm like, "Oh, &gt;&gt; I had positive results. I'm like, "Oh, &gt;&gt; I had positive results. I'm like, "Oh, interesting that like that my interesting that like that my interesting that like that my shoulder feels better even though I was shoulder feels better even though I was shoulder feels better even though I was doing it from my elbow or whatever it doing it from my elbow or whatever it doing it from my elbow or whatever it may be." This would be a good time for may be." This would be a good time for may be." This would be a good time for us to, you know, bracket what we're us to, you know, bracket what we're us to, you know, bracket what we're about to say by saying this is purely about to say by saying this is purely about to say by saying this is purely anecdotal, but filtered through I anecdotal, but filtered through I anecdotal, but filtered through I consider myself a skeptic on many, many consider myself a skeptic on many, many consider myself a skeptic on many, many things, especially things I would put things, especially things I would put things, especially things I would put into my body. I'll tell a story. into my body. I'll tell a story. into my body. I'll tell a story. What's your favorite personal BPC story What's your favorite personal BPC story What's your favorite personal BPC story involving you and your body? Yeah, involving you and your body? Yeah, involving you and your body? Yeah, &gt;&gt; I tore my tricep a few months ago. Tore. &gt;&gt; I tore my tricep a few months ago. Tore. &gt;&gt; I tore my tricep a few months ago. Tore. Yeah, tore triceps lifting with people I Yeah, tore triceps lifting with people I Yeah, tore triceps lifting with people I should have been lifting with. They're should have been lifting with. They're should have been lifting with. They're much stronger than I was. Purple from much stronger than I was. Purple from much stronger than I was. Purple from here to here. here to here. here to here. &gt;&gt; Like the pictures I posted on X. It's &gt;&gt; Like the pictures I posted on X. It's &gt;&gt; Like the pictures I posted on X. It's it's brutal. I'm like, I'm going to have it's brutal. I'm like, I'm going to have it's brutal. I'm like, I'm going to have to have surgery. This sucks. I don't to have surgery. This sucks. I don't to have surgery. This sucks. I don't have time to have surgery cuz you're have time to have surgery cuz you're have time to have surgery cuz you're in a brace for like 3 months. And you're in a brace for like 3 months. And you're in a brace for like 3 months. And I put BBC in locally. Don't try this at I put BBC in locally. Don't try this at I put BBC in locally. Don't try this at home. Not medical advice, but locally in home. Not medical advice, but locally in home. Not medical advice, but locally in the tissue spot with a couple of other the tissue spot with a couple of other the tissue spot with a couple of other peptides. And within 3 weeks, my PT peptides. And within 3 weeks, my PT peptides. And within 3 weeks, my PT is like, "What the hell are you doing? is like, "What the hell are you doing? is like, "What the hell are you doing? Like, this is healing so fast." Would I Like, this is healing so fast." Would I Like, this is healing so fast." Would I have healed that fast anyways? I don't have healed that fast anyways? I don't have healed that fast anyways? I don't know. But that's typically a grade two know. But that's typically a grade two know. But that's typically a grade two tricep tear with purple arm from tricep tear with purple arm from tricep tear with purple arm from top to bottom. It wasn't grade from top to bottom. It wasn't grade from top to bottom. It wasn't grade three. Uh cuz I could still extend my three. Uh cuz I could still extend my three. Uh cuz I could still extend my elbow. That's usually a 3-month elbow. That's usually a 3-month elbow. That's usually a 3-month recovery. And to be back in 3 to 4 weeks recovery. And to be back in 3 to 4 weeks recovery. And to be back in 3 to 4 weeks was fantastic for me, which is why was fantastic for me, which is why was fantastic for me, which is why I'm so excited. I'm so excited. I'm so excited. &gt;&gt; What dosage were you injecting? &gt;&gt; What dosage were you injecting? &gt;&gt; What dosage were you injecting? &gt;&gt; Uh a larger dose than people would uh &gt;&gt; Uh a larger dose than people would uh &gt;&gt; Uh a larger dose than people would uh &gt;&gt; not micrograms. No, &gt;&gt; not micrograms. No, &gt;&gt; not micrograms. No, &gt;&gt; you were up in the grams. &gt;&gt; you were up in the grams. &gt;&gt; you were up in the grams. &gt;&gt; Yeah. A lot higher. I think um &gt;&gt; Yeah. A lot higher. I think um &gt;&gt; Yeah. A lot higher. I think um personally and in some of our personally and in some of our personally and in some of our people, we've used bigger dosages. I people, we've used bigger dosages. I people, we've used bigger dosages. I think that's the problem. the low think that's the problem. the low think that's the problem. the low dosages even though that translates well dosages even though that translates well dosages even though that translates well from the mice data for humans I think from the mice data for humans I think from the mice data for humans I think the dose is way higher the dose is way higher the dose is way higher &gt;&gt; but people just go based on the dosage &gt;&gt; but people just go based on the dosage &gt;&gt; but people just go based on the dosage that would fit in the pile through a you that would fit in the pile through a you that would fit in the pile through a you know peptide sciences website rather know peptide sciences website rather know peptide sciences website rather than what actually we don't know what than what actually we don't know what than what actually we don't know what the human dose is for BBC157 so what the human dose is for BBC157 so what the human dose is for BBC157 so there's a lot of work to do just to there's a lot of work to do just to there's a lot of work to do just to figure that out like when we spoke to figure that out like when we spoke to figure that out like when we spoke to the to the orthopedic group like yeah the to the orthopedic group like yeah the to the orthopedic group like yeah we're going to start with you know 250 we're going to start with you know 250 we're going to start with you know 250 micrograms I'm like I don't know if micrograms I'm like I don't know if micrograms I'm like I don't know if you're going to see an effect at that you're going to see an effect at that you're going to see an effect at that low of a dose you might need to raise low of a dose you might need to raise low of a dose you might need to raise it up like that that's what people do it up like that that's what people do it up like that that's what people do online &gt;&gt; I'm like yeah but that's just because &gt;&gt; I'm like yeah but that's just because &gt;&gt; I'm like yeah but that's just because someone's peptide website says to do someone's peptide website says to do someone's peptide website says to do that. There's no data there, but you that. There's no data there, but you that. There's no data there, but you know, tricep was back to normal. know, tricep was back to normal. know, tricep was back to normal. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; That was a an interesting BPC case. I' &gt;&gt; That was a an interesting BPC case. I' &gt;&gt; That was a an interesting BPC case. I' I've seen other injuries where BBC I've seen other injuries where BBC I've seen other injuries where BBC didn't really help didn't really help didn't really help &gt;&gt; much. I can't match your story. That's &gt;&gt; much. I can't match your story. That's &gt;&gt; much. I can't match your story. That's that's a bigger result. I can just say that's a bigger result. I can just say that's a bigger result. I can just say that I had a bad trap neck pull where I that I had a bad trap neck pull where I that I had a bad trap neck pull where I couldn't turn my head and I was like, couldn't turn my head and I was like, couldn't turn my head and I was like, "Oh, one of those." and you know had "Oh, one of those." and you know had "Oh, one of those." and you know had some BPC so it was only I think only 200 some BPC so it was only I think only 200 some BPC so it was only I think only 200 micrograms and just pinned it right into micrograms and just pinned it right into micrograms and just pinned it right into the that's street talk for injected um the that's street talk for injected um the that's street talk for injected um right into the kind of like upper right into the kind of like upper right into the kind of like upper trapish area 2 days later completely trapish area 2 days later completely trapish area 2 days later completely gone of course gone of course gone of course &gt;&gt; I don't know what would have happened &gt;&gt; I don't know what would have happened &gt;&gt; I don't know what would have happened had I just waited had I just waited had I just waited &gt;&gt; but it seemed um eerily fast and then I &gt;&gt; but it seemed um eerily fast and then I &gt;&gt; but it seemed um eerily fast and then I stopped taking it y stopped taking it y stopped taking it y &gt;&gt; so this is a guy that you know and &gt;&gt; so this is a guy that you know and &gt;&gt; so this is a guy that you know and by the way that was um not gray market by the way that was um not gray market by the way that was um not gray market it was obtained through a doctor's it was obtained through a doctor's it was obtained through a doctor's prescription from a compounding pharmacy prescription from a compounding pharmacy prescription from a compounding pharmacy labeled BPC1 57 not PDA okay those labeled BPC1 57 not PDA okay those labeled BPC1 57 not PDA okay those are anecdotes I've also read just to be are anecdotes I've also read just to be are anecdotes I've also read just to be fair we should balance this out fair we should balance this out fair we should balance this out certainly on X you know people can say certainly on X you know people can say certainly on X you know people can say anything they want people saying oh you anything they want people saying oh you anything they want people saying oh you know I didn't feel well I stopped taking know I didn't feel well I stopped taking know I didn't feel well I stopped taking it okay could be due to what it was it okay could be due to what it was it okay could be due to what it was dissolved in could be due to their own dissolved in could be due to their own dissolved in could be due to their own unique you know response could be due to unique you know response could be due to unique you know response could be due to bad sourcing you know contamination so bad sourcing you know contamination so bad sourcing you know contamination so we don't know but not everyone has a we don't know but not everyone has a we don't know but not everyone has a great result and some people have no great result and some people have no great result and some people have no result right but many people report result right but many people report result right but many people report what can only be described as pretty what can only be described as pretty what can only be described as pretty astonishing ing positive results astonishing ing positive results astonishing ing positive results &gt;&gt; that cannot be directly ascribed to the &gt;&gt; that cannot be directly ascribed to the &gt;&gt; that cannot be directly ascribed to the BPC because of the placebo effect etc. BPC because of the placebo effect etc. BPC because of the placebo effect etc. And I'm not saying that to protect And I'm not saying that to protect And I'm not saying that to protect myself. I'm saying that so that people myself. I'm saying that so that people myself. I'm saying that so that people can couch this in that like how we got can couch this in that like how we got can couch this in that like how we got here y here y here y &gt;&gt; is because of stories like this. &gt;&gt; is because of stories like this. &gt;&gt; is because of stories like this. &gt;&gt; Well, there's two possibilities. Either &gt;&gt; Well, there's two possibilities. Either &gt;&gt; Well, there's two possibilities. Either BBC is as amazing as we think it is and BBC is as amazing as we think it is and BBC is as amazing as we think it is and it's unfortunate that millions of people it's unfortunate that millions of people it's unfortunate that millions of people don't have access to it don't have access to it don't have access to it &gt;&gt; or BBC is actually either ineffective or &gt;&gt; or BBC is actually either ineffective or &gt;&gt; or BBC is actually either ineffective or harmful to people and millions of people harmful to people and millions of people harmful to people and millions of people are injecting it right now by buying it are injecting it right now by buying it are injecting it right now by buying it through online sources. Both cases are through online sources. Both cases are through online sources. Both cases are very bad endpoints. one's worse than the very bad endpoints. one's worse than the very bad endpoints. one's worse than the other. You can argue which one, but other. You can argue which one, but other. You can argue which one, but that's why we need this data. We need that's why we need this data. We need that's why we need this data. We need people to push this forward to figure people to push this forward to figure people to push this forward to figure this out because we don't want these end this out because we don't want these end this out because we don't want these end points because if in 20 years we find points because if in 20 years we find points because if in 20 years we find out BPC is as good as, you know, Secrets out BPC is as good as, you know, Secrets out BPC is as good as, you know, Secrets Lab says it is, then man, people are Lab says it is, then man, people are Lab says it is, then man, people are pissed off all the, you know, joint pissed off all the, you know, joint pissed off all the, you know, joint replacements and injuries didn't heal replacements and injuries didn't heal replacements and injuries didn't heal and all the athletes that maybe could and all the athletes that maybe could and all the athletes that maybe could have had a longer career, that would be have had a longer career, that would be have had a longer career, that would be very unfortunate. But if it's the very unfortunate. But if it's the very unfortunate. But if it's the opposite and like, you know, every opposite and like, you know, every opposite and like, you know, every 18-year-old kid in the in the gym will 18-year-old kid in the in the gym will 18-year-old kid in the in the gym will come up to me and like, I'm going to come up to me and like, I'm going to come up to me and like, I'm going to inject BPC. Like, where do you inject BPC. Like, where do you inject BPC. Like, where do you get it from? get it from? get it from? &gt;&gt; I'm like, dude, you're 18. you have all &gt;&gt; I'm like, dude, you're 18. you have all &gt;&gt; I'm like, dude, you're 18. you have all the peptides you need in you like the peptides you need in you like the peptides you need in you like the parabiosis studies that these are young parabiosis studies that these are young parabiosis studies that these are young animals like you actually take your animals like you actually take your animals like you actually take your blood and blood and blood and &gt;&gt; we had Tony Weiss Corey on the podcast &gt;&gt; we had Tony Weiss Corey on the podcast &gt;&gt; we had Tony Weiss Corey on the podcast that was you know young blood is rich that was you know young blood is rich that was you know young blood is rich with these things and no we're not with these things and no we're not with these things and no we're not talking about harvesting blood from talking about harvesting blood from talking about harvesting blood from babies check out the Tony Weiss Corey babies check out the Tony Weiss Corey babies check out the Tony Weiss Corey episode we'll provide a link episode we'll provide a link episode we'll provide a link &gt;&gt; I mean what you just said about young &gt;&gt; I mean what you just said about young &gt;&gt; I mean what you just said about young guys coming up to you in the gym and guys coming up to you in the gym and guys coming up to you in the gym and saying should I be taking or I'm already saying should I be taking or I'm already saying should I be taking or I'm already taking BBC is you know we could have a taking BBC is you know we could have a taking BBC is you know we could have a whole other conversation maybe another whole other conversation maybe another whole other conversation maybe another time we will talk about testosterone and time we will talk about testosterone and time we will talk about testosterone and synthetics and things like that I see a synthetics and things like that I see a synthetics and things like that I see a lot of young guys taking everyone. lot of young guys taking everyone. lot of young guys taking everyone. &gt;&gt; I don't know if it's everyone. I don't &gt;&gt; I don't know if it's everyone. I don't &gt;&gt; I don't know if it's everyone. I don't know if it's everyone. I see a lot of know if it's everyone. I see a lot of know if it's everyone. I see a lot of many people are taking testosterone many people are taking testosterone many people are taking testosterone exogenously who truly don't need it and exogenously who truly don't need it and exogenously who truly don't need it and potentially permanently shutting down potentially permanently shutting down potentially permanently shutting down their fertility or causing other issues. their fertility or causing other issues. their fertility or causing other issues. &gt;&gt; With the looks maxing trend, too, &gt;&gt; With the looks maxing trend, too, &gt;&gt; With the looks maxing trend, too, &gt;&gt; with the looks maxing trend, you know, &gt;&gt; with the looks maxing trend, you know, &gt;&gt; with the looks maxing trend, you know, they're walking around with hammers, they're walking around with hammers, they're walking around with hammers, sledging on their face, this kind of sledging on their face, this kind of sledging on their face, this kind of thing. You know, I'm sure when I was in thing. You know, I'm sure when I was in thing. You know, I'm sure when I was in my 20s, you know, people in their 50s my 20s, you know, people in their 50s my 20s, you know, people in their 50s were probably like, "What are these kids were probably like, "What are these kids were probably like, "What are these kids doing?" You know, and it wasn't in doing?" You know, and it wasn't in doing?" You know, and it wasn't in anything like this, but who knows? It anything like this, but who knows? It anything like this, but who knows? It was like baggy pants and like you know was like baggy pants and like you know was like baggy pants and like you know and like there was weird stuff going on and like there was weird stuff going on and like there was weird stuff going on like hacky sacks and stuff. So not me, like hacky sacks and stuff. So not me, like hacky sacks and stuff. So not me, not me. But I'm confident that thanks to not me. But I'm confident that thanks to not me. But I'm confident that thanks to you we've framed the history of this you we've framed the history of this you we've framed the history of this which by the way is fascinating which by the way is fascinating which by the way is fascinating &gt;&gt; and kind of where we are now very &gt;&gt; and kind of where we are now very &gt;&gt; and kind of where we are now very well. So thank you. Thank you. Thank well. So thank you. Thank you. Thank well. So thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. &gt;&gt; I have two questions. Um well one &gt;&gt; I have two questions. Um well one &gt;&gt; I have two questions. Um well one comment and one question. The comment is comment and one question. The comment is comment and one question. The comment is I think there's a third category of I think there's a third category of I think there's a third category of problematic outcome. One you said is problematic outcome. One you said is problematic outcome. One you said is this thing works spectacularly well for this thing works spectacularly well for this thing works spectacularly well for a number of important problems to solve a number of important problems to solve a number of important problems to solve important problems and we don't find out important problems and we don't find out important problems and we don't find out about it because it wasn't looked at about it because it wasn't looked at about it because it wasn't looked at carefully. The other is it's carefully. The other is it's carefully. The other is it's detrimental. There's the other one which detrimental. There's the other one which detrimental. There's the other one which is we start hearing about adverse events is we start hearing about adverse events is we start hearing about adverse events y &gt;&gt; and it goes kind of the way of the dodo &gt;&gt; and it goes kind of the way of the dodo &gt;&gt; and it goes kind of the way of the dodo or it kind of drifts back into who you or it kind of drifts back into who you or it kind of drifts back into who you know and is it the good stuff or not the know and is it the good stuff or not the know and is it the good stuff or not the good stuff because we don't actually good stuff because we don't actually good stuff because we don't actually know whether or not the adverse know whether or not the adverse know whether or not the adverse outcome was due to BPC itself to misuse outcome was due to BPC itself to misuse outcome was due to BPC itself to misuse of BPC of BPC of BPC &gt;&gt; or to like you know like the factors &gt;&gt; or to like you know like the factors &gt;&gt; or to like you know like the factors that it's dissolved in or something that it's dissolved in or something that it's dissolved in or something like that and I think that's the most like that and I think that's the most like that and I think that's the most likely outcome unless we get our arms likely outcome unless we get our arms likely outcome unless we get our arms around this and that's where you could around this and that's where you could around this and that's where you could say like the hormone replacement therapy say like the hormone replacement therapy say like the hormone replacement therapy field has actually enjoyed the fact that field has actually enjoyed the fact that field has actually enjoyed the fact that if a woman decides she's going to take if a woman decides she's going to take if a woman decides she's going to take progesterone or estrogen replacement progesterone or estrogen replacement progesterone or estrogen replacement therapy permenopausal or menopausal therapy permenopausal or menopausal therapy permenopausal or menopausal or something for PCOS or whatever that or something for PCOS or whatever that or something for PCOS or whatever that wouldn't be what to take for PCOS but wouldn't be what to take for PCOS but wouldn't be what to take for PCOS but you get the idea or a guy decides in his you get the idea or a guy decides in his you get the idea or a guy decides in his you know 40s or 50s or whatever it is you know 40s or 50s or whatever it is you know 40s or 50s or whatever it is okay he's going to go on TRT he can do okay he's going to go on TRT he can do okay he's going to go on TRT he can do it carefully she can do it carefully it carefully she can do it carefully it carefully she can do it carefully &gt;&gt; and knows what adverse outcomes to look &gt;&gt; and knows what adverse outcomes to look &gt;&gt; and knows what adverse outcomes to look for no one's thinking oh my god the for no one's thinking oh my god the for no one's thinking oh my god the sesame oil that's dissolved in is sesame oil that's dissolved in is sesame oil that's dissolved in is possibly causing these problems possibly causing these problems possibly causing these problems &gt;&gt; well some people will be very &gt;&gt; well some people will be very &gt;&gt; well some people will be very particular on which oil their particular on which oil their particular on which oil their testosterone comes in. testosterone comes in. testosterone comes in. &gt;&gt; That's in the gym community. Yeah. &gt;&gt; That's in the gym community. Yeah. &gt;&gt; That's in the gym community. Yeah. Totally with you. And where to inject Totally with you. And where to inject Totally with you. And where to inject and so forth. But that aside, my concern and so forth. But that aside, my concern and so forth. But that aside, my concern is that it is kind of wild westish. is that it is kind of wild westish. is that it is kind of wild westish. &gt;&gt; Yes, it is. &gt;&gt; Yes, it is. &gt;&gt; Yes, it is. &gt;&gt; And I'm not so concerned I'll get in &gt;&gt; And I'm not so concerned I'll get in &gt;&gt; And I'm not so concerned I'll get in trouble for this, but whatever. trouble for this, but whatever. trouble for this, but whatever. &gt;&gt; I'm not so concerned that these actual &gt;&gt; I'm not so concerned that these actual &gt;&gt; I'm not so concerned that these actual compounds are necessarily harming compounds are necessarily harming compounds are necessarily harming people. I worry that the way they're people. I worry that the way they're people. I worry that the way they're arriving to people is harming them, and arriving to people is harming them, and arriving to people is harming them, and we're going to miss out on that first we're going to miss out on that first we're going to miss out on that first possibility that these are very useful. possibility that these are very useful. possibility that these are very useful. And of course, I don't want anyone And of course, I don't want anyone And of course, I don't want anyone getting hurt. getting hurt. getting hurt. &gt;&gt; So, here comes the question. As a &gt;&gt; So, here comes the question. As a &gt;&gt; So, here comes the question. As a physician, I realize that you are more physician, I realize that you are more physician, I realize that you are more than peptide curious. You're very than peptide curious. You're very than peptide curious. You're very peptide friendly in your own life. You peptide friendly in your own life. You peptide friendly in your own life. You know, if you have a patient who has, you know, if you have a patient who has, you know, if you have a patient who has, you know, just their gut is a mess or know, just their gut is a mess or know, just their gut is a mess or they're dealing with, you know, they're dealing with, you know, they're dealing with, you know, postsurgical issues and you know that postsurgical issues and you know that postsurgical issues and you know that BPC from the right source is either BPC from the right source is either BPC from the right source is either going to be benign or could potentially going to be benign or could potentially going to be benign or could potentially help them. What kind of position does help them. What kind of position does help them. What kind of position does that put you in? Yep. that put you in? Yep. that put you in? Yep. &gt;&gt; As an American board-certified &gt;&gt; As an American board-certified &gt;&gt; As an American board-certified physician, &gt;&gt; very uncomfortable position because if &gt;&gt; very uncomfortable position because if &gt;&gt; very uncomfortable position because if I'm, you know, rounding on a patient in I'm, you know, rounding on a patient in I'm, you know, rounding on a patient in the wards of a hospital and like, hey, the wards of a hospital and like, hey, the wards of a hospital and like, hey, you should take BPC instead of your you should take BPC instead of your you should take BPC instead of your pentopol, I'll probably get my license pentopol, I'll probably get my license pentopol, I'll probably get my license revoked. So, not a good idea. Don't do revoked. So, not a good idea. Don't do revoked. So, not a good idea. Don't do that. &gt;&gt; What about in addition to &gt;&gt; What about in addition to &gt;&gt; What about in addition to &gt;&gt; in addition to so like if they come see &gt;&gt; in addition to so like if they come see &gt;&gt; in addition to so like if they come see me in clinic, that might be a place me in clinic, that might be a place me in clinic, that might be a place where we can have that discussion. We're where we can have that discussion. We're where we can have that discussion. We're going to see very shortly here what the going to see very shortly here what the going to see very shortly here what the FDA is going to tell us about BPC and FDA is going to tell us about BPC and FDA is going to tell us about BPC and all these other peptides and the all these other peptides and the all these other peptides and the legality of them. if they get moved to legality of them. if they get moved to legality of them. if they get moved to the category one list and then the category one list and then the category one list and then the states say like hey the FDA said so states say like hey the FDA said so states say like hey the FDA said so we're not going to look we're not going we're not going to look we're not going we're not going to look we're not going to care about this you can do what you to care about this you can do what you to care about this you can do what you want to do as a physician and you want to do as a physician and you want to do as a physician and you counsel the patient like you have an counsel the patient like you have an counsel the patient like you have an honest discussion with the patient I honest discussion with the patient I honest discussion with the patient I think that's what it should be it should think that's what it should be it should think that's what it should be it should be between the physician and the patient be between the physician and the patient be between the physician and the patient like hey there's this promising compound like hey there's this promising compound like hey there's this promising compound it's not FDA approved we have minimal to it's not FDA approved we have minimal to it's not FDA approved we have minimal to no human data but we have anecdata are no human data but we have anecdata are no human data but we have anecdata are you willing to try this on yourself and you willing to try this on yourself and you willing to try this on yourself and we'll monitor you we'll have clear we'll monitor you we'll have clear we'll monitor you we'll have clear endpoints for that should be what this endpoints for that should be what this endpoints for that should be what this looks like frank discussion between a looks like frank discussion between a looks like frank discussion between a physician and a patient. Now, if that physician and a patient. Now, if that physician and a patient. Now, if that patient has an adverse effect, they can patient has an adverse effect, they can patient has an adverse effect, they can go to a medical board and say like, go to a medical board and say like, go to a medical board and say like, "Hey, Dr. so and so gave me BP157 and I "Hey, Dr. so and so gave me BP157 and I "Hey, Dr. so and so gave me BP157 and I had a bad effect and I would be like, had a bad effect and I would be like, had a bad effect and I would be like, "Hey, you gave them a non-FDA approved "Hey, you gave them a non-FDA approved "Hey, you gave them a non-FDA approved compound." A for injectable. B, the compound." A for injectable. B, the compound." A for injectable. B, the problem is there's orals that are being problem is there's orals that are being problem is there's orals that are being sold as supplements now, like BBC 57 as sold as supplements now, like BBC 57 as sold as supplements now, like BBC 57 as an oral available supplement because an oral available supplement because an oral available supplement because it's not a medication. It's never been it's not a medication. It's never been it's not a medication. It's never been uh approved as a medication in the uh approved as a medication in the uh approved as a medication in the United States. So, what is BBC's legal United States. So, what is BBC's legal United States. So, what is BBC's legal status? Is it dietary available? status? Is it dietary available? status? Is it dietary available? Therefore, cuz if you, you know, cut up Therefore, cuz if you, you know, cut up Therefore, cuz if you, you know, cut up an animal and ate its stomach, you'd an animal and ate its stomach, you'd an animal and ate its stomach, you'd probably get some BBC in. probably get some BBC in. probably get some BBC in. &gt;&gt; Well, I can buy desicated liver t. &gt;&gt; Well, I can buy desicated liver t. &gt;&gt; Well, I can buy desicated liver t. &gt;&gt; I'm eating livers. &gt;&gt; I'm eating livers. &gt;&gt; I'm eating livers. &gt;&gt; There there's tons of &gt;&gt; There there's tons of &gt;&gt; There there's tons of &gt;&gt; You can go buy liver at the this like &gt;&gt; You can go buy liver at the this like &gt;&gt; You can go buy liver at the this like one Michelin star restaurant, not down one Michelin star restaurant, not down one Michelin star restaurant, not down this road, but a different road. Yeah. this road, but a different road. Yeah. this road, but a different road. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, like Dr. Cavson identified &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, like Dr. Cavson identified &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, like Dr. Cavson identified many peptides in livers like ligen many peptides in livers like ligen many peptides in livers like ligen ovagen that you'd find in your ovagen that you'd find in your ovagen that you'd find in your desiccated liver supplement that you're desiccated liver supplement that you're desiccated liver supplement that you're eat. It's like the biggest eat. It's like the biggest eat. It's like the biggest distributors of peptides have been these distributors of peptides have been these distributors of peptides have been these organ meat companies because each organ meat companies because each organ meat companies because each organ has a signature peptide that comes out has a signature peptide that comes out has a signature peptide that comes out of it. of it. of it. &gt;&gt; Do they get absorbed? &gt;&gt; Do they get absorbed? &gt;&gt; Do they get absorbed? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Are they bioavailable active? &gt;&gt; Are they bioavailable active? &gt;&gt; Are they bioavailable active? &gt;&gt; Dr. Cavins's work suggests that it &gt;&gt; Dr. Cavins's work suggests that it &gt;&gt; Dr. Cavins's work suggests that it is. Dr. Vladimir McCavson is this is. Dr. Vladimir McCavson is this is. Dr. Vladimir McCavson is this Russian Soviet scientist that gives us Russian Soviet scientist that gives us Russian Soviet scientist that gives us epital and thyolin and pinealon and all epital and thyolin and pinealon and all epital and thyolin and pinealon and all these Russian peptides. Die and these Russian peptides. Die and these Russian peptides. Die and tripeptides can be orally available if tripeptides can be orally available if tripeptides can be orally available if they're the right shape and size. they're the right shape and size. they're the right shape and size. &gt;&gt; They're not very well uh available, but &gt;&gt; They're not very well uh available, but &gt;&gt; They're not very well uh available, but they can be available. So, you won't they can be available. So, you won't they can be available. So, you won't necessarily get it from the organ uh necessarily get it from the organ uh necessarily get it from the organ uh isolate or from the or eating the organ isolate or from the or eating the organ isolate or from the or eating the organ like if you eat heart probably very like if you eat heart probably very like if you eat heart probably very rich in lcarnitine. Can my body make rich in lcarnitine. Can my body make rich in lcarnitine. Can my body make good use of that? I mean, there's good use of that? I mean, there's good use of that? I mean, there's cardiogen, which is one of the heart cardiogen, which is one of the heart cardiogen, which is one of the heart peptides that was scantly studied peptides that was scantly studied peptides that was scantly studied uh in the late 2000s that may be orally uh in the late 2000s that may be orally uh in the late 2000s that may be orally bioavailable. The problem is no one's bioavailable. The problem is no one's bioavailable. The problem is no one's doing the work to figure that out. You doing the work to figure that out. You doing the work to figure that out. You painted this picture where not you painted this picture where not you painted this picture where not you perhaps, but let's just say um another perhaps, but let's just say um another perhaps, but let's just say um another physician has the awareness that BPC57 physician has the awareness that BPC57 physician has the awareness that BPC57 might be useful to a patient of theirs might be useful to a patient of theirs might be useful to a patient of theirs that's dealing with a they had like an that's dealing with a they had like an that's dealing with a they had like an ACL tear. They're not recovering very ACL tear. They're not recovering very ACL tear. They're not recovering very quickly. Doctor says, "Listen, you're quickly. Doctor says, "Listen, you're quickly. Doctor says, "Listen, you're doing everything correctly. there's this doing everything correctly. there's this doing everything correctly. there's this new category of stuff. We don't have a new category of stuff. We don't have a new category of stuff. We don't have a lot of data on it. I'm not aware that lot of data on it. I'm not aware that lot of data on it. I'm not aware that there are any severe risks, but they there are any severe risks, but they there are any severe risks, but they could be there. So, if you're they could be there. So, if you're they could be there. So, if you're willing to embrace those unknowns, you willing to embrace those unknowns, you willing to embrace those unknowns, you could take x number of micrograms or could take x number of micrograms or could take x number of micrograms or milligrams per day for 2 weeks and see milligrams per day for 2 weeks and see milligrams per day for 2 weeks and see how you feel. Patient says, "Okay, I'm how you feel. Patient says, "Okay, I'm how you feel. Patient says, "Okay, I'm willing to do that." The physician says, willing to do that." The physician says, willing to do that." The physician says, "Okay, you want to make sure that it's "Okay, you want to make sure that it's "Okay, you want to make sure that it's real and you want to make sure that it's real and you want to make sure that it's real and you want to make sure that it's clean, there's not no contaminants." Y clean, there's not no contaminants." Y clean, there's not no contaminants." Y &gt;&gt; if that physician says, you know, I can &gt;&gt; if that physician says, you know, I can &gt;&gt; if that physician says, you know, I can write you a script for it and this write you a script for it and this write you a script for it and this compounding pharmacy will send it to you compounding pharmacy will send it to you compounding pharmacy will send it to you and they're making money on it. A lot of and they're making money on it. A lot of and they're making money on it. A lot of people, well, the moment they hear that, people, well, the moment they hear that, people, well, the moment they hear that, they think, oh, well, they're totally they think, oh, well, they're totally they think, oh, well, they're totally incentivized to do this cuz they're incentivized to do this cuz they're incentivized to do this cuz they're going to get a cut. But if we go back to going to get a cut. But if we go back to going to get a cut. But if we go back to the original pharma model, it is a the original pharma model, it is a the original pharma model, it is a little bit of a different situation, little bit of a different situation, little bit of a different situation, right? Because let's say Lily charges right? Because let's say Lily charges right? Because let's say Lily charges $1,500 for a pen of some sort of GLP. $1,500 for a pen of some sort of GLP. $1,500 for a pen of some sort of GLP. the physician who prescribes that are the physician who prescribes that are the physician who prescribes that are they getting a cut of that 1500? they getting a cut of that 1500? they getting a cut of that 1500? &gt;&gt; They don't. They don't. &gt;&gt; They don't. They don't. &gt;&gt; They don't. They don't. &gt;&gt; But there are kickbacks and, you know, &gt;&gt; But there are kickbacks and, you know, &gt;&gt; But there are kickbacks and, you know, pharmaceutical incentives and pharma pharmaceutical incentives and pharma pharmaceutical incentives and pharma deals. Those are real. deals. Those are real. deals. Those are real. &gt;&gt; It's flights to Hawaii for a conference. &gt;&gt; It's flights to Hawaii for a conference. &gt;&gt; It's flights to Hawaii for a conference. &gt;&gt; Really? So, there are real incentives &gt;&gt; Really? So, there are real incentives &gt;&gt; Really? So, there are real incentives even though they're not getting paid even though they're not getting paid even though they're not getting paid directly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's there's always incentives &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's there's always incentives &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's there's always incentives in any kind of business, especially a in any kind of business, especially a in any kind of business, especially a business as big as pharmaceutical. business as big as pharmaceutical. business as big as pharmaceutical. &gt;&gt; Well, physicians are already getting &gt;&gt; Well, physicians are already getting &gt;&gt; Well, physicians are already getting paid. So, I'm not saying that. I mean, paid. So, I'm not saying that. I mean, paid. So, I'm not saying that. I mean, these are these are peripheral these are these are peripheral these are these are peripheral incentives. Well, the farmers also incentives. Well, the farmers also incentives. Well, the farmers also lobby a lot of the medical schools and lobby a lot of the medical schools and lobby a lot of the medical schools and they, you know, got there's a lot. they, you know, got there's a lot. they, you know, got there's a lot. &gt;&gt; So, there's a relationship there, but &gt;&gt; So, there's a relationship there, but &gt;&gt; So, there's a relationship there, but it's not cold hard cash. it's not cold hard cash. it's not cold hard cash. &gt;&gt; Sorry, as direct as the compound, &gt;&gt; Sorry, as direct as the compound, &gt;&gt; Sorry, as direct as the compound, &gt;&gt; but in a compounding pharmacy now, this &gt;&gt; but in a compounding pharmacy now, this &gt;&gt; but in a compounding pharmacy now, this physician, hypothetical physician, could physician, hypothetical physician, could physician, hypothetical physician, could say, "Hey, you know what? You can get it say, "Hey, you know what? You can get it say, "Hey, you know what? You can get it from this compounding pharmacy and it's from this compounding pharmacy and it's from this compounding pharmacy and it's going to be 500 bucks." The patient, going to be 500 bucks." The patient, going to be 500 bucks." The patient, we've now established because they've we've now established because they've we've now established because they've heard this podcast, has a right to say, heard this podcast, has a right to say, heard this podcast, has a right to say, "What are you paying for it versus what "What are you paying for it versus what "What are you paying for it versus what you're charging me?" They might lie. you're charging me?" They might lie. you're charging me?" They might lie. They might tell you the truth. Or the They might tell you the truth. Or the They might tell you the truth. Or the physician could say, "You know what? I'm physician could say, "You know what? I'm physician could say, "You know what? I'm not making a dime on this. It's just I not making a dime on this. It's just I not making a dime on this. It's just I think it might be useful to you." that think it might be useful to you." that think it might be useful to you." that physician is protected or not protected physician is protected or not protected physician is protected or not protected if something negative happens to the if something negative happens to the if something negative happens to the patient. Something happens to they is patient. Something happens to they is patient. Something happens to they is somebody suing a compounding pharmacy or somebody suing a compounding pharmacy or somebody suing a compounding pharmacy or they're suing their physician. they're suing their physician. they're suing their physician. &gt;&gt; They're suing all three. They're suing &gt;&gt; They're suing all three. They're suing &gt;&gt; They're suing all three. They're suing the physician, the compounded pharmacy the physician, the compounded pharmacy the physician, the compounded pharmacy and anyone who recommended it. So and anyone who recommended it. So and anyone who recommended it. So &gt;&gt; that's pretty scary. &gt;&gt; that's pretty scary. &gt;&gt; that's pretty scary. &gt;&gt; No malpractice provider is going to give &gt;&gt; No malpractice provider is going to give &gt;&gt; No malpractice provider is going to give you coverage for peptides, especially you coverage for peptides, especially you coverage for peptides, especially non FDA approved peptides unless non FDA approved peptides unless non FDA approved peptides unless there's, you know, high risk malpractice there's, you know, high risk malpractice there's, you know, high risk malpractice providers that will cover you for providers that will cover you for providers that will cover you for that. Let's say somebody gets hurt that. Let's say somebody gets hurt that. Let's say somebody gets hurt taking uh one of the prescribed pharma taking uh one of the prescribed pharma taking uh one of the prescribed pharma GLPS and they they're pissed and they GLPS and they they're pissed and they GLPS and they they're pissed and they and they sue they sue their doctor or and they sue they sue their doctor or and they sue they sue their doctor or they sue the pharma company depending on they sue the pharma company depending on they sue the pharma company depending on who had the liability. So if the who had the liability. So if the who had the liability. So if the doctor didn't warn you that you know doctor didn't warn you that you know doctor didn't warn you that you know injecting 10 times a dose might cause injecting 10 times a dose might cause injecting 10 times a dose might cause pancreatitis and you had pancreatitis and you had pancreatitis and you had pancreatitis they can claim the doctor is at fault. they can claim the doctor is at fault. they can claim the doctor is at fault. If someone has deep pockets they can go If someone has deep pockets they can go If someone has deep pockets they can go at Lily and say like hey Lily you didn't at Lily and say like hey Lily you didn't at Lily and say like hey Lily you didn't disclose this risk. I think now people disclose this risk. I think now people disclose this risk. I think now people thanks to you are armed with enough thanks to you are armed with enough thanks to you are armed with enough information to be able to make really information to be able to make really information to be able to make really good decisions about whether or not to good decisions about whether or not to good decisions about whether or not to say eh waiting for those clinical trial say eh waiting for those clinical trial say eh waiting for those clinical trial results or I'll stick my toe in the pond results or I'll stick my toe in the pond results or I'll stick my toe in the pond or I'm going to continue to learn more or I'm going to continue to learn more or I'm going to continue to learn more but I'm going to now learn more thanks but I'm going to now learn more thanks but I'm going to now learn more thanks to you genuinely with a lot more to you genuinely with a lot more to you genuinely with a lot more understanding about how this stuff flows understanding about how this stuff flows understanding about how this stuff flows from website or from doctor to patient. from website or from doctor to patient. from website or from doctor to patient. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about pinealon. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about pinealon. &gt;&gt; Let's talk about pinealon. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; pinealon is one that most people &gt;&gt; pinealon is one that most people &gt;&gt; pinealon is one that most people probably haven't heard of. Mhm. probably haven't heard of. Mhm. probably haven't heard of. Mhm. &gt;&gt; I'll just go on record saying I've tried &gt;&gt; I'll just go on record saying I've tried &gt;&gt; I'll just go on record saying I've tried it a few times or more. I don't take it a few times or more. I don't take it a few times or more. I don't take it regularly, but I tried it before sleep. regularly, but I tried it before sleep. regularly, but I tried it before sleep. Yep. &gt;&gt; If I take it at the beginning of the &gt;&gt; If I take it at the beginning of the &gt;&gt; If I take it at the beginning of the night, it reduces my deep slowwave sleep night, it reduces my deep slowwave sleep night, it reduces my deep slowwave sleep and gives me far more REM across the and gives me far more REM across the and gives me far more REM across the night. Not a great situation. night. Not a great situation. night. Not a great situation. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; great situation is if I go to sleep, get &gt;&gt; great situation is if I go to sleep, get &gt;&gt; great situation is if I go to sleep, get my usual ration of deep sleep. If I my usual ration of deep sleep. If I my usual ration of deep sleep. If I happen to wake up in the middle of the happen to wake up in the middle of the happen to wake up in the middle of the night to use the restroom once or so, night to use the restroom once or so, night to use the restroom once or so, not uncommon, if I do a very small not uncommon, if I do a very small not uncommon, if I do a very small injection of pinealon at that point, the injection of pinealon at that point, the injection of pinealon at that point, the one and a half hours of REM that I would one and a half hours of REM that I would one and a half hours of REM that I would get in the final hours of my sleep, now get in the final hours of my sleep, now get in the final hours of my sleep, now I'm getting 3 hours in the same amount I'm getting 3 hours in the same amount I'm getting 3 hours in the same amount of sleep. It's just a higher fraction of sleep. It's just a higher fraction of sleep. It's just a higher fraction of REM. Y REM. Y REM. Y &gt;&gt; sometimes wake up feeling a little &gt;&gt; sometimes wake up feeling a little &gt;&gt; sometimes wake up feeling a little groggy, but it is a whole other life to groggy, but it is a whole other life to groggy, but it is a whole other life to get that much REM. I don't do it get that much REM. I don't do it get that much REM. I don't do it regularly. It's not, you know, I would regularly. It's not, you know, I would regularly. It's not, you know, I would say maybe three times a month, but say maybe three times a month, but say maybe three times a month, but here's the interesting thing. It here's the interesting thing. It here's the interesting thing. It improves my percentage of REM on all the improves my percentage of REM on all the improves my percentage of REM on all the other nights in between those three other nights in between those three other nights in between those three injections. &gt;&gt; So I'm coming clean here. &gt;&gt; So I'm coming clean here. &gt;&gt; So I'm coming clean here. &gt;&gt; Lingering effects. &gt;&gt; Lingering effects. &gt;&gt; Lingering effects. &gt;&gt; Very cool. You're interested in &gt;&gt; Very cool. You're interested in &gt;&gt; Very cool. You're interested in pinealone for a whole other set of pinealone for a whole other set of pinealone for a whole other set of reasons. But first of all, what is reasons. But first of all, what is reasons. But first of all, what is pinealone and where does it act? Does it pinealone and where does it act? Does it pinealone and where does it act? Does it have a known receptor? have a known receptor? have a known receptor? &gt;&gt; No known receptor. So pinealon is a &gt;&gt; No known receptor. So pinealon is a &gt;&gt; No known receptor. So pinealon is a tripeptide edr discovered by the tripeptide edr discovered by the tripeptide edr discovered by the mentioned of Dr. Vladimir Cavinson. He's mentioned of Dr. Vladimir Cavinson. He's mentioned of Dr. Vladimir Cavinson. He's a Soviet researcher that comes out of a Soviet researcher that comes out of a Soviet researcher that comes out of this Soviet era research to make this Soviet era research to make this Soviet era research to make soldiers, astronauts, and pilots uh soldiers, astronauts, and pilots uh soldiers, astronauts, and pilots uh better. There's concern that the US better. There's concern that the US better. There's concern that the US might be using lasers to shoot at might be using lasers to shoot at might be using lasers to shoot at soldiers. So, the Soviet Union um tasks soldiers. So, the Soviet Union um tasks soldiers. So, the Soviet Union um tasks him with identifying peptides to defend him with identifying peptides to defend him with identifying peptides to defend soldiers, their eyes, and then they're soldiers, their eyes, and then they're soldiers, their eyes, and then they're aging because what would happen is aging because what would happen is aging because what would happen is they'd be in a submarine for a few they'd be in a submarine for a few they'd be in a submarine for a few months, there'd be a nuclear sub, and months, there'd be a nuclear sub, and months, there'd be a nuclear sub, and they'd come back to shore and they'd come back to shore and they'd come back to shore and they'd be like, you know, these they'd be like, you know, these they'd be like, you know, these submariners, let's call them, would look submariners, let's call them, would look submariners, let's call them, would look 10, 20 years older. also happens to 10, 20 years older. also happens to 10, 20 years older. also happens to astronauts. &gt;&gt; Yes. So then the same the same thing as &gt;&gt; Yes. So then the same the same thing as &gt;&gt; Yes. So then the same the same thing as astronauts are coming back they're astronauts are coming back they're astronauts are coming back they're aged. So Vladimir Cavson is they're aged. So Vladimir Cavson is they're aged. So Vladimir Cavson is looking at this and he's like hey looking at this and he's like hey looking at this and he's like hey there's got to be a solution for there's got to be a solution for there's got to be a solution for this. There's been literature about this. There's been literature about this. There's been literature about using extracts of other tissues notably using extracts of other tissues notably using extracts of other tissues notably the pineal gland and the thymus from you the pineal gland and the thymus from you the pineal gland and the thymus from you know late 1800s till this 1970s uh know late 1800s till this 1970s uh know late 1800s till this 1970s uh point that we're you know starting our point that we're you know starting our point that we're you know starting our story. And he starts grounding up these story. And he starts grounding up these story. And he starts grounding up these um extracts and injecting it into these um extracts and injecting it into these um extracts and injecting it into these people and then undoing a lot of this people and then undoing a lot of this people and then undoing a lot of this aging effects through pineal extracts aging effects through pineal extracts aging effects through pineal extracts and thymus extracts because these what and thymus extracts because these what and thymus extracts because these what do these soldiers have? They had very do these soldiers have? They had very do these soldiers have? They had very bad circadian rhythmicity. So they bad circadian rhythmicity. So they bad circadian rhythmicity. So they can't couldn't sleep properly. They had can't couldn't sleep properly. They had can't couldn't sleep properly. They had terrible immunity. They'd get sick terrible immunity. They'd get sick terrible immunity. They'd get sick often. They'd be uh have autoimmune often. They'd be uh have autoimmune often. They'd be uh have autoimmune problems. All these conditions that come problems. All these conditions that come problems. All these conditions that come with it. And then they were able to undo with it. And then they were able to undo with it. And then they were able to undo this using these organ extracts. So this using these organ extracts. So this using these organ extracts. So Vladimir Cavson takes it a step further. Vladimir Cavson takes it a step further. Vladimir Cavson takes it a step further. He looks like, hey, what's causing this He looks like, hey, what's causing this He looks like, hey, what's causing this effect in these in these tissues? Like effect in these in these tissues? Like effect in these in these tissues? Like people have been injecting pineal glands people have been injecting pineal glands people have been injecting pineal glands in different research models or taking in different research models or taking in different research models or taking out pineal glands from rats from the out pineal glands from rats from the out pineal glands from rats from the 1800s onwards. He finds peptides in 1800s onwards. He finds peptides in 1800s onwards. He finds peptides in these extracts. He's like, "Huh, I these extracts. He's like, "Huh, I these extracts. He's like, "Huh, I wonder if these effects are from the wonder if these effects are from the wonder if these effects are from the peptides, not from this the gland peptides, not from this the gland peptides, not from this the gland itself." So then he sequences from the itself." So then he sequences from the itself." So then he sequences from the pineal gland epialon and from the thymus pineal gland epialon and from the thymus pineal gland epialon and from the thymus gland a couple different peptides vyon gland a couple different peptides vyon gland a couple different peptides vyon thyogen cristaggen that you'll be thyogen cristaggen that you'll be thyogen cristaggen that you'll be hearing about in the next few years that hearing about in the next few years that hearing about in the next few years that on their own do a lot of the effects on their own do a lot of the effects on their own do a lot of the effects that the whole extract would do. that the whole extract would do. that the whole extract would do. Now you're talking about epialon but Now you're talking about epialon but Now you're talking about epialon but pinealon and epon pinealon and epon pinealon and epon &gt;&gt; is not from the pineal gland &gt;&gt; is not from the pineal gland &gt;&gt; is not from the pineal gland &gt;&gt; is not from the pineal gland &gt;&gt; is not from the pineal gland &gt;&gt; is not from the pineal gland &gt;&gt; even though everyone &gt;&gt; even though everyone &gt;&gt; even though everyone &gt;&gt; no I think it's called that because &gt;&gt; no I think it's called that because &gt;&gt; no I think it's called that because there's as far as I understand there's as far as I understand there's as far as I understand please correct me if I'm wrong there are please correct me if I'm wrong there are please correct me if I'm wrong there are animal data suggesting that pinealon can animal data suggesting that pinealon can animal data suggesting that pinealon can help either regenerate or enhance the help either regenerate or enhance the help either regenerate or enhance the general functioning of pinealytes. the general functioning of pinealytes. the general functioning of pinealytes. So it's having an effect on the pineal So it's having an effect on the pineal So it's having an effect on the pineal when cult like you take cultured pineal when cult like you take cultured pineal when cult like you take cultured pineal glands like little PI gland you put it glands like little PI gland you put it glands like little PI gland you put it in a dish and you dissociate the cells in a dish and you dissociate the cells in a dish and you dissociate the cells or keep it you know as a little P-siz or keep it you know as a little P-siz or keep it you know as a little P-siz thing and then you give it pinealon and thing and then you give it pinealon and thing and then you give it pinealon and seems to improve the timing and perhaps seems to improve the timing and perhaps seems to improve the timing and perhaps even the amount of melatonin output from even the amount of melatonin output from even the amount of melatonin output from the pineal these kinds of the pineal these kinds of the pineal these kinds of &gt;&gt; epialon does that so that's a big &gt;&gt; epialon does that so that's a big &gt;&gt; epialon does that so that's a big confusion I don't know why he named them confusion I don't know why he named them confusion I don't know why he named them the way he named them if anyone knows the way he named them if anyone knows the way he named them if anyone knows please let us know but epalon is from please let us know but epalon is from please let us know but epalon is from the pineal gland pinealon comes from a the pineal gland pinealon comes from a the pineal gland pinealon comes from a groundup brain extract called cortexin groundup brain extract called cortexin groundup brain extract called cortexin &gt;&gt; and brain has a pineal in it. &gt;&gt; and brain has a pineal in it. &gt;&gt; and brain has a pineal in it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it was the cortex &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it was the cortex &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it was the cortex specifically, not the subcortical specifically, not the subcortical specifically, not the subcortical regions. So he specifically not the regions. So he specifically not the regions. So he specifically not the subcortical regions. So flavon subcortical regions. So flavon subcortical regions. So flavon identifies he makes a drug in Russia. identifies he makes a drug in Russia. identifies he makes a drug in Russia. It's called epialamine which is the It's called epialamine which is the It's called epialamine which is the pineal gland extract and had great pineal gland extract and had great pineal gland extract and had great effect on circadian rhythmicity and it's effect on circadian rhythmicity and it's effect on circadian rhythmicity and it's rich with melatonin basically giving rich with melatonin basically giving rich with melatonin basically giving people melatonin people melatonin people melatonin &gt;&gt; but also you up with enzyme that creates &gt;&gt; but also you up with enzyme that creates &gt;&gt; but also you up with enzyme that creates melatonin from serotonin to an melatonin from serotonin to an melatonin from serotonin to an acetyl serotonin to melatonin. So like acetyl serotonin to melatonin. So like acetyl serotonin to melatonin. So like um when he gave it to young monkeys, the um when he gave it to young monkeys, the um when he gave it to young monkeys, the monkeys had no effect, but he gave it to monkeys had no effect, but he gave it to monkeys had no effect, but he gave it to age monkeys that have decreased age monkeys that have decreased age monkeys that have decreased melatonin and you know from puberty melatonin and you know from puberty melatonin and you know from puberty onwards your melatonin levels onwards your melatonin levels onwards your melatonin levels dramatically decrease. He was able to dramatically decrease. He was able to dramatically decrease. He was able to restore melatonin production in these restore melatonin production in these restore melatonin production in these aged animals and eventually replicated aged animals and eventually replicated aged animals and eventually replicated it on humans. it on humans. it on humans. &gt;&gt; I want to talk about thymus because it's &gt;&gt; I want to talk about thymus because it's &gt;&gt; I want to talk about thymus because it's fascinating and you are truly aversed in fascinating and you are truly aversed in fascinating and you are truly aversed in this. But before we do that, this. But before we do that, this. But before we do that, &gt;&gt; so pineal comes from the cortex, not the &gt;&gt; so pineal comes from the cortex, not the &gt;&gt; so pineal comes from the cortex, not the pineal. That's annoying. pineal. That's annoying. pineal. That's annoying. &gt;&gt; Yes, very annoying. &gt;&gt; Yes, very annoying. &gt;&gt; Yes, very annoying. &gt;&gt; Um maybe we just rename it today. I'll &gt;&gt; Um maybe we just rename it today. I'll &gt;&gt; Um maybe we just rename it today. I'll let you do the renaming. We'll call it let you do the renaming. We'll call it let you do the renaming. We'll call it EDR. &gt;&gt; EDR. &gt;&gt; EDR. &gt;&gt; EDR. &gt;&gt; That's the three amino acid sequence. &gt;&gt; That's the three amino acid sequence. &gt;&gt; That's the three amino acid sequence. &gt;&gt; Great. We'll call it EDR so people don't &gt;&gt; Great. We'll call it EDR so people don't &gt;&gt; Great. We'll call it EDR so people don't get confused. What are some of the known get confused. What are some of the known get confused. What are some of the known effects? Or am I just imagining this REM effects? Or am I just imagining this REM effects? Or am I just imagining this REM increase? Because I can't change what's increase? Because I can't change what's increase? Because I can't change what's happening to me during sleep. Y that happening to me during sleep. Y that happening to me during sleep. Y that would be an amazing placebo effect. And would be an amazing placebo effect. And would be an amazing placebo effect. And the reason I say amazing is there are the reason I say amazing is there are the reason I say amazing is there are many things that one can do to improve many things that one can do to improve many things that one can do to improve the amount of slowwave deep sleep. Not the amount of slowwave deep sleep. Not the amount of slowwave deep sleep. Not eating too close to bedtime, doing some eating too close to bedtime, doing some eating too close to bedtime, doing some exercise early in the day, etc., etc. exercise early in the day, etc., etc. exercise early in the day, etc., etc. very hard to increase REM except by very hard to increase REM except by very hard to increase REM except by heating your sleep environment in the heating your sleep environment in the heating your sleep environment in the last third of your night and maybe some last third of your night and maybe some last third of your night and maybe some alpha GPC in the late day can bump it up alpha GPC in the late day can bump it up alpha GPC in the late day can bump it up a bit or you can REM deprive yourself or a bit or you can REM deprive yourself or a bit or you can REM deprive yourself or you can smoke cannabis for 10 years then you can smoke cannabis for 10 years then you can smoke cannabis for 10 years then quit and then you'll get a lot of REM quit and then you'll get a lot of REM quit and then you'll get a lot of REM because you got no REM for 10 years do because you got no REM for 10 years do because you got no REM for 10 years do not recommend that protocol but not recommend that protocol but not recommend that protocol but &gt;&gt; for me it was just striking so why would &gt;&gt; for me it was just striking so why would &gt;&gt; for me it was just striking so why would EDR &gt;&gt; tripeptide with no receptor &gt;&gt; tripeptide with no receptor &gt;&gt; tripeptide with no receptor &gt;&gt; right previously called pinealon but &gt;&gt; right previously called pinealon but &gt;&gt; right previously called pinealon but from here uh here forward EDR why would from here uh here forward EDR why would from here uh here forward EDR why would that have this effect on REM sleep. that have this effect on REM sleep. that have this effect on REM sleep. &gt;&gt; Yep. And and I actually searched through &gt;&gt; Yep. And and I actually searched through &gt;&gt; Yep. And and I actually searched through all of the literature from Cavson. He all of the literature from Cavson. He all of the literature from Cavson. He never mentions REM sleep once in his never mentions REM sleep once in his never mentions REM sleep once in his studies. He studied pinealon quite studies. He studied pinealon quite studies. He studied pinealon quite extensively on different neuronal tissue extensively on different neuronal tissue extensively on different neuronal tissue extracts, animal studies, even in extracts, animal studies, even in extracts, animal studies, even in athletes and never mentions the REM athletes and never mentions the REM athletes and never mentions the REM sleep. They weren't having they didn't sleep. They weren't having they didn't sleep. They weren't having they didn't have Whoops in the 1970s in the Soviet have Whoops in the 1970s in the Soviet have Whoops in the 1970s in the Soviet Union. They didn't have an eight sleep. Union. They didn't have an eight sleep. Union. They didn't have an eight sleep. You're kidding me. No. You're kidding me. No. You're kidding me. No. &gt;&gt; So they didn't have, you know, sleep &gt;&gt; So they didn't have, you know, sleep &gt;&gt; So they didn't have, you know, sleep trackers in the 1970s uh when it came to trackers in the 1970s uh when it came to trackers in the 1970s uh when it came to these. So there was no reports on to these. So there was no reports on to these. So there was no reports on that. But what seems to be happening, that. But what seems to be happening, that. But what seems to be happening, let's see, what is this on this edr? let's see, what is this on this edr? let's see, what is this on this edr? It's a tripeptide that um meets the It's a tripeptide that um meets the It's a tripeptide that um meets the groove of the DNA of different key groove of the DNA of different key groove of the DNA of different key regions and helps the promoter region be regions and helps the promoter region be regions and helps the promoter region be exposed. So then that DNA transduction exposed. So then that DNA transduction exposed. So then that DNA transduction can happen uh translation transcription. can happen uh translation transcription. can happen uh translation transcription. So you get So you get So you get &gt;&gt; it's turning on genetic programs. &gt;&gt; it's turning on genetic programs. &gt;&gt; it's turning on genetic programs. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; It's acting a little bit like a &gt;&gt; It's acting a little bit like a &gt;&gt; It's acting a little bit like a transcription factor. transcription factor. transcription factor. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost like that or maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost like that or maybe &gt;&gt; Yeah. Almost like that or maybe assisting transcription factors in assisting transcription factors in assisting transcription factors in accessing the DNA in the right places. accessing the DNA in the right places. accessing the DNA in the right places. So pinealon in one sentence it's So pinealon in one sentence it's So pinealon in one sentence it's leading to better brain metabolism leading to better brain metabolism leading to better brain metabolism through modulating all these different through modulating all these different through modulating all these different pathways. for example GDF11 sod one sod pathways. for example GDF11 sod one sod pathways. for example GDF11 sod one sod 2 uh iris PPR alpha PPR gamma so what 2 uh iris PPR alpha PPR gamma so what 2 uh iris PPR alpha PPR gamma so what seems to be happening so he made seems to be happening so he made seems to be happening so he made pinealon as a anti-stress um cognitive pinealon as a anti-stress um cognitive pinealon as a anti-stress um cognitive performance compound performance compound performance compound &gt;&gt; uh and it was available orally in like &gt;&gt; uh and it was available orally in like &gt;&gt; uh and it was available orally in like Kazakhstan to Kazakhstan to Kazakhstan to &gt;&gt; that I'm taking before sleep I should be &gt;&gt; that I'm taking before sleep I should be &gt;&gt; that I'm taking before sleep I should be taking in the morning taking in the morning taking in the morning &gt;&gt; yes so if you take a high enough dose &gt;&gt; yes so if you take a high enough dose &gt;&gt; yes so if you take a high enough dose there is sedation from it but if you there is sedation from it but if you there is sedation from it but if you take it in the morning or prehit workout take it in the morning or prehit workout take it in the morning or prehit workout you get quite an interesting effect so you get quite an interesting effect so you get quite an interesting effect so he studied this um compound on athletes he studied this um compound on athletes he studied this um compound on athletes and he would uh do have them do their and he would uh do have them do their and he would uh do have them do their training session, go to exhaustion and training session, go to exhaustion and training session, go to exhaustion and then do a test afterwards. And there's then do a test afterwards. And there's then do a test afterwards. And there's two groups, pinealon and the placebo. two groups, pinealon and the placebo. two groups, pinealon and the placebo. The pinealon group could keep their The pinealon group could keep their The pinealon group could keep their performance up despite uh being performance up despite uh being performance up despite uh being maximally exhausted from their training. maximally exhausted from their training. maximally exhausted from their training. &gt;&gt; I feel like such a dummy. Here I am &gt;&gt; I feel like such a dummy. Here I am &gt;&gt; I feel like such a dummy. Here I am having like these elaborate dreams I having like these elaborate dreams I having like these elaborate dreams I don't really remember or care about when don't really remember or care about when don't really remember or care about when I could be actually thinking better I could be actually thinking better I could be actually thinking better during the daytime. during the daytime. during the daytime. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, a lot of people report less &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, a lot of people report less &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, a lot of people report less brain fog, you know, better thinking. Uh brain fog, you know, better thinking. Uh brain fog, you know, better thinking. Uh a friend that has a you know, nine a friend that has a you know, nine a friend that has a you know, nine figure company has all of his employees figure company has all of his employees figure company has all of his employees on pineal on. They're taking it in the on pineal on. They're taking it in the on pineal on. They're taking it in the morning. &gt;&gt; In the morning, uh, or at night, &gt;&gt; In the morning, uh, or at night, &gt;&gt; In the morning, uh, or at night, depending on, depending on, depending on, &gt;&gt; do you know the dosages? Not that we're &gt;&gt; do you know the dosages? Not that we're &gt;&gt; do you know the dosages? Not that we're recommending it. recommending it. recommending it. &gt;&gt; Orally, people will take anywhere &gt;&gt; Orally, people will take anywhere &gt;&gt; Orally, people will take anywhere between, you know, half a milligram up between, you know, half a milligram up between, you know, half a milligram up to three milligrams is what where people to three milligrams is what where people to three milligrams is what where people um, settle in. Um, the Cavson ones that um, settle in. Um, the Cavson ones that um, settle in. Um, the Cavson ones that come from Russia are like 200 that come from Russia are like 200 that come from Russia are like 200 micrograms. &gt;&gt; Some people are injecting it. &gt;&gt; Some people are injecting it. &gt;&gt; Some people are injecting it. &gt;&gt; Some people are injecting it. &gt;&gt; Some people are injecting it. &gt;&gt; Some people are injecting it. &gt;&gt; It goes systemic. &gt;&gt; It goes systemic. &gt;&gt; It goes systemic. &gt;&gt; Ego systemic. It's orally available &gt;&gt; Ego systemic. It's orally available &gt;&gt; Ego systemic. It's orally available through these uh, Latin pep through these uh, Latin pep through these uh, Latin pep transporters. &gt;&gt; Crosses the bloodb brain barrier &gt;&gt; Crosses the bloodb brain barrier &gt;&gt; Crosses the bloodb brain barrier &gt;&gt; most likely. Yes. &gt;&gt; most likely. Yes. &gt;&gt; most likely. Yes. &gt;&gt; Okay. Cuz it's coming from cortex, &gt;&gt; Okay. Cuz it's coming from cortex, &gt;&gt; Okay. Cuz it's coming from cortex, but otherwise we're the way you're but otherwise we're the way you're but otherwise we're the way you're describing it, we're putting no one's describing it, we're putting no one's describing it, we're putting no one's infusing into the brain. infusing into the brain. infusing into the brain. &gt;&gt; No one's so we're assuming it's small &gt;&gt; No one's so we're assuming it's small &gt;&gt; No one's so we're assuming it's small enough. It's trieptide to cross the enough. It's trieptide to cross the enough. It's trieptide to cross the bloodb brain barrier. bloodb brain barrier. bloodb brain barrier. &gt;&gt; Have you tried it? &gt;&gt; Have you tried it? &gt;&gt; Have you tried it? &gt;&gt; I mean, I took some last night, but &gt;&gt; I mean, I took some last night, but &gt;&gt; I mean, I took some last night, but &gt;&gt; Okay. At night. &gt;&gt; Okay. At night. &gt;&gt; Okay. At night. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I will take larger dosages &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I will take larger dosages &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, I will take larger dosages uh if I want to get good sleep. I'll uh if I want to get good sleep. I'll uh if I want to get good sleep. I'll describe as 8K. Some people it will describe as 8K. Some people it will describe as 8K. Some people it will cause them to have a little bit of cause them to have a little bit of cause them to have a little bit of awakening um at first. That may be why awakening um at first. That may be why awakening um at first. That may be why your deep sleep was going away. I'll say your deep sleep was going away. I'll say your deep sleep was going away. I'll say this. &gt;&gt; If I take half of what was recommended, &gt;&gt; If I take half of what was recommended, &gt;&gt; If I take half of what was recommended, I'm great. But I'm very sensitive to I'm great. But I'm very sensitive to I'm great. But I'm very sensitive to everything. Just sensitive. If I take everything. Just sensitive. If I take everything. Just sensitive. If I take what was recommended, I fall very deeply what was recommended, I fall very deeply what was recommended, I fall very deeply asleep. I have elaborate dreams and I asleep. I have elaborate dreams and I asleep. I have elaborate dreams and I wake up. Yeah. And I couldn't tell if wake up. Yeah. And I couldn't tell if wake up. Yeah. And I couldn't tell if that was a disruption in sleep that was a disruption in sleep that was a disruption in sleep architecture. I just found and granted I'm only I just found and granted I'm only I just found and granted I'm only doing this three times per month doing this three times per month doing this three times per month maximum. And I often forget and then I maximum. And I often forget and then I maximum. And I often forget and then I go months and months and I was like, oh, go months and months and I was like, oh, go months and months and I was like, oh, maybe I'll take a little pineal. Whoa, maybe I'll take a little pineal. Whoa, maybe I'll take a little pineal. Whoa, this is wild. and then I'd stop taking this is wild. and then I'd stop taking this is wild. and then I'd stop taking it because I don't know enough it because I don't know enough it because I don't know enough about it. Now, I know it's cleanly about it. Now, I know it's cleanly about it. Now, I know it's cleanly sourced because I trust the compounding sourced because I trust the compounding sourced because I trust the compounding pharmacy it's coming from, but I should pharmacy it's coming from, but I should pharmacy it's coming from, but I should ask, are there any known risks of EDR? ask, are there any known risks of EDR? ask, are there any known risks of EDR? &gt;&gt; So far, nothing in the Russian &gt;&gt; So far, nothing in the Russian &gt;&gt; So far, nothing in the Russian literature. So, big caveat, it's Russian literature. So, big caveat, it's Russian literature. So, big caveat, it's Russian literature. It's not gold standard literature. It's not gold standard literature. It's not gold standard American research that we love here. Um, American research that we love here. Um, American research that we love here. Um, so there's nothing that's come up as a, so there's nothing that's come up as a, so there's nothing that's come up as a, you know, clear sign because what you know, clear sign because what you know, clear sign because what it seems the big theory of Cavson is it seems the big theory of Cavson is it seems the big theory of Cavson is that as you're when you're younger, you that as you're when you're younger, you that as you're when you're younger, you make a lot of these peptides naturally. make a lot of these peptides naturally. make a lot of these peptides naturally. these tri die tri and tetropeptides and these tri die tri and tetropeptides and these tri die tri and tetropeptides and as you age they go down in function and as you age they go down in function and as you age they go down in function and quantity and by replenishing these quantity and by replenishing these quantity and by replenishing these peptides you're restoring some aspect of peptides you're restoring some aspect of peptides you're restoring some aspect of youthfulness &gt;&gt; something similar happens in America &gt;&gt; something similar happens in America &gt;&gt; something similar happens in America with GHK copper which is another with GHK copper which is another with GHK copper which is another tripeptide that's technically like the tripeptide that's technically like the tripeptide that's technically like the collagen regulator so the brain collagen regulator so the brain collagen regulator so the brain regulator and GHK copper is the collagen regulator and GHK copper is the collagen regulator and GHK copper is the collagen regulator but so far the side regulator but so far the side regulator but so far the side effects we've noticed we have the effects we've noticed we have the effects we've noticed we have the probably the biggest anecdotal probably the biggest anecdotal probably the biggest anecdotal compilation of N equals 1 every compilation of N equals 1 every compilation of N equals 1 every day I wake up someone texts me be like day I wake up someone texts me be like day I wake up someone texts me be like hey Pineelon did this to me some will hey Pineelon did this to me some will hey Pineelon did this to me some will have a little drop in blood sugar have a little drop in blood sugar have a little drop in blood sugar because it activates PPR alpha PPR because it activates PPR alpha PPR because it activates PPR alpha PPR gamma. So it'll have positive metabolic gamma. So it'll have positive metabolic gamma. So it'll have positive metabolic effects. So that's something to keep an effects. So that's something to keep an effects. So that's something to keep an eye out. And in some people even had eye out. And in some people even had eye out. And in some people even had their A1C's drop. So their A1C's drop. So their A1C's drop. So &gt;&gt; hypoglycemics and other people blood &gt;&gt; hypoglycemics and other people blood &gt;&gt; hypoglycemics and other people blood sugar issues take extra caution. sugar issues take extra caution. sugar issues take extra caution. &gt;&gt; And then very vivid dreams for some &gt;&gt; And then very vivid dreams for some &gt;&gt; And then very vivid dreams for some people that could be disheartening if people that could be disheartening if people that could be disheartening if they have like you know nightmares or they have like you know nightmares or they have like you know nightmares or something like that. But very vivid something like that. But very vivid something like that. But very vivid dreams uh as a result of a pinealon dreams uh as a result of a pinealon dreams uh as a result of a pinealon especially like the color and the especially like the color and the especially like the color and the quality of the dreams is very the quality of the dreams is very the quality of the dreams is very different than you'd normally expect. different than you'd normally expect. different than you'd normally expect. What seems to be happening What seems to be happening What seems to be happening &gt;&gt; is like just like you know psychedelics &gt;&gt; is like just like you know psychedelics &gt;&gt; is like just like you know psychedelics change the redux state of the brain. change the redux state of the brain. change the redux state of the brain. Pinealon is doing something similar Pinealon is doing something similar Pinealon is doing something similar where you're getting more alertness where you're getting more alertness where you're getting more alertness during the day during the day during the day &gt;&gt; like you don't wake up with as much &gt;&gt; like you don't wake up with as much &gt;&gt; like you don't wake up with as much brain fog uh at least anecdotally. Uh brain fog uh at least anecdotally. Uh brain fog uh at least anecdotally. Uh you get better performance during like you get better performance during like you get better performance during like high-intensity interval training and high-intensity interval training and high-intensity interval training and then you get more REM sleep at night. um then you get more REM sleep at night. um then you get more REM sleep at night. um because the neurons are in a better because the neurons are in a better because the neurons are in a better oxidative state thanks to the PPR alpha oxidative state thanks to the PPR alpha oxidative state thanks to the PPR alpha PPR gamma iris and all these different PPR gamma iris and all these different PPR gamma iris and all these different pathways that it's modulating pathways that it's modulating pathways that it's modulating &gt;&gt; um with no clear one you know receptor &gt;&gt; um with no clear one you know receptor &gt;&gt; um with no clear one you know receptor that it's doing it through. that it's doing it through. that it's doing it through. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor function. acknowledge our sponsor function. acknowledge our sponsor function. Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives you insights into your heart health, you insights into your heart health, you insights into your heart health, your hormone health, autoimmune your hormone health, autoimmune your hormone health, autoimmune function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health. It also analyzes these mental health. It also analyzes these mental health. It also analyzes these results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with function, I learned that some of my function, I learned that some of my function, I learned that some of my blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start supplementing with nattokinise, which supplementing with nattokinise, which supplementing with nattokinise, which can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL cholesterol. And it did. In a follow-up cholesterol. And it did. In a follow-up cholesterol. And it did. In a follow-up test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back exactly where I want them. Comprehensive exactly where I want them. Comprehensive exactly where I want them. Comprehensive lab testing of the sort that function lab testing of the sort that function lab testing of the sort that function offers is just so important for health. offers is just so important for health. offers is just so important for health. I mean, how else are you going to know I mean, how else are you going to know I mean, how else are you going to know what's going on under the hood? And what's going on under the hood? And what's going on under the hood? And while I've been doing blood work for while I've been doing blood work for while I've been doing blood work for years, it used to be timeconuming, years, it used to be timeconuming, years, it used to be timeconuming, complicated, and expensive. In fact, I complicated, and expensive. In fact, I complicated, and expensive. In fact, I used to spend thousands of dollars per used to spend thousands of dollars per used to spend thousands of dollars per year trying to get this kind of data. year trying to get this kind of data. year trying to get this kind of data. And the data, frankly, were not all that And the data, frankly, were not all that And the data, frankly, were not all that good. But now with Function, it's good. But now with Function, it's good. But now with Function, it's extremely easy and affordable. A extremely easy and affordable. A extremely easy and affordable. A function membership is only a dollar a function membership is only a dollar a function membership is only a dollar a day, $365 a year. And if you think about day, $365 a year. And if you think about day, $365 a year. And if you think about the information it provides and the information it provides and the information it provides and the health challenges it helps you avoid and health challenges it helps you avoid and health challenges it helps you avoid and the proactive things that it can do for the proactive things that it can do for the proactive things that it can do for you to enhance your health, I truly look you to enhance your health, I truly look you to enhance your health, I truly look at it as a savings. To learn more, visit at it as a savings. To learn more, visit at it as a savings. To learn more, visit functionhealth.com/huberman and use the code hubman for a $50 credit and use the code hubman for a $50 credit and use the code hubman for a $50 credit towards your membership. Again, that's towards your membership. Again, that's towards your membership. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman. &gt;&gt; What about epital, which turns out comes &gt;&gt; What about epital, which turns out comes &gt;&gt; What about epital, which turns out comes from the pineal? I'd love your thoughts from the pineal? I'd love your thoughts from the pineal? I'd love your thoughts on this. I've heard and I thought it was on this. I've heard and I thought it was on this. I've heard and I thought it was complete nonsense when I first heard it complete nonsense when I first heard it complete nonsense when I first heard it that the pineal becomes calcified as that the pineal becomes calcified as that the pineal becomes calcified as people age. The reason I thought it was people age. The reason I thought it was people age. The reason I thought it was nonsense is I used to co-e neuro anatomy nonsense is I used to co-e neuro anatomy nonsense is I used to co-e neuro anatomy when I was at UCSD before moving my lab when I was at UCSD before moving my lab when I was at UCSD before moving my lab to Stanford with a guy named Harvey to Stanford with a guy named Harvey to Stanford with a guy named Harvey Carton. You guys can look him up. Carton. You guys can look him up. Carton. You guys can look him up. Unfortunately, he passed away. He was in Unfortunately, he passed away. He was in Unfortunately, he passed away. He was in his late 80s and he had this incredible his late 80s and he had this incredible his late 80s and he had this incredible career as a I think one of the greatest career as a I think one of the greatest career as a I think one of the greatest neuroanatomists of the last hundred neuroanatomists of the last hundred neuroanatomists of the last hundred years. It's a that's a good category to years. It's a that's a good category to years. It's a that's a good category to be in because we have like Kahal who's be in because we have like Kahal who's be in because we have like Kahal who's like discovered everything basically and like discovered everything basically and like discovered everything basically and then the rest of neuroscientists are then the rest of neuroscientists are then the rest of neuroscientists are just kind of tinkering around with what just kind of tinkering around with what just kind of tinkering around with what he predicted and then a few other neuro he predicted and then a few other neuro he predicted and then a few other neuro anatomists like Ted Jones is there but anatomists like Ted Jones is there but anatomists like Ted Jones is there but he's like the neuroanatomist of my he's like the neuroanatomist of my he's like the neuroanatomist of my generation and I asked him about this generation and I asked him about this generation and I asked him about this calcification thing cuz he had looked at calcification thing cuz he had looked at calcification thing cuz he had looked at the brains of so many different species the brains of so many different species the brains of so many different species including humans. He was also an MD by including humans. He was also an MD by including humans. He was also an MD by the way and he goes, "Yeah, I don't know the way and he goes, "Yeah, I don't know the way and he goes, "Yeah, I don't know whether or not this calcification thing whether or not this calcification thing whether or not this calcification thing is real." M is real." M is real." M &gt;&gt; and he kind of brushed it aside and I &gt;&gt; and he kind of brushed it aside and I &gt;&gt; and he kind of brushed it aside and I thought well Harvey doesn't take it thought well Harvey doesn't take it thought well Harvey doesn't take it seriously so I'm not going to take it seriously so I'm not going to take it seriously so I'm not going to take it seriously but even though he was seriously but even though he was seriously but even though he was absolutely right about many things absolutely right about many things absolutely right about many things I think he might have missed that one I think he might have missed that one I think he might have missed that one because when I go to the literature now because when I go to the literature now because when I go to the literature now it's a little bit tough because the it's a little bit tough because the it's a little bit tough because the cadaavvers that you looked at in medical cadaavvers that you looked at in medical cadaavvers that you looked at in medical school and not all of them are processed school and not all of them are processed school and not all of them are processed on the same timeline right it's not on the same timeline right it's not on the same timeline right it's not thankfully it's not a controlled science thankfully it's not a controlled science thankfully it's not a controlled science right these are people that generously right these are people that generously right these are people that generously donate their bodies to science right donate their bodies to science right donate their bodies to science right &gt;&gt; does our pineal calcify and even if it &gt;&gt; does our pineal calcify and even if it &gt;&gt; does our pineal calcify and even if it does that somehow inhibit its does that somehow inhibit its does that somehow inhibit its ability to communicate with our other ability to communicate with our other ability to communicate with our other tissues. &gt;&gt; It's it's a big kind of debatable thing &gt;&gt; It's it's a big kind of debatable thing &gt;&gt; It's it's a big kind of debatable thing in the pineal research. If you look in the pineal research. If you look in the pineal research. If you look at the pineal gland Wikipedia, it's very at the pineal gland Wikipedia, it's very at the pineal gland Wikipedia, it's very under uh developed, let's say, because under uh developed, let's say, because under uh developed, let's say, because it's kind of woowoo. Like when you think it's kind of woowoo. Like when you think it's kind of woowoo. Like when you think of pineal gland, you think of someone of pineal gland, you think of someone of pineal gland, you think of someone who's going to sell you who's going to sell you who's going to sell you &gt;&gt; a neuroscientist chooses to work on the &gt;&gt; a neuroscientist chooses to work on the &gt;&gt; a neuroscientist chooses to work on the pineal. &gt;&gt; They should, but it's not a very sexy. &gt;&gt; They should, but it's not a very sexy. &gt;&gt; They should, but it's not a very sexy. &gt;&gt; It sounds like someone's going to sell &gt;&gt; It sounds like someone's going to sell &gt;&gt; It sounds like someone's going to sell you crystals or something about your you crystals or something about your you crystals or something about your &gt;&gt; It's not very sexy. Yeah. &gt;&gt; It's not very sexy. Yeah. &gt;&gt; It's not very sexy. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But I think it's a key aspect of &gt;&gt; But I think it's a key aspect of &gt;&gt; But I think it's a key aspect of aging and longevity. So that's aging and longevity. So that's aging and longevity. So that's what gives us, you know, our interest in what gives us, you know, our interest in what gives us, you know, our interest in it. the pineal gland. Um it seems from it. the pineal gland. Um it seems from it. the pineal gland. Um it seems from Caven's work that the decrease in pineal Caven's work that the decrease in pineal Caven's work that the decrease in pineal gland function with aging is more of a gland function with aging is more of a gland function with aging is more of a physiologic than a anatomic problem. Now physiologic than a anatomic problem. Now physiologic than a anatomic problem. Now I will see some calcification on MRI is I will see some calcification on MRI is I will see some calcification on MRI is when we have a patient come in for like when we have a patient come in for like when we have a patient come in for like a stroke or you know TBI will look at a stroke or you know TBI will look at a stroke or you know TBI will look at their MRI and I'm like hey there's that their MRI and I'm like hey there's that their MRI and I'm like hey there's that looks like a little bit calcification looks like a little bit calcification looks like a little bit calcification there. uh maybe my neurology colleagues there. uh maybe my neurology colleagues there. uh maybe my neurology colleagues will disagree but that seems to happen will disagree but that seems to happen will disagree but that seems to happen but the question is what is actually but the question is what is actually but the question is what is actually leading to the deterioration of leading to the deterioration of leading to the deterioration of melatonin synthesis because it decreases melatonin synthesis because it decreases melatonin synthesis because it decreases quite dramatically and some people even quite dramatically and some people even quite dramatically and some people even think that might start puberty like if think that might start puberty like if think that might start puberty like if you have a pineal cyst you can you have a pineal cyst you can you have a pineal cyst you can have precocious puberty like eight or have precocious puberty like eight or have precocious puberty like eight or nine years old nine years old nine years old &gt;&gt; the rhythmicity in melatonin because a &gt;&gt; the rhythmicity in melatonin because a &gt;&gt; the rhythmicity in melatonin because a young baby very young baby their young baby very young baby their young baby very young baby their melatonin secretion is not very rhythmic melatonin secretion is not very rhythmic melatonin secretion is not very rhythmic but they're in REM like a lot a lot of but they're in REM like a lot a lot of but they're in REM like a lot a lot of their sleep is REM it's a beautiful their sleep is REM it's a beautiful their sleep is REM it's a beautiful thing Right. With time it becomes more thing Right. With time it becomes more thing Right. With time it becomes more rhythmic. And of course in today's day rhythmic. And of course in today's day rhythmic. And of course in today's day and age with all the artificial lighting and age with all the artificial lighting and age with all the artificial lighting and the lack of sunlight exposure things and the lack of sunlight exposure things and the lack of sunlight exposure things that you and I care a lot about. Um that you and I care a lot about. Um that you and I care a lot about. Um people are making themselves somewhat people are making themselves somewhat people are making themselves somewhat arythmic or phase shifted. arythmic or phase shifted. arythmic or phase shifted. &gt;&gt; But epialen is somehow restoring &gt;&gt; But epialen is somehow restoring &gt;&gt; But epialen is somehow restoring pinealytes is somehow enhancing function pinealytes is somehow enhancing function pinealytes is somehow enhancing function of the pineal and other tissues. of the pineal and other tissues. of the pineal and other tissues. &gt;&gt; Yep. So uh in cabin's work he's found &gt;&gt; Yep. So uh in cabin's work he's found &gt;&gt; Yep. So uh in cabin's work he's found that it will increase the expression of that it will increase the expression of that it will increase the expression of the different clock genes. So in like the different clock genes. So in like the different clock genes. So in like you know lymphosytes that he'll measure you know lymphosytes that he'll measure you know lymphosytes that he'll measure in peripheral tissues he'll notice that in peripheral tissues he'll notice that in peripheral tissues he'll notice that the clock genes actually change. So in a the clock genes actually change. So in a the clock genes actually change. So in a more rhythmic pattern he'll notice that more rhythmic pattern he'll notice that more rhythmic pattern he'll notice that morning cortisol is higher. Great. Which morning cortisol is higher. Great. Which morning cortisol is higher. Great. Which by the way folks I've said this in the by the way folks I've said this in the by the way folks I've said this in the cortisol episode. You want your morning cortisol episode. You want your morning cortisol episode. You want your morning cortisol super high. You want your cortisol super high. You want your cortisol super high. You want your evening and nighttime cortisol low. If evening and nighttime cortisol low. If evening and nighttime cortisol low. If you're a resident in medical school just you're a resident in medical school just you're a resident in medical school just listen to what your superiors say. They listen to what your superiors say. They listen to what your superiors say. They don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about your cortisol don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about your cortisol don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about your cortisol levels. You got to do the hard work and levels. You got to do the hard work and levels. You got to do the hard work and then uh later you get to later you get then uh later you get to later you get then uh later you get to later you get to go to bed. It's a little weird that to go to bed. It's a little weird that to go to bed. It's a little weird that the medical profession tortures their the medical profession tortures their the medical profession tortures their own by disrupting one of the one of the own by disrupting one of the one of the own by disrupting one of the one of the primary anchors of health. Yep. primary anchors of health. Yep. primary anchors of health. Yep. &gt;&gt; And and cognitive function, right? I &gt;&gt; And and cognitive function, right? I &gt;&gt; And and cognitive function, right? I mean, I've had 28 hour shifts and that's mean, I've had 28 hour shifts and that's mean, I've had 28 hour shifts and that's what got me interested in security. what got me interested in security. what got me interested in security. &gt;&gt; You're young. You're good. You're good. &gt;&gt; You're young. You're good. You're good. &gt;&gt; You're young. You're good. You're good. But yeah, the idea was it was restoring But yeah, the idea was it was restoring But yeah, the idea was it was restoring a more um circadian appropriate hormonal a more um circadian appropriate hormonal a more um circadian appropriate hormonal profile through you know HTH cortisol profile through you know HTH cortisol profile through you know HTH cortisol &gt;&gt; taken when &gt;&gt; taken when &gt;&gt; taken when &gt;&gt; anytime because the idea with these bio &gt;&gt; anytime because the idea with these bio &gt;&gt; anytime because the idea with these bio regulators unlike you know a GLP-1 drug regulators unlike you know a GLP-1 drug regulators unlike you know a GLP-1 drug that you take today and have the effect that you take today and have the effect that you take today and have the effect for the next week the idea from the for the next week the idea from the for the next week the idea from the cavonin model is that you take these and cavonin model is that you take these and cavonin model is that you take these and then you acrewue benefits when you're then you acrewue benefits when you're then you acrewue benefits when you're off of them like you notice with off of them like you notice with off of them like you notice with pinealon you took pinealon for a day or pinealon you took pinealon for a day or pinealon you took pinealon for a day or two or three days a month and you had two or three days a month and you had two or three days a month and you had effects until you took the next dose. So effects until you took the next dose. So effects until you took the next dose. So the idea is can you acrue benefits from the idea is can you acrue benefits from the idea is can you acrue benefits from these compounds as they upregulate or these compounds as they upregulate or these compounds as they upregulate or downregulate certain genetic pathways in downregulate certain genetic pathways in downregulate certain genetic pathways in a more favorable state and then keep a more favorable state and then keep a more favorable state and then keep those effects later on. So in the cavson those effects later on. So in the cavson those effects later on. So in the cavson seminal work was this 15y year um seminal work was this 15y year um seminal work was this 15y year um longevity study he got people in nursing longevity study he got people in nursing longevity study he got people in nursing homes two groups one them got echalon in homes two groups one them got echalon in homes two groups one them got echalon in the form of epathalamine which is the form of epathalamine which is the form of epathalamine which is the whole pineal gland extract and then a whole pineal gland extract and then a whole pineal gland extract and then a thymus peptide called thyolin not thymus peptide called thyolin not thymus peptide called thyolin not thyulin there's two different peptides a thyulin there's two different peptides a thyulin there's two different peptides a lot of people confuse them every peptide lot of people confuse them every peptide lot of people confuse them every peptide website confuses them but I inject them website confuses them but I inject them website confuses them but I inject them for 15 years like a 10 or 20 day course for 15 years like a 10 or 20 day course for 15 years like a 10 or 20 day course per year just uh beginning of the per year just uh beginning of the per year just uh beginning of the year middle of the year and that's it year middle of the year and that's it year middle of the year and that's it and they had a significant lower and they had a significant lower and they had a significant lower mortality when it came to cardiovascular mortality when it came to cardiovascular mortality when it came to cardiovascular disease, uh, infectious risk and for, disease, uh, infectious risk and for, disease, uh, infectious risk and for, um, cancers. So, Russian study, caveat, um, cancers. So, Russian study, caveat, um, cancers. So, Russian study, caveat, but that would be the most but that would be the most but that would be the most interesting longevity study I've seen interesting longevity study I've seen interesting longevity study I've seen done if accurate, if true, uh, because done if accurate, if true, uh, because done if accurate, if true, uh, because he was able to take nursing home he was able to take nursing home he was able to take nursing home patients, give them peptides for, you patients, give them peptides for, you patients, give them peptides for, you know, very small amount of the year, and know, very small amount of the year, and know, very small amount of the year, and yet they accred benefits the rest of the yet they accred benefits the rest of the yet they accred benefits the rest of the year. &gt;&gt; Impressive. Uh, one of the things that &gt;&gt; Impressive. Uh, one of the things that &gt;&gt; Impressive. Uh, one of the things that really got me excited about epalon, is really got me excited about epalon, is really got me excited about epalon, is italon or talon? The Russians say epylon italon or talon? The Russians say epylon italon or talon? The Russians say epylon is the way they say it, but it's is the way they say it, but it's is the way they say it, but it's spelled with a th Okay. So, I'll say spelled with a th Okay. So, I'll say spelled with a th Okay. So, I'll say epal whoever wants, you know, we're epal whoever wants, you know, we're epal whoever wants, you know, we're making the rules today. So, making the rules today. So, making the rules today. So, &gt;&gt; okay, epitoon is also a DG. That's &gt;&gt; okay, epitoon is also a DG. That's &gt;&gt; okay, epitoon is also a DG. That's that's the amino acid for amino acid. that's the amino acid for amino acid. that's the amino acid for amino acid. &gt;&gt; I'll say epialin because it's uh easiest &gt;&gt; I'll say epialin because it's uh easiest &gt;&gt; I'll say epialin because it's uh easiest for me and forgive me if anyone takes for me and forgive me if anyone takes for me and forgive me if anyone takes offense. I took interest because uh in offense. I took interest because uh in offense. I took interest because uh in my former life running a lab focused on my former life running a lab focused on my former life running a lab focused on among other things uh visual pathway among other things uh visual pathway among other things uh visual pathway repair y um to reverse blindness or repair y um to reverse blindness or repair y um to reverse blindness or impending blindness. Um there's some impending blindness. Um there's some impending blindness. Um there's some interesting papers and there I can interesting papers and there I can interesting papers and there I can really gauge the data even though really gauge the data even though really gauge the data even though they're in mice. I can say this is a they're in mice. I can say this is a they're in mice. I can say this is a real effect or like a me effect or like real effect or like a me effect or like real effect or like a me effect or like a wo effect using epialin to combat some a wo effect using epialin to combat some a wo effect using epialin to combat some of the neurodeeneration in things like of the neurodeeneration in things like of the neurodeeneration in things like uh retinitis pigmentotosa downstream uh retinitis pigmentotosa downstream uh retinitis pigmentotosa downstream neurodeeneration in RP uh which is a neurodeeneration in RP uh which is a neurodeeneration in RP uh which is a very common unfortunately blinding very common unfortunately blinding very common unfortunately blinding disease or even in glaucoma. Y disease or even in glaucoma. Y disease or even in glaucoma. Y &gt;&gt; I should mention that BPC57 to my &gt;&gt; I should mention that BPC57 to my &gt;&gt; I should mention that BPC57 to my knowledge hasn't been looked at knowledge hasn't been looked at knowledge hasn't been looked at extensively in terms of optic nerve extensively in terms of optic nerve extensively in terms of optic nerve repair but it absolutely should be. If repair but it absolutely should be. If repair but it absolutely should be. If if someone knows those papers, please if someone knows those papers, please if someone knows those papers, please put them in the comments. So, I was put them in the comments. So, I was put them in the comments. So, I was intrigued. Yep. Like, there's this intrigued. Yep. Like, there's this intrigued. Yep. Like, there's this molecule that's somehow involved in DNA molecule that's somehow involved in DNA molecule that's somehow involved in DNA repair, &gt;&gt; and it's uh either maintaining or &gt;&gt; and it's uh either maintaining or &gt;&gt; and it's uh either maintaining or restoring some of the machinery that restoring some of the machinery that restoring some of the machinery that would otherwise definitely be lost in would otherwise definitely be lost in would otherwise definitely be lost in one of these optic nerve damage one of these optic nerve damage one of these optic nerve damage conditions that models things like conditions that models things like conditions that models things like glaucoma, retinitis, pigmentotosa, glaucoma, retinitis, pigmentotosa, glaucoma, retinitis, pigmentotosa, stroke, uh traumatic head injury. It's a stroke, uh traumatic head injury. It's a stroke, uh traumatic head injury. It's a big deal. Yep. Vision and movement are big deal. Yep. Vision and movement are big deal. Yep. Vision and movement are kind of the biggies. I mean there are kind of the biggies. I mean there are kind of the biggies. I mean there are other things too but like you know you other things too but like you know you other things too but like you know you don't want to lose those and if you do don't want to lose those and if you do don't want to lose those and if you do you can get by but it you need you can get by but it you need you can get by but it you need additional support obviously. So the additional support obviously. So the additional support obviously. So the reason it's so interesting to me is that reason it's so interesting to me is that reason it's so interesting to me is that it's getting to DNA repair as opposed to it's getting to DNA repair as opposed to it's getting to DNA repair as opposed to these downstream these downstream these downstream um you know working on any number of um you know working on any number of um you know working on any number of vague receptorish maybe no receptor vague receptorish maybe no receptor vague receptorish maybe no receptor things like and this is what gene things like and this is what gene things like and this is what gene therapy is about. therapy is about. therapy is about. &gt;&gt; Yep. So do you think of epien as kind of &gt;&gt; Yep. So do you think of epien as kind of &gt;&gt; Yep. So do you think of epien as kind of a gene therapy of sorts or do you think a gene therapy of sorts or do you think a gene therapy of sorts or do you think about it more as support for genetic about it more as support for genetic about it more as support for genetic machinery that has lots of downstream machinery that has lots of downstream machinery that has lots of downstream targets? &gt;&gt; Yes, I think it supports this genetic &gt;&gt; Yes, I think it supports this genetic &gt;&gt; Yes, I think it supports this genetic machinery. Um when it comes to the eyes, machinery. Um when it comes to the eyes, machinery. Um when it comes to the eyes, it seems to be repairing some of the it seems to be repairing some of the it seems to be repairing some of the photo receptors that might get damaged photo receptors that might get damaged photo receptors that might get damaged in a red pigmentotosa. Melanopsin wasn't in a red pigmentotosa. Melanopsin wasn't in a red pigmentotosa. Melanopsin wasn't discovered when Cavson was discovered when Cavson was discovered when Cavson was kicking it around. But I would my kicking it around. But I would my kicking it around. But I would my theory is that epiphylon is working on theory is that epiphylon is working on theory is that epiphylon is working on melanopsin. &gt;&gt; Interesting. and that it may be &gt;&gt; Interesting. and that it may be &gt;&gt; Interesting. and that it may be upregulating melanopsin levels and then upregulating melanopsin levels and then upregulating melanopsin levels and then making that morning sunlight that making that morning sunlight that making that morning sunlight that everyone likes everyone likes everyone likes &gt;&gt; to be more effective because the big &gt;&gt; to be more effective because the big &gt;&gt; to be more effective because the big problem is a lot of people will tell me problem is a lot of people will tell me problem is a lot of people will tell me doc I did morning sunlight didn't I doc I did morning sunlight didn't I doc I did morning sunlight didn't I didn't feel the effects I'm like have didn't feel the effects I'm like have didn't feel the effects I'm like have you had enough darkness to regenerate you had enough darkness to regenerate you had enough darkness to regenerate melanopsin levels because we know that melanopsin levels because we know that melanopsin levels because we know that uh in animal studies 5 days of pure uh in animal studies 5 days of pure uh in animal studies 5 days of pure darkness dramatically increases the darkness dramatically increases the darkness dramatically increases the amount of melanopsin in the redness amount of melanopsin in the redness amount of melanopsin in the redness &gt;&gt; this is interesting and I certainly have &gt;&gt; this is interesting and I certainly have &gt;&gt; this is interesting and I certainly have a lot of close friends that are in a lot of close friends that are in a lot of close friends that are in a position to do these studies um and a position to do these studies um and a position to do these studies um and you know the podcast is obviously you know the podcast is obviously you know the podcast is obviously available free to everyone but we have a available free to everyone but we have a available free to everyone but we have a premium channel that funds research. We premium channel that funds research. We premium channel that funds research. We don't talk a lot about it, but we we've don't talk a lot about it, but we we've don't talk a lot about it, but we we've given a lot of money away to excellent given a lot of money away to excellent given a lot of money away to excellent laboratories where they're free to laboratories where they're free to laboratories where they're free to explore these things. I'd love to see explore these things. I'd love to see explore these things. I'd love to see some of the studies that we're talking some of the studies that we're talking some of the studies that we're talking about today supported. And by the way, about today supported. And by the way, about today supported. And by the way, that's done in collaboration with donors that's done in collaboration with donors that's done in collaboration with donors that do a match. So, we could get the that do a match. So, we could get the that do a match. So, we could get the right people to do the right studies right people to do the right studies right people to do the right studies with no bias toward what the preferred with no bias toward what the preferred with no bias toward what the preferred outcome is. In fact, the scientists that outcome is. In fact, the scientists that outcome is. In fact, the scientists that we both know, the right ones, would try we both know, the right ones, would try we both know, the right ones, would try and disprove the hypothesis that any of and disprove the hypothesis that any of and disprove the hypothesis that any of this stuff was real. And if some makes this stuff was real. And if some makes this stuff was real. And if some makes it through that filter, then they would it through that filter, then they would it through that filter, then they would conclude it's real. Otherwise, they're conclude it's real. Otherwise, they're conclude it's real. Otherwise, they're trying to essentially knock down the trying to essentially knock down the trying to essentially knock down the quoteunquote positive outcome. Yep. the quoteunquote positive outcome. Yep. the quoteunquote positive outcome. Yep. I mean, and I think as a clinician, one I mean, and I think as a clinician, one I mean, and I think as a clinician, one of the key things to pe for people to of the key things to pe for people to of the key things to pe for people to remember is that we've screwed up a lot remember is that we've screwed up a lot remember is that we've screwed up a lot of times as clinicians through different of times as clinicians through different of times as clinicians through different grotesque abuses of our, you know, grotesque abuses of our, you know, grotesque abuses of our, you know, trust. We've done, you know, trust. We've done, you know, trust. We've done, you know, interventions or drugs that weren't the interventions or drugs that weren't the interventions or drugs that weren't the most efficacious. For example, like in most efficacious. For example, like in most efficacious. For example, like in the 1910s to 1940s, we irradiated the 1910s to 1940s, we irradiated the 1910s to 1940s, we irradiated the thymuses of young kids to prevent SIDS. thymuses of young kids to prevent SIDS. thymuses of young kids to prevent SIDS. This was considered gold standard This was considered gold standard This was considered gold standard medicine. Like medicine. Like medicine. Like &gt;&gt; does it have anything to do with SIDS? &gt;&gt; does it have anything to do with SIDS? &gt;&gt; does it have anything to do with SIDS? &gt;&gt; No, they thought that sudden infant &gt;&gt; No, they thought that sudden infant &gt;&gt; No, they thought that sudden infant death. &gt;&gt; They thought that the thymus was too big &gt;&gt; They thought that the thymus was too big &gt;&gt; They thought that the thymus was too big and was sitting on the heart and that and was sitting on the heart and that and was sitting on the heart and that might be the cause. So tons of these might be the cause. So tons of these might be the cause. So tons of these kids, you know, I think at least 10,000 kids, you know, I think at least 10,000 kids, you know, I think at least 10,000 died from cancers. No, I think the only died from cancers. No, I think the only died from cancers. No, I think the only person that's talked about it is he has person that's talked about it is he has person that's talked about it is he has a video talking about this. So we've had a video talking about this. So we've had a video talking about this. So we've had a lot of issues as a as a as a field. We a lot of issues as a as a as a field. We a lot of issues as a as a as a field. We have to be very cognizant of that and have to be very cognizant of that and have to be very cognizant of that and know the history of where we've been know the history of where we've been know the history of where we've been like Verkow of the famous Verkow like Verkow of the famous Verkow like Verkow of the famous Verkow triad. He was like pro this therapy triad. He was like pro this therapy triad. He was like pro this therapy &gt;&gt; and we all know learn about it in &gt;&gt; and we all know learn about it in &gt;&gt; and we all know learn about it in medical school but no one talks about medical school but no one talks about medical school but no one talks about this aspect. So there's a lot of this aspect. So there's a lot of this aspect. So there's a lot of grotesque abuses of medical power. Let's grotesque abuses of medical power. Let's grotesque abuses of medical power. Let's say we have to be very careful in which say we have to be very careful in which say we have to be very careful in which interventions we give people and the interventions we give people and the interventions we give people and the first things like do no harm. So while first things like do no harm. So while first things like do no harm. So while we are you know excited about these we are you know excited about these we are you know excited about these therapies we have to be kind of careful therapies we have to be kind of careful therapies we have to be kind of careful in where we're taking people. in where we're taking people. in where we're taking people. &gt;&gt; Appreciate that. I wasn't aware of that &gt;&gt; Appreciate that. I wasn't aware of that &gt;&gt; Appreciate that. I wasn't aware of that study. Perfect um tea up for uh no pun study. Perfect um tea up for uh no pun study. Perfect um tea up for uh no pun for the thymus. Tell me about the for the thymus. Tell me about the for the thymus. Tell me about the thymus. Um super interesting organ. thymus. Um super interesting organ. thymus. Um super interesting organ. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; We gland. &gt;&gt; We gland. &gt;&gt; We gland. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; We all have one when we're born. &gt;&gt; We all have one when we're born. &gt;&gt; We all have one when we're born. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; By the time we're what age is it mostly &gt;&gt; By the time we're what age is it mostly &gt;&gt; By the time we're what age is it mostly gone? &gt;&gt; So the thymus is grown under the &gt;&gt; So the thymus is grown under the &gt;&gt; So the thymus is grown under the influence of a lot of these youthful influence of a lot of these youthful influence of a lot of these youthful hormones, melatonin, growth hormone, um hormones, melatonin, growth hormone, um hormones, melatonin, growth hormone, um DHEA, um and then is shrunk at the DHEA, um and then is shrunk at the DHEA, um and then is shrunk at the moment you hit puberty. So until from moment you hit puberty. So until from moment you hit puberty. So until from your the day of birth until puberty, you your the day of birth until puberty, you your the day of birth until puberty, you grow this massive thymus. grow this massive thymus. grow this massive thymus. &gt;&gt; Where does it sit? &gt;&gt; Where does it sit? &gt;&gt; Where does it sit? &gt;&gt; It's right above your heart. Right &gt;&gt; It's right above your heart. Right &gt;&gt; It's right above your heart. Right behind this the collar bone. behind this the collar bone. behind this the collar bone. &gt;&gt; How big is it? &gt;&gt; How big is it? &gt;&gt; How big is it? &gt;&gt; It's a in a baby, it could be quite &gt;&gt; It's a in a baby, it could be quite &gt;&gt; It's a in a baby, it could be quite large on the chest as a baseball. large on the chest as a baseball. large on the chest as a baseball. &gt;&gt; Like maybe the size of half the heart, &gt;&gt; Like maybe the size of half the heart, &gt;&gt; Like maybe the size of half the heart, let's say. Maybe bigger. Depends on let's say. Maybe bigger. Depends on let's say. Maybe bigger. Depends on the size. Right now in our bodies, on the size. Right now in our bodies, on the size. Right now in our bodies, it's going to be a bunch of fat with a it's going to be a bunch of fat with a it's going to be a bunch of fat with a couple of different globules of thyic couple of different globules of thyic couple of different globules of thyic residue. &gt;&gt; Tiny tiny. &gt;&gt; Tiny tiny. &gt;&gt; Tiny tiny. &gt;&gt; Very tiny. In fact, most surgeons will &gt;&gt; Very tiny. In fact, most surgeons will &gt;&gt; Very tiny. In fact, most surgeons will just remove it um when they do surgery just remove it um when they do surgery just remove it um when they do surgery nowadays for like open heart. U but nowadays for like open heart. U but nowadays for like open heart. U but there's, you know, good data from New there's, you know, good data from New there's, you know, good data from New England Journal of Medicine that England Journal of Medicine that England Journal of Medicine that removing the thymus tissue, residue removing the thymus tissue, residue removing the thymus tissue, residue tissue leads to uh a mortality signal tissue leads to uh a mortality signal tissue leads to uh a mortality signal within the first 5 years after those within the first 5 years after those within the first 5 years after those surgeries. &gt;&gt; So people have died because of thymus &gt;&gt; So people have died because of thymus &gt;&gt; So people have died because of thymus removed. &gt;&gt; They'll have like either higher rates of &gt;&gt; They'll have like either higher rates of &gt;&gt; They'll have like either higher rates of cancers or, you know, higher rates of cancers or, you know, higher rates of cancers or, you know, higher rates of autoimmune diseases if they have their autoimmune diseases if they have their autoimmune diseases if they have their thymuses removed. Now there are their thymuses removed. Now there are their thymuses removed. Now there are thyomomas where people have to have thyomomas where people have to have thyomomas where people have to have their thymus removed but we're talking their thymus removed but we're talking their thymus removed but we're talking about people that you know the surgeon about people that you know the surgeon about people that you know the surgeon is going in to do a coronary artery is going in to do a coronary artery is going in to do a coronary artery bypass surgery. bypass surgery. bypass surgery. &gt;&gt; Is the thymus neurally innervated? &gt;&gt; Is the thymus neurally innervated? &gt;&gt; Is the thymus neurally innervated? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; So it's getting signals from brain &gt;&gt; So it's getting signals from brain &gt;&gt; So it's getting signals from brain &gt;&gt; Vegas nerve. Yep. &gt;&gt; Vegas nerve. Yep. &gt;&gt; Vegas nerve. Yep. &gt;&gt; So it's getting sorry to get technical &gt;&gt; So it's getting sorry to get technical &gt;&gt; So it's getting sorry to get technical here but I since I did the episode in here but I since I did the episode in here but I since I did the episode in the Vegas some people might remember the Vegas some people might remember the Vegas some people might remember there's a lot of ascending sensory there's a lot of ascending sensory there's a lot of ascending sensory information from the Vegas going up to information from the Vegas going up to information from the Vegas going up to the brain. There's also motor control the brain. There's also motor control the brain. There's also motor control from the brain going down through the from the brain going down through the from the brain going down through the Vegas. So it's two two-way street mostly Vegas. So it's two two-way street mostly Vegas. So it's two two-way street mostly up some down. Is the thymus controlled up some down. Is the thymus controlled up some down. Is the thymus controlled by the descending is like in other words by the descending is like in other words by the descending is like in other words is something going on in our brain like is something going on in our brain like is something going on in our brain like stress level or sleep controlling our stress level or sleep controlling our stress level or sleep controlling our thymic? &gt;&gt; There's sympathetic and parasympathetic &gt;&gt; There's sympathetic and parasympathetic &gt;&gt; There's sympathetic and parasympathetic intervations for thymus intervations for thymus intervations for thymus &gt;&gt; um that dictates its hormonal output &gt;&gt; um that dictates its hormonal output &gt;&gt; um that dictates its hormonal output because the thymus what is the because the thymus what is the because the thymus what is the thymus? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a gland that both &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a gland that both &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a gland that both secretes hormones secretes hormones secretes hormones &gt;&gt; and develops the tea cells. So your &gt;&gt; and develops the tea cells. So your &gt;&gt; and develops the tea cells. So your lymphatic cells are found in your bone lymphatic cells are found in your bone lymphatic cells are found in your bone marrow that's where they're made. the marrow that's where they're made. the marrow that's where they're made. the tea cells will travel up to the thymus tea cells will travel up to the thymus tea cells will travel up to the thymus and get trained so they don't kill you and get trained so they don't kill you and get trained so they don't kill you and they don't attack your own tissue and they don't attack your own tissue and they don't attack your own tissue but attack a foreign invader or a cancer but attack a foreign invader or a cancer but attack a foreign invader or a cancer or whatever it may be that process is or whatever it may be that process is or whatever it may be that process is very good in youth and as you age you very good in youth and as you age you very good in youth and as you age you get more autoimmunity more cancers etc get more autoimmunity more cancers etc get more autoimmunity more cancers etc because the immune system is not as etc because the immune system is not as etc because the immune system is not as robust &gt;&gt; both because the thymus makes less of &gt;&gt; both because the thymus makes less of &gt;&gt; both because the thymus makes less of the hormones that train the immune cells the hormones that train the immune cells the hormones that train the immune cells and makes less of these immune cells and makes less of these immune cells and makes less of these immune cells themselves so when you're you know 15 themselves so when you're you know 15 themselves so when you're you know 15 you're making uh 10 to the eth magnitude you're making uh 10 to the eth magnitude you're making uh 10 to the eth magnitude of these cells every single day they're of these cells every single day they're of these cells every single day they're called naive T cells, they will called naive T cells, they will called naive T cells, they will eventually become your CD4 and CD8 T- eventually become your CD4 and CD8 T- eventually become your CD4 and CD8 T- cells. Uh, as you age, this number cells. Uh, as you age, this number cells. Uh, as you age, this number dramatically decreases. And those cells dramatically decreases. And those cells dramatically decreases. And those cells will live somewhere between 10 and 15 will live somewhere between 10 and 15 will live somewhere between 10 and 15 years. And that can kind of gauge when years. And that can kind of gauge when years. And that can kind of gauge when the mortality window kicks in for a lot the mortality window kicks in for a lot the mortality window kicks in for a lot of these different disorders. When your of these different disorders. When your of these different disorders. When your thymus reaches a, you know, minimum thymus reaches a, you know, minimum thymus reaches a, you know, minimum level of output, you get a lot of these level of output, you get a lot of these level of output, you get a lot of these disorders like cancers, uh, heart disorders like cancers, uh, heart disorders like cancers, uh, heart disease, autoimmunity. If you put almost disease, autoimmunity. If you put almost disease, autoimmunity. If you put almost any disease and look at the thymus um any disease and look at the thymus um any disease and look at the thymus um risk associated with it, it increases as risk associated with it, it increases as risk associated with it, it increases as the thymus um function uh decreases. the thymus um function uh decreases. the thymus um function uh decreases. There's a nature paper uh 2026 just came There's a nature paper uh 2026 just came There's a nature paper uh 2026 just came out that looked at cardiovascular out that looked at cardiovascular out that looked at cardiovascular disease and cancer mortality and all disease and cancer mortality and all disease and cancer mortality and all these different metrics that they did these different metrics that they did these different metrics that they did MRIs of people and the people that MRIs of people and the people that MRIs of people and the people that had the higher thymic scores had less had the higher thymic scores had less had the higher thymic scores had less mortality across every single one of mortality across every single one of mortality across every single one of these conditions. But you said, not these conditions. But you said, not these conditions. But you said, not challenging this, but what's surprising challenging this, but what's surprising challenging this, but what's surprising about that very interesting result is about that very interesting result is about that very interesting result is that you said that by the time you reach that you said that by the time you reach that you said that by the time you reach your you're in your 30s, I'm in my 50s, your you're in your 30s, I'm in my 50s, your you're in your 30s, I'm in my 50s, those ages, our ages, you there, you've those ages, our ages, you there, you've those ages, our ages, you there, you've got just a bit of residual tissue there. got just a bit of residual tissue there. got just a bit of residual tissue there. It's just a few cells and yet it's It's just a few cells and yet it's It's just a few cells and yet it's somehow maintaining function. The rate somehow maintaining function. The rate somehow maintaining function. The rate of decrease varies dramatically from of decrease varies dramatically from of decrease varies dramatically from person to person. So we call this thymic person to person. So we call this thymic person to person. So we call this thymic involution. So from the moment puberty involution. So from the moment puberty involution. So from the moment puberty starts till um you die, your thymus is starts till um you die, your thymus is starts till um you die, your thymus is slowly shrinking. That really happens in slowly shrinking. That really happens in slowly shrinking. That really happens in your 20s and 30s. the majority of that your 20s and 30s. the majority of that your 20s and 30s. the majority of that under the pressure of androgens, under the pressure of androgens, under the pressure of androgens, estrogens, progesterines and estrogens, progesterines and estrogens, progesterines and corticosteroids. Those are driving a lot corticosteroids. Those are driving a lot corticosteroids. Those are driving a lot of the shrinkage. of the shrinkage. of the shrinkage. &gt;&gt; So the hormones that everyone seems to &gt;&gt; So the hormones that everyone seems to &gt;&gt; So the hormones that everyone seems to want to increase the rest of their life want to increase the rest of their life want to increase the rest of their life and that uh become you know active a lot and that uh become you know active a lot and that uh become you know active a lot during puberty actually cause thyic during puberty actually cause thyic during puberty actually cause thyic involution. &gt;&gt; Yes. So like u castration will undo some &gt;&gt; Yes. So like u castration will undo some &gt;&gt; Yes. So like u castration will undo some of the thyic involution. Um, pregnancy of the thyic involution. Um, pregnancy of the thyic involution. Um, pregnancy is a great time to involute your thymus, is a great time to involute your thymus, is a great time to involute your thymus, which makes sense because you don't want which makes sense because you don't want which makes sense because you don't want to be having an autoimmune attack to be having an autoimmune attack to be having an autoimmune attack against the baby or an immune attack against the baby or an immune attack against the baby or an immune attack against the baby. against the baby. against the baby. &gt;&gt; Do women's thymus disappear after &gt;&gt; Do women's thymus disappear after &gt;&gt; Do women's thymus disappear after pregnancy? &gt;&gt; They they involute and then will regrow &gt;&gt; They they involute and then will regrow &gt;&gt; They they involute and then will regrow during the breastfeeding period under during the breastfeeding period under during the breastfeeding period under the influences of growth hormone and the influences of growth hormone and the influences of growth hormone and prolactin. So, hibernating animals will prolactin. So, hibernating animals will prolactin. So, hibernating animals will have a dramatic shrinkage of the thymus have a dramatic shrinkage of the thymus have a dramatic shrinkage of the thymus during hibernation and then a regrowth during hibernation and then a regrowth during hibernation and then a regrowth um during the feeding window. Is there um during the feeding window. Is there um during the feeding window. Is there any benefit to doing or taking something any benefit to doing or taking something any benefit to doing or taking something to either maintain or regenerate thyic to either maintain or regenerate thyic to either maintain or regenerate thyic size? So there was size? So there was size? So there was &gt;&gt; as an as a let's just say somebody 25 or &gt;&gt; as an as a let's just say somebody 25 or &gt;&gt; as an as a let's just say somebody 25 or older. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a um interesting study &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a um interesting study &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a um interesting study trim trial from Dr. Greg Fahhee. He's trim trial from Dr. Greg Fahhee. He's trim trial from Dr. Greg Fahhee. He's doing a study where he's giving a doing a study where he's giving a doing a study where he's giving a cocktail of growth hormone, metformin, cocktail of growth hormone, metformin, cocktail of growth hormone, metformin, and DHEA. Uh gave that for 12 months and DHEA. Uh gave that for 12 months and DHEA. Uh gave that for 12 months and had the thymic size increase on imaging. had the thymic size increase on imaging. had the thymic size increase on imaging. The amount of CD4 or CD8 T cells The amount of CD4 or CD8 T cells The amount of CD4 or CD8 T cells increase and the ratio of which increase and the ratio of which increase and the ratio of which improved. uh and then some of the improved. uh and then some of the improved. uh and then some of the markers that would show like immune cell markers that would show like immune cell markers that would show like immune cell exhaustion like PD1 and all these exhaustion like PD1 and all these exhaustion like PD1 and all these different aspects of T- cell um dynamics different aspects of T- cell um dynamics different aspects of T- cell um dynamics also improve. So they're trying also improve. So they're trying also improve. So they're trying to use growth hormone to regrow the to use growth hormone to regrow the to use growth hormone to regrow the thymus. &gt;&gt; Getting us directly to peptides. Many &gt;&gt; Getting us directly to peptides. Many &gt;&gt; Getting us directly to peptides. Many people who are peptide curious start people who are peptide curious start people who are peptide curious start asking about thymus and alpha. Is thymus asking about thymus and alpha. Is thymus asking about thymus and alpha. Is thymus and alpha a peptide that comes from the and alpha a peptide that comes from the and alpha a peptide that comes from the thymus? Thankfully they named it thymus? Thankfully they named it thymus? Thankfully they named it appropriately this time. Uh great uh for appropriately this time. Uh great uh for appropriately this time. Uh great uh for that. What does thymus alpha do that. What does thymus alpha do that. What does thymus alpha do endogenously when you're not injecting endogenously when you're not injecting endogenously when you're not injecting it or taking it? What's its normal it or taking it? What's its normal it or taking it? What's its normal function? &gt;&gt; So thyosin alpha 1 is part of this &gt;&gt; So thyosin alpha 1 is part of this &gt;&gt; So thyosin alpha 1 is part of this thymic family of hormones that gets thymic family of hormones that gets thymic family of hormones that gets secreted. It's like at least 21 amino secreted. It's like at least 21 amino secreted. It's like at least 21 amino acids. It uh increases T- cell acids. It uh increases T- cell acids. It uh increases T- cell development in the thymus, increases TE- development in the thymus, increases TE- development in the thymus, increases TE- cell perforation outside the thymus and cell perforation outside the thymus and cell perforation outside the thymus and makes the T- cells more likely to makes the T- cells more likely to makes the T- cells more likely to properly attack a pathogen. Um like it's properly attack a pathogen. Um like it's properly attack a pathogen. Um like it's like a you know jet fuel for the for the like a you know jet fuel for the for the like a you know jet fuel for the for the tea cells. tea cells. tea cells. &gt;&gt; So it's like proimmune. Yes. I've heard &gt;&gt; So it's like proimmune. Yes. I've heard &gt;&gt; So it's like proimmune. Yes. I've heard of people taking it when they feel run of people taking it when they feel run of people taking it when they feel run down, if they're traveling, they're down, if they're traveling, they're down, if they're traveling, they're sleeping less than usual, they're a new sleeping less than usual, they're a new sleeping less than usual, they're a new parent. So, obviously that's kind of, parent. So, obviously that's kind of, parent. So, obviously that's kind of, you know, uh, peptide wild west kind of you know, uh, peptide wild west kind of you know, uh, peptide wild west kind of indications. &gt;&gt; It was FDA approved as Zidaxin, um, for &gt;&gt; It was FDA approved as Zidaxin, um, for &gt;&gt; It was FDA approved as Zidaxin, um, for kids that were born without a thymus or kids that were born without a thymus or kids that were born without a thymus or a malfunction thymus like Dor syndrome, a malfunction thymus like Dor syndrome, a malfunction thymus like Dor syndrome, these different kind of genetic these different kind of genetic these different kind of genetic abnormalities um, to be used for these abnormalities um, to be used for these abnormalities um, to be used for these kids to help develop the T- cells that kids to help develop the T- cells that kids to help develop the T- cells that they had that weren't um, in the thymus they had that weren't um, in the thymus they had that weren't um, in the thymus because they'd have like bone marrow tea because they'd have like bone marrow tea because they'd have like bone marrow tea cells that weren't properly developed. cells that weren't properly developed. cells that weren't properly developed. So there was good support from thyopaf 1 So there was good support from thyopaf 1 So there was good support from thyopaf 1 for these kids. I don't think that FDA for these kids. I don't think that FDA for these kids. I don't think that FDA approval still exists. So the people are approval still exists. So the people are approval still exists. So the people are trying to you know grandfather thyop one trying to you know grandfather thyop one trying to you know grandfather thyop one into these this peptide conversation. Um into these this peptide conversation. Um into these this peptide conversation. Um in other countries it's approved for a in other countries it's approved for a in other countries it's approved for a ad aguant therapy for like hepatitis B, ad aguant therapy for like hepatitis B, ad aguant therapy for like hepatitis B, hepatitis C and in different hepatitis C and in different hepatitis C and in different cancers. So far the sepsis literature cancers. So far the sepsis literature cancers. So far the sepsis literature and the infectious literature is not and the infectious literature is not and the infectious literature is not that promising. It might be like if you that promising. It might be like if you that promising. It might be like if you take antibiotics with thy one you might take antibiotics with thy one you might take antibiotics with thy one you might have a quicker bounce around. What what have a quicker bounce around. What what have a quicker bounce around. What what I would be interested to see is like if I would be interested to see is like if I would be interested to see is like if you know went to nursing homes you know went to nursing homes you know went to nursing homes injected everybody with thousand thyin injected everybody with thousand thyin injected everybody with thousand thyin alpha 1 in November and December would alpha 1 in November and December would alpha 1 in November and December would you have less flu in January and you have less flu in January and you have less flu in January and February? That'd be like the interesting February? That'd be like the interesting February? That'd be like the interesting thought experiment. Both thyus alpha 1 thought experiment. Both thyus alpha 1 thought experiment. Both thyus alpha 1 and thymus and beta 4 come out of the and thymus and beta 4 come out of the and thymus and beta 4 come out of the Goldstein lab. That's the very famous Goldstein lab. That's the very famous Goldstein lab. That's the very famous lab that studied the thymus in the 70s ' lab that studied the thymus in the 70s ' lab that studied the thymus in the 70s ' 80s and 90s. Um but thyic research kind 80s and 90s. Um but thyic research kind 80s and 90s. Um but thyic research kind of fell out of favor the last few of fell out of favor the last few of fell out of favor the last few decades but now decades but now decades but now &gt;&gt; also sexy as the pineal. I say that sort &gt;&gt; also sexy as the pineal. I say that sort &gt;&gt; also sexy as the pineal. I say that sort of tongue and cheek because I mean I of tongue and cheek because I mean I of tongue and cheek because I mean I think these are fascinating glands and think these are fascinating glands and think these are fascinating glands and um the reason I ask if they're neurally um the reason I ask if they're neurally um the reason I ask if they're neurally innovated is that you know nowadays innovated is that you know nowadays innovated is that you know nowadays there's a there are a lot of reasons why there's a there are a lot of reasons why there's a there are a lot of reasons why people choose to study one thing or the people choose to study one thing or the people choose to study one thing or the other. But these um underststudied other. But these um underststudied other. But these um underststudied glands if neurally innovated then open glands if neurally innovated then open glands if neurally innovated then open up a lot of interesting questions about up a lot of interesting questions about up a lot of interesting questions about brain control, behavioral stress control brain control, behavioral stress control brain control, behavioral stress control and the and the experiments kind of and the and the experiments kind of and the and the experiments kind of write themselves. doing them still takes write themselves. doing them still takes write themselves. doing them still takes a lot of work. Interpreting them is no a lot of work. Interpreting them is no a lot of work. Interpreting them is no easy task either. But um I think there easy task either. But um I think there easy task either. But um I think there should certainly be more work on um on should certainly be more work on um on should certainly be more work on um on the pineal and on the thymus. So I the pineal and on the thymus. So I the pineal and on the thymus. So I want to make that clear that have you want to make that clear that have you want to make that clear that have you taken thy alpha? Oh yeah, I' I've used taken thy alpha? Oh yeah, I' I've used taken thy alpha? Oh yeah, I' I've used thumbs off one when uh when I travel to thumbs off one when uh when I travel to thumbs off one when uh when I travel to avoid the uh cesspool of planes and to avoid the uh cesspool of planes and to avoid the uh cesspool of planes and hotels and all these places which uh hotels and all these places which uh hotels and all these places which uh like I would say traveling and then this like I would say traveling and then this like I would say traveling and then this year on the wards the first time I don't year on the wards the first time I don't year on the wards the first time I don't get flu, cold, whatever kind of get flu, cold, whatever kind of get flu, cold, whatever kind of infection I do one throughout and I infection I do one throughout and I infection I do one throughout and I didn't get sick a single time. didn't get sick a single time. didn't get sick a single time. &gt;&gt; What time of day or night are you &gt;&gt; What time of day or night are you &gt;&gt; What time of day or night are you injecting? &gt;&gt; Uh twice a week uh time agnostic. Uh &gt;&gt; Uh twice a week uh time agnostic. Uh &gt;&gt; Uh twice a week uh time agnostic. Uh we're talking about you know 2.5 we're talking about you know 2.5 we're talking about you know 2.5 milligrams uh as a prophylactic. that's milligrams uh as a prophylactic. that's milligrams uh as a prophylactic. that's not FDA approved or Yeah. not FDA approved or Yeah. not FDA approved or Yeah. &gt;&gt; or this is just you doing your thing. &gt;&gt; or this is just you doing your thing. &gt;&gt; or this is just you doing your thing. &gt;&gt; I'm curious and see if it would it &gt;&gt; I'm curious and see if it would it &gt;&gt; I'm curious and see if it would it would work. would work. would work. &gt;&gt; You're trying to stay healthy so you can &gt;&gt; You're trying to stay healthy so you can &gt;&gt; You're trying to stay healthy so you can uh take care of patients. Exactly. So uh take care of patients. Exactly. So uh take care of patients. Exactly. So you're willing to be your own you're willing to be your own you're willing to be your own experiment. When we hear about thyosin experiment. When we hear about thyosin experiment. When we hear about thyosin alpha, we usually hear about TB500 also. alpha, we usually hear about TB500 also. alpha, we usually hear about TB500 also. What's TB500 and how are the are the two What's TB500 and how are the are the two What's TB500 and how are the are the two related if at all? related if at all? related if at all? &gt;&gt; So while Cavinson's finding thyolin and &gt;&gt; So while Cavinson's finding thyolin and &gt;&gt; So while Cavinson's finding thyolin and he's injecting that into people, the he's injecting that into people, the he's injecting that into people, the Goldstein lab finds thyin fraction 5 Goldstein lab finds thyin fraction 5 Goldstein lab finds thyin fraction 5 which is this giant uh protein that has which is this giant uh protein that has which is this giant uh protein that has many different peptides in it. Thy alpha many different peptides in it. Thy alpha many different peptides in it. Thy alpha 1 being one of them and then thymusin 1 being one of them and then thymusin 1 being one of them and then thymusin beta 4 being the other one. Thyself beta 4 being the other one. Thyself beta 4 being the other one. Thyself alpha 1, thyus beta 4 were discovered in alpha 1, thyus beta 4 were discovered in alpha 1, thyus beta 4 were discovered in the thymus but they're not exclusive to the thymus but they're not exclusive to the thymus but they're not exclusive to the thymus gland. They're also made in the thymus gland. They're also made in the thymus gland. They're also made in other tissues. Thysin beta 4 seems to be other tissues. Thysin beta 4 seems to be other tissues. Thysin beta 4 seems to be uh this 43 amino acid peptide that helps uh this 43 amino acid peptide that helps uh this 43 amino acid peptide that helps in the actin cytokeleton of cells. So if in the actin cytokeleton of cells. So if in the actin cytokeleton of cells. So if you think about it, immune cells have to you think about it, immune cells have to you think about it, immune cells have to move a lot. So they have to re move a lot. So they have to re move a lot. So they have to re reorganize their actin cytokeleton quite reorganize their actin cytokeleton quite reorganize their actin cytokeleton quite quickly. So it seems to upregulate that quickly. So it seems to upregulate that quickly. So it seems to upregulate that movement &gt;&gt; which you know the horse community for &gt;&gt; which you know the horse community for &gt;&gt; which you know the horse community for doping uh and other athletes have found doping uh and other athletes have found doping uh and other athletes have found a niche for thy beta 4 to use it as a niche for thy beta 4 to use it as a niche for thy beta 4 to use it as a &gt;&gt; the horse community. &gt;&gt; the horse community. &gt;&gt; the horse community. &gt;&gt; Yeah. The horse races. Thus made 4 is a &gt;&gt; Yeah. The horse races. Thus made 4 is a &gt;&gt; Yeah. The horse races. Thus made 4 is a very common doping agent very common doping agent very common doping agent &gt;&gt; for the riders or for the for the &gt;&gt; for the riders or for the for the &gt;&gt; for the riders or for the for the horses. &gt;&gt; For the horses. &gt;&gt; For the horses. &gt;&gt; For the horses. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Do they test the horses for? &gt;&gt; Do they test the horses for? &gt;&gt; Do they test the horses for? &gt;&gt; Yeah. No there's like a big doping &gt;&gt; Yeah. No there's like a big doping &gt;&gt; Yeah. No there's like a big doping scandal when it comes to horses and scandal when it comes to horses and scandal when it comes to horses and uh I don't know if they test them or uh I don't know if they test them or uh I don't know if they test them or they like they like they like &gt;&gt; you know what's funny this is a very &gt;&gt; you know what's funny this is a very &gt;&gt; you know what's funny this is a very relevant tangent. Occasionally someone relevant tangent. Occasionally someone relevant tangent. Occasionally someone will say, "Hey, does all this morning will say, "Hey, does all this morning will say, "Hey, does all this morning sunlight stuff, does that work on like sunlight stuff, does that work on like sunlight stuff, does that work on like dogs?" And I go, "Listen, I hate to tell dogs?" And I go, "Listen, I hate to tell dogs?" And I go, "Listen, I hate to tell you this, but like a lot of the you this, but like a lot of the you this, but like a lot of the literature came from animals, not literature came from animals, not literature came from animals, not necessarily dogs, and they have necessarily dogs, and they have necessarily dogs, and they have melanopsin, ganglen cells, they have melanopsin, ganglen cells, they have melanopsin, ganglen cells, they have super kaismatic like yes, and yes, super kaismatic like yes, and yes, super kaismatic like yes, and yes, same physiology." same physiology." same physiology." &gt;&gt; And then recently, won't say who, wasn't &gt;&gt; And then recently, won't say who, wasn't &gt;&gt; And then recently, won't say who, wasn't me. Um, truly, I have a friend whose uh me. Um, truly, I have a friend whose uh me. Um, truly, I have a friend whose uh dog was injured. And the question dog was injured. And the question dog was injured. And the question becomes like, would BPC work? And you becomes like, would BPC work? And you becomes like, would BPC work? And you can actually say, well, there's a lot can actually say, well, there's a lot can actually say, well, there's a lot more animal data than uh human data. more animal data than uh human data. more animal data than uh human data. talked to a couple vets and vets will talked to a couple vets and vets will talked to a couple vets and vets will they're a lot more adventurous than we they're a lot more adventurous than we they're a lot more adventurous than we might think and I thought well listen might think and I thought well listen might think and I thought well listen you know now of course these are pets you know now of course these are pets you know now of course these are pets they're I love my dog you know not the they're I love my dog you know not the they're I love my dog you know not the same as a human I am a bit of a species same as a human I am a bit of a species same as a human I am a bit of a species but love them tremendously um but love them tremendously um but love them tremendously um &gt;&gt; and I think the &gt;&gt; and I think the &gt;&gt; and I think the &gt;&gt; pet peptide industry is going to be &gt;&gt; pet peptide industry is going to be &gt;&gt; pet peptide industry is going to be enormous already enormous already enormous already &gt;&gt; so here's the question and then we'll go &gt;&gt; so here's the question and then we'll go &gt;&gt; so here's the question and then we'll go right back to what we were saying before right back to what we were saying before right back to what we were saying before &gt;&gt; there's been so much interest in NAD NMN &gt;&gt; there's been so much interest in NAD NMN &gt;&gt; there's been so much interest in NAD NMN and NR to upregulate NAD what NAD is a and NR to upregulate NAD what NAD is a and NR to upregulate NAD what NAD is a prolongevity NAD for you know one of prolongevity NAD for you know one of prolongevity NAD for you know one of these things that drops over uh over the these things that drops over uh over the these things that drops over uh over the lifespan &gt;&gt; although the paper last week says that &gt;&gt; although the paper last week says that &gt;&gt; although the paper last week says that it doesn't drop in blood the landmark it doesn't drop in blood the landmark it doesn't drop in blood the landmark paper &gt;&gt; I will say which &gt;&gt; I will say which &gt;&gt; I will say which &gt;&gt; is the news stories on that claim that I &gt;&gt; is the news stories on that claim that I &gt;&gt; is the news stories on that claim that I called it a longevity drug I've always called it a longevity drug I've always called it a longevity drug I've always said that NAD I do augment NAD using said that NAD I do augment NAD using said that NAD I do augment NAD using NMN it gives me more uh morning energy I NMN it gives me more uh morning energy I NMN it gives me more uh morning energy I will say it does make my nails really will say it does make my nails really will say it does make my nails really thick and my hair grow fast two effects thick and my hair grow fast two effects thick and my hair grow fast two effects I was not looking for but I like the I was not looking for but I like the I was not looking for but I like the energy effect I've never said it energy effect I've never said it energy effect I've never said it increases lifespan ever. So, um, this increases lifespan ever. So, um, this increases lifespan ever. So, um, this was mentioned in the New York Times and was mentioned in the New York Times and was mentioned in the New York Times and elsewhere, and it's absolutely false elsewhere, and it's absolutely false elsewhere, and it's absolutely false that my name is included in that my name is included in that my name is included in that statement. So, their fact checkers need statement. So, their fact checkers need statement. So, their fact checkers need factchecking. NAD has been kind of the factchecking. NAD has been kind of the factchecking. NAD has been kind of the thing for a lot of people who want to go thing for a lot of people who want to go thing for a lot of people who want to go beyond supplements, right? They kind beyond supplements, right? They kind beyond supplements, right? They kind beyond creatine, beyond magnesium, beyond creatine, beyond magnesium, beyond creatine, beyond magnesium, beyond what they can get, you know, just beyond what they can get, you know, just beyond what they can get, you know, just on Amazon or whatever, but on Amazon or whatever, but on Amazon or whatever, but &gt;&gt; they don't want to go all the way to, &gt;&gt; they don't want to go all the way to, &gt;&gt; they don't want to go all the way to, you know, like blood cleansing and all you know, like blood cleansing and all you know, like blood cleansing and all this other stuff, which I certainly this other stuff, which I certainly this other stuff, which I certainly don't do myself, and I think that's too don't do myself, and I think that's too don't do myself, and I think that's too extreme, at least for me. extreme, at least for me. extreme, at least for me. When I hear about thy alpha, TB500, BPC, When I hear about thy alpha, TB500, BPC, When I hear about thy alpha, TB500, BPC, it occupies this kind of middle ground, it occupies this kind of middle ground, it occupies this kind of middle ground, right? And so I think this is why a lot right? And so I think this is why a lot right? And so I think this is why a lot of people are saying, "Hey, Alison, I of people are saying, "Hey, Alison, I of people are saying, "Hey, Alison, I love my dog. I love my cat." I don't love my dog. I love my cat." I don't love my dog. I love my cat." I don't know if NAD is going to do anything for know if NAD is going to do anything for know if NAD is going to do anything for their longevity. It doesn't look like it their longevity. It doesn't look like it their longevity. It doesn't look like it may or may not. I don't know. But I may or may not. I don't know. But I may or may not. I don't know. But I think a lot of people are starting to think a lot of people are starting to think a lot of people are starting to think, oh, you know, like, think, oh, you know, like, think, oh, you know, like, &gt;&gt; and here we go, Pavlov and his dogs. So, &gt;&gt; and here we go, Pavlov and his dogs. So, &gt;&gt; and here we go, Pavlov and his dogs. So, I do think this is another category of I do think this is another category of I do think this is another category of interest. And of course, we're the interest. And of course, we're the interest. And of course, we're the curators. They don't get a vote. They curators. They don't get a vote. They curators. They don't get a vote. They can't consent. Right. can't consent. Right. can't consent. Right. &gt;&gt; Right. So, we have to be very thoughtful &gt;&gt; Right. So, we have to be very thoughtful &gt;&gt; Right. So, we have to be very thoughtful there, too. Yep. there, too. Yep. there, too. Yep. &gt;&gt; If I ask you, let's say I had an aged &gt;&gt; If I ask you, let's say I had an aged &gt;&gt; If I ask you, let's say I had an aged dog and I come to you and I go, "Listen, dog and I come to you and I go, "Listen, dog and I come to you and I go, "Listen, I know you're a human physician, but I know you're a human physician, but I know you're a human physician, but he's getting sick a lot. I don't know, he's getting sick a lot. I don't know, he's getting sick a lot. I don't know, maybe getting some thyus and alpha. He's maybe getting some thyus and alpha. He's maybe getting some thyus and alpha. He's kind of creaky joints, some BPC. He's kind of creaky joints, some BPC. He's kind of creaky joints, some BPC. He's probably got a couple years to go and probably got a couple years to go and probably got a couple years to go and that's it." Would you say like, that's it." Would you say like, that's it." Would you say like, &gt;&gt; "Well, &gt;&gt; "Well, &gt;&gt; "Well, &gt;&gt; I know you're not a vet. &gt;&gt; I know you're not a vet. &gt;&gt; I know you're not a vet. &gt;&gt; The veterary board is going to sue me &gt;&gt; The veterary board is going to sue me &gt;&gt; The veterary board is going to sue me now, but now, but now, but &gt;&gt; No, they're not. Actually, I have &gt;&gt; No, they're not. Actually, I have &gt;&gt; No, they're not. Actually, I have relatives who are vets. They are very relatives who are vets. They are very relatives who are vets. They are very open. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Very open. The veterary community has &gt;&gt; Very open. The veterary community has &gt;&gt; Very open. The veterary community has been very open. I injected my previous been very open. I injected my previous been very open. I injected my previous dog. Yeah, dog. Yeah, dog. Yeah, &gt;&gt; with testosterone later in life. And I &gt;&gt; with testosterone later in life. And I &gt;&gt; with testosterone later in life. And I expected the vets to come after me with expected the vets to come after me with expected the vets to come after me with pitchforks. And I got calls that we pitchforks. And I got calls that we pitchforks. And I got calls that we would love to prescribe this. In fact, would love to prescribe this. In fact, would love to prescribe this. In fact, we wish we could just do vasectomies on we wish we could just do vasectomies on we wish we could just do vasectomies on male dogs. Let them keep their male dogs. Let them keep their male dogs. Let them keep their testosterone and then you don't have to testosterone and then you don't have to testosterone and then you don't have to worry about this breeding problem. And worry about this breeding problem. And worry about this breeding problem. And you let people train them not to hump. you let people train them not to hump. you let people train them not to hump. &gt;&gt; Yep. No, my sister was at a &gt;&gt; Yep. No, my sister was at a &gt;&gt; Yep. No, my sister was at a compending pharmacy here locally that compending pharmacy here locally that compending pharmacy here locally that would give dogs their testosterone. And would give dogs their testosterone. And would give dogs their testosterone. And it made him so much healthier and it made him so much healthier and it made him so much healthier and happier. I have zero regrets. happier. I have zero regrets. happier. I have zero regrets. &gt;&gt; I'm propeptid for pets. Let's say let's &gt;&gt; I'm propeptid for pets. Let's say let's &gt;&gt; I'm propeptid for pets. Let's say let's say I think there would be beneficial say I think there would be beneficial say I think there would be beneficial effects. We know dogs when they vomit effects. We know dogs when they vomit effects. We know dogs when they vomit they end up licking some of the vomit. they end up licking some of the vomit. they end up licking some of the vomit. You've seen this before. You've seen this before. You've seen this before. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Unfort is he trying to get peptides back &gt;&gt; Unfort is he trying to get peptides back &gt;&gt; Unfort is he trying to get peptides back from the gastric tract like the first from the gastric tract like the first from the gastric tract like the first from a pavlovian dog from a pavlovian dog from a pavlovian dog &gt;&gt; being kind to dogs. &gt;&gt; being kind to dogs. &gt;&gt; being kind to dogs. &gt;&gt; So I'm like but I mean intuitively &gt;&gt; So I'm like but I mean intuitively &gt;&gt; So I'm like but I mean intuitively instinctively there might be something instinctively there might be something instinctively there might be something there like they might be trying to get there like they might be trying to get there like they might be trying to get BPC out of that. Who knows? But um I BPC out of that. Who knows? But um I BPC out of that. Who knows? But um I think there would be less hesitation for think there would be less hesitation for think there would be less hesitation for people to use these on animals. They people to use these on animals. They people to use these on animals. They come from animal literature. Like you come from animal literature. Like you come from animal literature. Like you said we don't want to be harming these said we don't want to be harming these said we don't want to be harming these pets, right? But a lot of I think a lot pets, right? But a lot of I think a lot pets, right? But a lot of I think a lot of the positive signals are going to of the positive signals are going to of the positive signals are going to come out of people giving them to their come out of people giving them to their come out of people giving them to their pets. Unfortunately, there's so many pets. Unfortunately, there's so many pets. Unfortunately, there's so many brands now that are popping up every day brands now that are popping up every day brands now that are popping up every day giving uh their pets peptides. giving uh their pets peptides. giving uh their pets peptides. &gt;&gt; Um because BPC, is it going to be &gt;&gt; Um because BPC, is it going to be &gt;&gt; Um because BPC, is it going to be treated as a supplement when it comes to treated as a supplement when it comes to treated as a supplement when it comes to oral capsules or is it going to be oral capsules or is it going to be oral capsules or is it going to be treated as a med? Like we haven't got treated as a med? Like we haven't got treated as a med? Like we haven't got that answer from the FDA. RFK got that answer from the FDA. RFK got that answer from the FDA. RFK himself has kind of said like these are himself has kind of said like these are himself has kind of said like these are supplements. They're not they're not supplements. They're not they're not supplements. They're not they're not medications. So FDA said that he said medications. So FDA said that he said medications. So FDA said that he said that we're not going to regulate them as that we're not going to regulate them as that we're not going to regulate them as meds because they're not meds which I meds because they're not meds which I meds because they're not meds which I don't know if the agency themselves is don't know if the agency themselves is don't know if the agency themselves is going to be too happy with that. I mean going to be too happy with that. I mean going to be too happy with that. I mean there's a big well McCary just McCiri I there's a big well McCary just McCiri I there's a big well McCary just McCiri I don't ever know how to pronounce his don't ever know how to pronounce his don't ever know how to pronounce his last name um recently left so that there last name um recently left so that there last name um recently left so that there was a from what I understand a kind of a was a from what I understand a kind of a was a from what I understand a kind of a split I don't think he left because of split I don't think he left because of split I don't think he left because of peptide anything I think it was related peptide anything I think it was related peptide anything I think it was related to other things that I'm not aware of to other things that I'm not aware of to other things that I'm not aware of but I do think the question that you're but I do think the question that you're but I do think the question that you're raising is one of the most important raising is one of the most important raising is one of the most important questions &gt;&gt; is BPC going to be taken seriously as a &gt;&gt; is BPC going to be taken seriously as a &gt;&gt; is BPC going to be taken seriously as a drug &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; y &gt;&gt; or is it more creatineish &gt;&gt; or is it more creatineish &gt;&gt; or is it more creatineish &gt;&gt; yep I mean for example I could give you &gt;&gt; yep I mean for example I could give you &gt;&gt; yep I mean for example I could give you a B12 supplement you could buy that on a B12 supplement you could buy that on a B12 supplement you could buy that on Amazon or I could prescribe that to you Amazon or I could prescribe that to you Amazon or I could prescribe that to you but if I was to give you an injectable but if I was to give you an injectable but if I was to give you an injectable B12 shot, you would need a prescription B12 shot, you would need a prescription B12 shot, you would need a prescription for that. for that. for that. &gt;&gt; So, is that distinction going to apply &gt;&gt; So, is that distinction going to apply &gt;&gt; So, is that distinction going to apply to peptides also is the big question to peptides also is the big question to peptides also is the big question that no one's answered. And is a, you that no one's answered. And is a, you that no one's answered. And is a, you know, pinealon is a supplement you can know, pinealon is a supplement you can know, pinealon is a supplement you can find in Kazakhstan and Russia and find in Kazakhstan and Russia and find in Kazakhstan and Russia and Ukraine wherever all these different Ukraine wherever all these different Ukraine wherever all these different countries over the counter in countries over the counter in countries over the counter in differenties. &gt;&gt; Is pinealon available as a capsule? &gt;&gt; Is pinealon available as a capsule? &gt;&gt; Is pinealon available as a capsule? &gt;&gt; It's available as a caps. &gt;&gt; It's available as a caps. &gt;&gt; It's available as a caps. &gt;&gt; Does it work as well as a capsule in a &gt;&gt; Does it work as well as a capsule in a &gt;&gt; Does it work as well as a capsule in a capsule? &gt;&gt; Higher doses as needed, but it still &gt;&gt; Higher doses as needed, but it still &gt;&gt; Higher doses as needed, but it still works. &gt;&gt; What are the doses dosages excuse me &gt;&gt; What are the doses dosages excuse me &gt;&gt; What are the doses dosages excuse me that people are injecting versus taking that people are injecting versus taking that people are injecting versus taking orally? So when it comes to the bio orally? So when it comes to the bio orally? So when it comes to the bio regulators the epitalon pineelion the regulators the epitalon pineelion the regulators the epitalon pineelion the cavon literature looks at like microgram cavon literature looks at like microgram cavon literature looks at like microgram dosages from 10 to 100 micrograms of um dosages from 10 to 100 micrograms of um dosages from 10 to 100 micrograms of um of the actual raw peptides of the of the actual raw peptides of the of the actual raw peptides of the peptide mixes we're talking about 10 peptide mixes we're talking about 10 peptide mixes we're talking about 10 milligs. So 10 milligs of you know milligs. So 10 milligs of you know milligs. So 10 milligs of you know desiccated cow brain that might give you desiccated cow brain that might give you desiccated cow brain that might give you a few hundred micrograms of pineon. Oh a few hundred micrograms of pineon. Oh a few hundred micrograms of pineon. Oh man, desiccated cow brain makes me think man, desiccated cow brain makes me think man, desiccated cow brain makes me think of crutzville yakob aka mad cow pry of crutzville yakob aka mad cow pry of crutzville yakob aka mad cow pry first patient I had on wards in third first patient I had on wards in third first patient I had on wards in third year of medical school year of medical school year of medical school &gt;&gt; had degenerative brain from crutzville &gt;&gt; had degenerative brain from crutzville &gt;&gt; had degenerative brain from crutzville &gt;&gt; yak there was yeah it was a bad case &gt;&gt; yak there was yeah it was a bad case &gt;&gt; yak there was yeah it was a bad case on neurology on neurology on neurology &gt;&gt; wards yeah please folks do not be &gt;&gt; wards yeah please folks do not be &gt;&gt; wards yeah please folks do not be consuming brains I know there's some consuming brains I know there's some consuming brains I know there's some people like oh he's got all this stuff people like oh he's got all this stuff people like oh he's got all this stuff that can help you like please that can help you like please that can help you like please like these uh these pron please like these uh these pron please like these uh these pron things are really serious things are really serious things are really serious &gt;&gt; yeah scary &gt;&gt; yeah scary &gt;&gt; yeah scary &gt;&gt; it's really scary it's really &gt;&gt; it's really scary it's really &gt;&gt; it's really scary it's really scary and not just from wild game, but scary and not just from wild game, but scary and not just from wild game, but it's really scary. it's really scary. it's really scary. &gt;&gt; By the way, I think this set back all &gt;&gt; By the way, I think this set back all &gt;&gt; By the way, I think this set back all that research in the when the you that research in the when the you that research in the when the you know the PON stuff happened in the early know the PON stuff happened in the early know the PON stuff happened in the early 2000s that set back a lot of these 2000s that set back a lot of these 2000s that set back a lot of these animal derived peptide research animal derived peptide research animal derived peptide research dramatically cuz people like oh we don't dramatically cuz people like oh we don't dramatically cuz people like oh we don't want to touch these extracts anymore. want to touch these extracts anymore. want to touch these extracts anymore. Makes sense Makes sense Makes sense &gt;&gt; because there was thymus extracts. There &gt;&gt; because there was thymus extracts. There &gt;&gt; because there was thymus extracts. There were like there was about you know 10 were like there was about you know 10 were like there was about you know 10 different groups in Eastern Europe that different groups in Eastern Europe that different groups in Eastern Europe that came up with their own thymus peptide came up with their own thymus peptide came up with their own thymus peptide drug &gt;&gt; which was a polyeptide fragment with you &gt;&gt; which was a polyeptide fragment with you &gt;&gt; which was a polyeptide fragment with you know thyusphan thus beta 4 vylon thyogen know thyusphan thus beta 4 vylon thyogen know thyusphan thus beta 4 vylon thyogen crystal like all these different crystal like all these different crystal like all these different peptides that you'd get together. The peptides that you'd get together. The peptides that you'd get together. The the Eastern Europeans went down like the Eastern Europeans went down like the Eastern Europeans went down like this mix of just mixing up young thyuses this mix of just mixing up young thyuses this mix of just mixing up young thyuses because you don't want an old thyus from because you don't want an old thyus from because you don't want an old thyus from a cow. You want a six-month old cow that a cow. You want a six-month old cow that a cow. You want a six-month old cow that has the giant juicy big thymus with all has the giant juicy big thymus with all has the giant juicy big thymus with all the healthy hormones in there. uh they'd the healthy hormones in there. uh they'd the healthy hormones in there. uh they'd grind that up and inject that into grind that up and inject that into grind that up and inject that into humans with positive effects like you humans with positive effects like you humans with positive effects like you know hundreds of papers on that. The know hundreds of papers on that. The know hundreds of papers on that. The American side, the Goldstein um group American side, the Goldstein um group American side, the Goldstein um group came up with thyin fraction 5 which has came up with thyin fraction 5 which has came up with thyin fraction 5 which has thy one and thyin beta 4 in it. Also thy one and thyin beta 4 in it. Also thy one and thyin beta 4 in it. Also thyin beta 10, thyin beta 9, a bunch of thyin beta 10, thyin beta 9, a bunch of thyin beta 10, thyin beta 9, a bunch of different thyosins but studied these two different thyosins but studied these two different thyosins but studied these two dramatically thy 1 and thyin beta 4. The dramatically thy 1 and thyin beta 4. The dramatically thy 1 and thyin beta 4. The French came up with the actual main French came up with the actual main French came up with the actual main thymus hormone which is thyulin not thymus hormone which is thyulin not thymus hormone which is thyulin not thyolin. Thyolin is the Russian thyolin. Thyolin is the Russian thyolin. Thyolin is the Russian polyeptide mix. Thymulin is a nine amino polyeptide mix. Thymulin is a nine amino polyeptide mix. Thymulin is a nine amino acid uh peptide that is the marker of acid uh peptide that is the marker of acid uh peptide that is the marker of thymus function. It also has very thymus function. It also has very thymus function. It also has very interesting neurological effects which I interesting neurological effects which I interesting neurological effects which I think you'll find interesting think you'll find interesting think you'll find interesting because it modulates the what we're because it modulates the what we're because it modulates the what we're calling the thymus pituitary adrenal calling the thymus pituitary adrenal calling the thymus pituitary adrenal axis thymus pituitary gonatal axis. axis thymus pituitary gonatal axis. axis thymus pituitary gonatal axis. Thyulin is this peptide that's secreted Thyulin is this peptide that's secreted Thyulin is this peptide that's secreted by thymus dramatically decreases with by thymus dramatically decreases with by thymus dramatically decreases with age um as zinc dependent. So biology age um as zinc dependent. So biology age um as zinc dependent. So biology likes to use metals with different amino likes to use metals with different amino likes to use metals with different amino acid structures. Hemoglobin with iron, acid structures. Hemoglobin with iron, acid structures. Hemoglobin with iron, GHK copper with copper. Thyuin is zinc GHK copper with copper. Thyuin is zinc GHK copper with copper. Thyuin is zinc dependent. So it's a nine amino acid dependent. So it's a nine amino acid dependent. So it's a nine amino acid peptide with zinc inside of it to peptide with zinc inside of it to peptide with zinc inside of it to do its effects. That will develop NK do its effects. That will develop NK do its effects. That will develop NK cells and T- cells um stimulate the cells and T- cells um stimulate the cells and T- cells um stimulate the immune response. But also in the animal immune response. But also in the animal immune response. But also in the animal models, not replicated in humans yet, models, not replicated in humans yet, models, not replicated in humans yet, when they take out the pituitary and when they take out the pituitary and when they take out the pituitary and then inject, you know, act or ACG, the then inject, you know, act or ACG, the then inject, you know, act or ACG, the amount of thyline sensitizes the end amount of thyline sensitizes the end amount of thyline sensitizes the end organ to production of the targeted organ to production of the targeted organ to production of the targeted hormone. For example, if you were just hormone. For example, if you were just hormone. For example, if you were just to give ACG alone to the animal, to give ACG alone to the animal, to give ACG alone to the animal, &gt;&gt; hCG, synthetic glutinizing hormone. &gt;&gt; hCG, synthetic glutinizing hormone. &gt;&gt; hCG, synthetic glutinizing hormone. &gt;&gt; Yes. ACG is binding to the &gt;&gt; Yes. ACG is binding to the &gt;&gt; Yes. ACG is binding to the it's called the ACG LH receptor. So they it's called the ACG LH receptor. So they it's called the ACG LH receptor. So they would get more testosterone produced would get more testosterone produced would get more testosterone produced when they got ACG with thyulin when they got ACG with thyulin when they got ACG with thyulin &gt;&gt; versus ACG alone. &gt;&gt; versus ACG alone. &gt;&gt; versus ACG alone. &gt;&gt; So what you're saying is that thymus and &gt;&gt; So what you're saying is that thymus and &gt;&gt; So what you're saying is that thymus and alpha potentially or TB500 or other alpha potentially or TB500 or other alpha potentially or TB500 or other thyic hormones, thyic hormones, thyic hormones, &gt;&gt; thy thyulin specifically. &gt;&gt; thy thyulin specifically. &gt;&gt; thy thyulin specifically. &gt;&gt; Okay. Thyulin specifically. Okay. The &gt;&gt; Okay. Thyulin specifically. Okay. The &gt;&gt; Okay. Thyulin specifically. Okay. The other ones do different effects on the other ones do different effects on the other ones do different effects on the on the pituitary axis. on the pituitary axis. on the pituitary axis. &gt;&gt; So thulin specifically can augment Yes. &gt;&gt; So thulin specifically can augment Yes. &gt;&gt; So thulin specifically can augment Yes. &gt;&gt; the effects of indogenous and perhaps &gt;&gt; the effects of indogenous and perhaps &gt;&gt; the effects of indogenous and perhaps also exogenous hormones. also exogenous hormones. also exogenous hormones. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; And it makes sense because if you're not &gt;&gt; And it makes sense because if you're not &gt;&gt; And it makes sense because if you're not robust when it comes to immune status robust when it comes to immune status robust when it comes to immune status because you can think of your because you can think of your because you can think of your thyulin as high in youth, low in aged, thyulin as high in youth, low in aged, thyulin as high in youth, low in aged, &gt;&gt; you have no business investing in &gt;&gt; you have no business investing in &gt;&gt; you have no business investing in reproduction. You have no business in reproduction. You have no business in reproduction. You have no business in creating a lot of cortical steroids creating a lot of cortical steroids creating a lot of cortical steroids because that gives you that, you know, because that gives you that, you know, because that gives you that, you know, youthful energy in the morning. But if youthful energy in the morning. But if youthful energy in the morning. But if you're making a lot of coral steroids, you're making a lot of coral steroids, you're making a lot of coral steroids, you're shrinking your thymus. So it you're shrinking your thymus. So it you're shrinking your thymus. So it creates kind of a feedback loop, creates kind of a feedback loop, creates kind of a feedback loop, negative feedback loop to prevent you negative feedback loop to prevent you negative feedback loop to prevent you from overrunning your system. A lot of from overrunning your system. A lot of from overrunning your system. A lot of young guys will be like, "Oh, my immune young guys will be like, "Oh, my immune young guys will be like, "Oh, my immune system sucks and my testosterone is system sucks and my testosterone is system sucks and my testosterone is low." Like, is there a thymus link? low." Like, is there a thymus link? low." Like, is there a thymus link? There is the question. There is the question. There is the question. &gt;&gt; Interesting. And I I'm sure that you're &gt;&gt; Interesting. And I I'm sure that you're &gt;&gt; Interesting. And I I'm sure that you're the first person in the last 20 years to the first person in the last 20 years to the first person in the last 20 years to be talking about this publicly. Um, and be talking about this publicly. Um, and be talking about this publicly. Um, and I really appreciate that you are because I really appreciate that you are because I really appreciate that you are because of course you knew what the thymus was. of course you knew what the thymus was. of course you knew what the thymus was. don't know a lot about the biology but don't know a lot about the biology but don't know a lot about the biology but you've really um opened people's eyes to you've really um opened people's eyes to you've really um opened people's eyes to and um what it is that it goes away over and um what it is that it goes away over and um what it is that it goes away over time. People taking thyosin alpha TB500 time. People taking thyosin alpha TB500 time. People taking thyosin alpha TB500 and um thymulin. and um thymulin. and um thymulin. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Is this something that people would &gt;&gt; Is this something that people would &gt;&gt; Is this something that people would cocktail or is taking thyulin something cocktail or is taking thyulin something cocktail or is taking thyulin something that generally could be a good idea that generally could be a good idea that generally could be a good idea under certain circumstances? under certain circumstances? under certain circumstances? &gt;&gt; Thyulin itself has a very short &gt;&gt; Thyulin itself has a very short &gt;&gt; Thyulin itself has a very short half-life. The goal would be to increase half-life. The goal would be to increase half-life. The goal would be to increase endogenous production of the thymulin endogenous production of the thymulin endogenous production of the thymulin itself. &gt;&gt; How would you do that? &gt;&gt; How would you do that? &gt;&gt; How would you do that? &gt;&gt; So sufficient zinc status is necessary &gt;&gt; So sufficient zinc status is necessary &gt;&gt; So sufficient zinc status is necessary to make thyulin. The first sign of zinc to make thyulin. The first sign of zinc to make thyulin. The first sign of zinc depletion before RBC zinc or serum zinc depletion before RBC zinc or serum zinc depletion before RBC zinc or serum zinc decrease is your thyuline levels tank. decrease is your thyuline levels tank. decrease is your thyuline levels tank. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it nerve cells. Drinking Element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. GHKU to claim a free sample pack. GHKU to claim a free sample pack. GHKU copper. &gt;&gt; Yeah, most of the questions I get about &gt;&gt; Yeah, most of the questions I get about &gt;&gt; Yeah, most of the questions I get about it are from women. it are from women. it are from women. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; I sent out a little informal poll to the &gt;&gt; I sent out a little informal poll to the &gt;&gt; I sent out a little informal poll to the uh be careful how I say this. women in uh be careful how I say this. women in uh be careful how I say this. women in my life um including siblings and things my life um including siblings and things my life um including siblings and things like that and almost all the women like that and almost all the women like that and almost all the women said, "What about GHQ copper? I hear it said, "What about GHQ copper? I hear it said, "What about GHQ copper? I hear it can be good for my skin. Should I use it can be good for my skin. Should I use it can be good for my skin. Should I use it topically, take it orally, or inject it? topically, take it orally, or inject it? topically, take it orally, or inject it? If I inject it, should I inject it If I inject it, should I inject it If I inject it, should I inject it locally?" I'm like, "Please don't inject locally?" I'm like, "Please don't inject locally?" I'm like, "Please don't inject it in your face cuz I don't as much as it in your face cuz I don't as much as it in your face cuz I don't as much as I'm comfortable with people giving I'm comfortable with people giving I'm comfortable with people giving themselves like a little, you know, themselves like a little, you know, themselves like a little, you know, sterile injection and you know, belly or sterile injection and you know, belly or sterile injection and you know, belly or something like I get worried about something like I get worried about something like I get worried about non-experts injecting themselves in the non-experts injecting themselves in the non-experts injecting themselves in the face and other tissues. So, a lot face and other tissues. So, a lot face and other tissues. So, a lot of interest in this. of interest in this. of interest in this. &gt;&gt; What is it? Why has it made it into this &gt;&gt; What is it? Why has it made it into this &gt;&gt; What is it? Why has it made it into this kind of um aesthetic category? kind of um aesthetic category? kind of um aesthetic category? Because I'm guessing it has a lot of Because I'm guessing it has a lot of Because I'm guessing it has a lot of other effects too. But it's kind of other effects too. But it's kind of other effects too. But it's kind of funny how things kind of land in one funny how things kind of land in one funny how things kind of land in one region. Like creatine was like the region. Like creatine was like the region. Like creatine was like the muscle thing for a long time. Then it muscle thing for a long time. Then it muscle thing for a long time. Then it got some kind of like maybe it's good got some kind of like maybe it's good got some kind of like maybe it's good for cognition, maybe for people with for cognition, maybe for people with for cognition, maybe for people with Alzheimer's. Maybe women should take it Alzheimer's. Maybe women should take it Alzheimer's. Maybe women should take it too for all those reasons and more. And too for all those reasons and more. And too for all those reasons and more. And it kind of reverted back to like the it kind of reverted back to like the it kind of reverted back to like the muscle thing. GHKCU is a tripeptide um muscle thing. GHKCU is a tripeptide um muscle thing. GHKCU is a tripeptide um with a copper uh ion in the in the with a copper uh ion in the in the with a copper uh ion in the in the middle. It's glycine histadine and middle. It's glycine histadine and middle. It's glycine histadine and lysine. Um it's actually found in type lysine. Um it's actually found in type lysine. Um it's actually found in type one collagen fibers. So one collagen fibers. So one collagen fibers. So &gt;&gt; it's only where type one collagen fibers &gt;&gt; it's only where type one collagen fibers &gt;&gt; it's only where type one collagen fibers are &gt;&gt; all over your skin and hair and &gt;&gt; all over your skin and hair and &gt;&gt; all over your skin and hair and connective tissue. So connective tissue. So connective tissue. So &gt;&gt; uh just like Vladimir Cavson discovers &gt;&gt; uh just like Vladimir Cavson discovers &gt;&gt; uh just like Vladimir Cavson discovers these 40 different peptides, liver these 40 different peptides, liver these 40 different peptides, liver peptides, brain peptides, pineal peptides, brain peptides, pineal peptides, brain peptides, pineal peptides, whatever it may be, there's a peptides, whatever it may be, there's a peptides, whatever it may be, there's a American researcher Lauren Pikart, Dr. American researcher Lauren Pikart, Dr. American researcher Lauren Pikart, Dr. Lauren Pickard uh who's passed now he Lauren Pickard uh who's passed now he Lauren Pickard uh who's passed now he discovers GHKCU discovers GHKCU discovers GHKCU uh in the collagen tissue and he's like uh in the collagen tissue and he's like uh in the collagen tissue and he's like hey this might be the factor that hey this might be the factor that hey this might be the factor that controls collagen synthesis and also controls collagen synthesis and also controls collagen synthesis and also collagen breakdown. So he does a bunch collagen breakdown. So he does a bunch collagen breakdown. So he does a bunch of studies his work is all about this. of studies his work is all about this. of studies his work is all about this. So almost all the literature comes So almost all the literature comes So almost all the literature comes from this one lab a common theme in from this one lab a common theme in from this one lab a common theme in peptides unfortunately um he discovers peptides unfortunately um he discovers peptides unfortunately um he discovers it in maybe the mid70s it's um found to it in maybe the mid70s it's um found to it in maybe the mid70s it's um found to be very high in youth in serum be very high in youth in serum be very high in youth in serum levels. So you'll find this in the blood levels. So you'll find this in the blood levels. So you'll find this in the blood of anyone that we test um up to like of anyone that we test um up to like of anyone that we test um up to like 200 I think nanogs whatever the unit 200 I think nanogs whatever the unit 200 I think nanogs whatever the unit was and then gets down to like in the was and then gets down to like in the was and then gets down to like in the levels of the 60s by the age of 65. So levels of the 60s by the age of 65. So levels of the 60s by the age of 65. So dramatically decreases with age. It's dramatically decreases with age. It's dramatically decreases with age. It's thought to be maybe what leads to the thought to be maybe what leads to the thought to be maybe what leads to the youthful appearance of young skin and youthful appearance of young skin and youthful appearance of young skin and with age you lose that effect. So he did with age you lose that effect. So he did with age you lose that effect. So he did a bunch of trials both topically for a bunch of trials both topically for a bunch of trials both topically for skin for hair. Um there's now injectable skin for hair. Um there's now injectable skin for hair. Um there's now injectable work being done. So, similar to the BPC, work being done. So, similar to the BPC, work being done. So, similar to the BPC, they would, you know, cut rats open, they would, you know, cut rats open, they would, you know, cut rats open, inject GHK copper, uh, in a different inject GHK copper, uh, in a different inject GHK copper, uh, in a different site, and they'd get faster wound site, and they'd get faster wound site, and they'd get faster wound repair, uh, of the skin tissue from repair, uh, of the skin tissue from repair, uh, of the skin tissue from injecting this. So, that's, you know, injecting this. So, that's, you know, injecting this. So, that's, you know, it's become synonymous with BBC157, it's become synonymous with BBC157, it's become synonymous with BBC157, TB500, Wolverine stack, which is someone TB500, Wolverine stack, which is someone TB500, Wolverine stack, which is someone online just made up. And online just made up. And online just made up. And &gt;&gt; that's the Wolverine stack. &gt;&gt; that's the Wolverine stack. &gt;&gt; that's the Wolverine stack. &gt;&gt; It's those two. Yes. &gt;&gt; It's those two. Yes. &gt;&gt; It's those two. Yes. &gt;&gt; TB500 and alpha. &gt;&gt; TB500 and alpha. &gt;&gt; TB500 and alpha. &gt;&gt; No, the T500 and BBC157. &gt;&gt; No, the T500 and BBC157. &gt;&gt; No, the T500 and BBC157. &gt;&gt; BBC157. Okay. Now people will add on GHK &gt;&gt; BBC157. Okay. Now people will add on GHK &gt;&gt; BBC157. Okay. Now people will add on GHK copper and call it the glow stack. copper and call it the glow stack. copper and call it the glow stack. &gt;&gt; The glow stack. &gt;&gt; The glow stack. &gt;&gt; The glow stack. &gt;&gt; Oh, interesting. Okay. &gt;&gt; Oh, interesting. Okay. &gt;&gt; Oh, interesting. Okay. &gt;&gt; Someone has made it up in a research &gt;&gt; Someone has made it up in a research &gt;&gt; Someone has made it up in a research chemical. &gt;&gt; Like a glow Wolverine. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like a glow Wolverine. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Like a glow Wolverine. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's there's a big debate about &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's there's a big debate about &gt;&gt; Yeah. There's there's a big debate about whether or not if mixing those together whether or not if mixing those together whether or not if mixing those together causes, you know, denaturing of causes, you know, denaturing of causes, you know, denaturing of different peptides. That's beyond this different peptides. That's beyond this different peptides. That's beyond this discussion. Point is GHA copper. It both discussion. Point is GHA copper. It both discussion. Point is GHA copper. It both upregulates the synthesis side of upregulates the synthesis side of upregulates the synthesis side of collagen and the breakdown side of collagen and the breakdown side of collagen and the breakdown side of collagen. So, because when you're collagen. So, because when you're collagen. So, because when you're remodeling tissue, if you're just remodeling tissue, if you're just remodeling tissue, if you're just rebuilding it, you're going to rebuilding it, you're going to rebuilding it, you're going to get like very pathogenic uh structures. get like very pathogenic uh structures. get like very pathogenic uh structures. And if you're just breaking down, you're And if you're just breaking down, you're And if you're just breaking down, you're getting bad structures. So you're doing getting bad structures. So you're doing getting bad structures. So you're doing both. So the idea is does it number one both. So the idea is does it number one both. So the idea is does it number one have a skin effect, which it seems to have a skin effect, which it seems to have a skin effect, which it seems to be. The pickards, you know, compared it be. The pickards, you know, compared it be. The pickards, you know, compared it to retinol and vitamin C creams and to retinol and vitamin C creams and to retinol and vitamin C creams and all these things with positive effects all these things with positive effects all these things with positive effects and people anecdotally talk about like, and people anecdotally talk about like, and people anecdotally talk about like, you know, their crows feet going away you know, their crows feet going away you know, their crows feet going away and topically it does good for them. and topically it does good for them. and topically it does good for them. There was a study on hair that didn't There was a study on hair that didn't There was a study on hair that didn't seem too promising. So it's not going to seem too promising. So it's not going to seem too promising. So it's not going to the peptide sites try to tell you like the peptide sites try to tell you like the peptide sites try to tell you like this is better than minoxidil. Not this is better than minoxidil. Not this is better than minoxidil. Not really. Maybe it could be an adjunct and really. Maybe it could be an adjunct and really. Maybe it could be an adjunct and a lot of patients will have that a lot of patients will have that a lot of patients will have that success using that with some of their success using that with some of their success using that with some of their other topical um hair loss agents other topical um hair loss agents other topical um hair loss agents and now there's a Chinese group studying and now there's a Chinese group studying and now there's a Chinese group studying it for um lung regeneration because it for um lung regeneration because it for um lung regeneration because there's a lot of connective tissue in there's a lot of connective tissue in there's a lot of connective tissue in the lungs uh between the different the lungs uh between the different the lungs uh between the different alvoli and there's some you know hype alvoli and there's some you know hype alvoli and there's some you know hype there of using um GH copper as a there of using um GH copper as a there of using um GH copper as a regenerative from that side. How many regenerative from that side. How many regenerative from that side. How many people are trying to regenerate their people are trying to regenerate their people are trying to regenerate their lungs is for like COPD lungs is for like COPD lungs is for like COPD &gt;&gt; COPD and smokers it's a big &gt;&gt; COPD and smokers it's a big &gt;&gt; COPD and smokers it's a big issue. &gt;&gt; Maybe long lung CO from what I hear is a &gt;&gt; Maybe long lung CO from what I hear is a &gt;&gt; Maybe long lung CO from what I hear is a real thing. Lung damage from COVID. Y I real thing. Lung damage from COVID. Y I real thing. Lung damage from COVID. Y I know some people debate it but it seems know some people debate it but it seems know some people debate it but it seems like there are enough people walking like there are enough people walking like there are enough people walking around &gt;&gt; who were vaccinated and nonvaccinated &gt;&gt; who were vaccinated and nonvaccinated &gt;&gt; who were vaccinated and nonvaccinated who claim that they have who claim that they have who claim that they have &gt;&gt; symptoms postcoid that have last a long &gt;&gt; symptoms postcoid that have last a long &gt;&gt; symptoms postcoid that have last a long time aka long co. So that might be an time aka long co. So that might be an time aka long co. So that might be an interesting place for them to remain interesting place for them to remain interesting place for them to remain peptide curious. peptide curious. peptide curious. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And enthyic atrophy is a big part &gt;&gt; Yeah. And enthyic atrophy is a big part &gt;&gt; Yeah. And enthyic atrophy is a big part of the I suspect of the I suspect of the I suspect &gt;&gt; postco. Yeah, because any infection &gt;&gt; postco. Yeah, because any infection &gt;&gt; postco. Yeah, because any infection actually leads to we talk about the actually leads to we talk about the actually leads to we talk about the thymic involution that happens with age. thymic involution that happens with age. thymic involution that happens with age. There's thymic atrophy that happens There's thymic atrophy that happens There's thymic atrophy that happens after every infection the thymus kind of after every infection the thymus kind of after every infection the thymus kind of shrinks down and then the idea is that shrinks down and then the idea is that shrinks down and then the idea is that you know recover you convoles we you know recover you convoles we you know recover you convoles we just have convolescent homes for just have convolescent homes for just have convolescent homes for sick patients and then you regenerate sick patients and then you regenerate sick patients and then you regenerate your thymus in the state of health. I your thymus in the state of health. I your thymus in the state of health. I think the problem in modern day people think the problem in modern day people think the problem in modern day people are stressed out they're at work they are stressed out they're at work they are stressed out they're at work they get sick and they get keep getting sick. get sick and they get keep getting sick. get sick and they get keep getting sick. So they never get this chance for So they never get this chance for So they never get this chance for that thymus rejuvenation. So then that thymus rejuvenation. So then that thymus rejuvenation. So then they're constantly getting hit down and they're constantly getting hit down and they're constantly getting hit down and they're ending up with these diseases of they're ending up with these diseases of they're ending up with these diseases of aging that could have maybe been aging that could have maybe been aging that could have maybe been augmented, amilarated, maybe pushed down augmented, amilarated, maybe pushed down augmented, amilarated, maybe pushed down had their thymus function been better in had their thymus function been better in had their thymus function been better in youth. Raise my hand, Professor Bachery. youth. Raise my hand, Professor Bachery. youth. Raise my hand, Professor Bachery. Um, I'm only half. I really feel like Um, I'm only half. I really feel like Um, I'm only half. I really feel like I'm in school. This is so cool for me. I I'm in school. This is so cool for me. I I'm in school. This is so cool for me. I I'm truly in heaven right now. If you I'm truly in heaven right now. If you I'm truly in heaven right now. If you look back at the literature on look back at the literature on look back at the literature on convolesing, how long were people uh convolesing, how long were people uh convolesing, how long were people uh recommended to take some time off after recommended to take some time off after recommended to take some time off after a cold or a flu or some other That's a cold or a flu or some other That's a cold or a flu or some other That's a good question. because I think this good question. because I think this good question. because I think this would tell us like are we just like with would tell us like are we just like with would tell us like are we just like with um sort of uh how long um maternity um sort of uh how long um maternity um sort of uh how long um maternity leave type things like you know the idea leave type things like you know the idea leave type things like you know the idea now is people are being forced to go now is people are being forced to go now is people are being forced to go back too quickly in countries like in back too quickly in countries like in back too quickly in countries like in Scandinavia perhaps where they get more Scandinavia perhaps where they get more Scandinavia perhaps where they get more time positive outcomes for baby and mom time positive outcomes for baby and mom time positive outcomes for baby and mom like I think it's an interesting and like I think it's an interesting and like I think it's an interesting and important question because our biology important question because our biology important question because our biology hasn't changed that much no in the last hasn't changed that much no in the last hasn't changed that much no in the last you know couple thousand years at least you know couple thousand years at least you know couple thousand years at least like after one has a cold typically like after one has a cold typically like after one has a cold typically people go back as soon as they deem people go back as soon as they deem people go back as soon as they deem themselves non-infectious which really themselves non-infectious which really themselves non-infectious which really worries Um, but do you think people are getting Um, but do you think people are getting Um, but do you think people are getting back to work too quickly? I mean, I back to work too quickly? I mean, I back to work too quickly? I mean, I understand the reasons why, but do you understand the reasons why, but do you understand the reasons why, but do you think that adding a stage of really think that adding a stage of really think that adding a stage of really getting back to full functioning without getting back to full functioning without getting back to full functioning without getting into the, you know, back to the getting into the, you know, back to the getting into the, you know, back to the gym, back to work, back to everything is gym, back to work, back to everything is gym, back to work, back to everything is could be beneficial for these longevity could be beneficial for these longevity could be beneficial for these longevity effects, &gt;&gt; right? Right. Well, I mean, if you think &gt;&gt; right? Right. Well, I mean, if you think &gt;&gt; right? Right. Well, I mean, if you think about it, nothing that they do once they about it, nothing that they do once they about it, nothing that they do once they come back is is, you know, additive to come back is is, you know, additive to come back is is, you know, additive to healing. Their their circadian rhythms healing. Their their circadian rhythms healing. Their their circadian rhythms are thrown off. They're under are thrown off. They're under are thrown off. They're under malilluminative lights all day. Okay, malilluminative lights all day. Okay, malilluminative lights all day. Okay, they're not getting sunlight. They're they're not getting sunlight. They're they're not getting sunlight. They're not their vitamin D levels are not their vitamin D levels are not their vitamin D levels are atrocious. Their blue light exposure at atrocious. Their blue light exposure at atrocious. Their blue light exposure at night is high. Their stress levels night is high. Their stress levels night is high. Their stress levels are very high. Their guts are inflamed are very high. Their guts are inflamed are very high. Their guts are inflamed from eating processed from eating processed from eating processed hyperprocessed hyper palatable foods. hyperprocessed hyper palatable foods. hyperprocessed hyper palatable foods. They have obesity or they're They have obesity or they're They have obesity or they're pre-diabetic. So all these things now pre-diabetic. So all these things now pre-diabetic. So all these things now lead to this inflammatory state and they lead to this inflammatory state and they lead to this inflammatory state and they just got sick and their thymus didn't just got sick and their thymus didn't just got sick and their thymus didn't bounce back. So then they get sick the bounce back. So then they get sick the bounce back. So then they get sick the next time in two or three weeks. Like next time in two or three weeks. Like next time in two or three weeks. Like post pandemic a lot of my colleagues post pandemic a lot of my colleagues post pandemic a lot of my colleagues were like dude I get sick three four were like dude I get sick three four were like dude I get sick three four times a winter now before I'd get sick times a winter now before I'd get sick times a winter now before I'd get sick you know once a winter. So this is where you know once a winter. So this is where you know once a winter. So this is where the interest in thyic peptides is very the interest in thyic peptides is very the interest in thyic peptides is very elusive. We have to figure out if the elusive. We have to figure out if the elusive. We have to figure out if the STPs or the PTE are the more STPs or the PTE are the more STPs or the PTE are the more interesting ones. There's synthetic interesting ones. There's synthetic interesting ones. There's synthetic thyic peptides thyself one thus beta 4in thyic peptides thyself one thus beta 4in thyic peptides thyself one thus beta 4in and there's purified thyic extracts. and there's purified thyic extracts. and there's purified thyic extracts. There's the two different research There's the two different research There's the two different research committees that exist when it comes to committees that exist when it comes to committees that exist when it comes to the thymus. Which one will be more the thymus. Which one will be more the thymus. Which one will be more advantageous? Vladimir cabin came up advantageous? Vladimir cabin came up advantageous? Vladimir cabin came up with the thyimolin inject injectable and with the thyimolin inject injectable and with the thyimolin inject injectable and oral versions of that. and he had oral versions of that. and he had oral versions of that. and he had positive uh immune markers and he showed positive uh immune markers and he showed positive uh immune markers and he showed like CD4 cells come up and CD8 cells like CD4 cells come up and CD8 cells like CD4 cells come up and CD8 cells improve and all his um immune improve and all his um immune improve and all his um immune markers become a more youthful state markers become a more youthful state markers become a more youthful state let's say let's say let's say &gt;&gt; but unfortunately what's happening here &gt;&gt; but unfortunately what's happening here &gt;&gt; but unfortunately what's happening here is we don't have thymologists like we is we don't have thymologists like we is we don't have thymologists like we don't have a branch of medicine that's don't have a branch of medicine that's don't have a branch of medicine that's dedicated to this aspect of immunity dedicated to this aspect of immunity dedicated to this aspect of immunity like there's you know allergy like there's you know allergy like there's you know allergy and immun immunologists and immun immunologists and immun immunologists but they focus more on you know but they focus more on you know but they focus more on you know allergies to different agents or very allergies to different agents or very allergies to different agents or very severe immune diseases is they're not severe immune diseases is they're not severe immune diseases is they're not really addressing the immunity of the really addressing the immunity of the really addressing the immunity of the general public and how you can boost general public and how you can boost general public and how you can boost that. And I think post pandemic a lot of that. And I think post pandemic a lot of that. And I think post pandemic a lot of people started to ask hey how can I have people started to ask hey how can I have people started to ask hey how can I have better immunity for myself. Uh and now better immunity for myself. Uh and now better immunity for myself. Uh and now finally people are starting to talk finally people are starting to talk finally people are starting to talk about the thymus. Unfortunately it's about the thymus. Unfortunately it's about the thymus. Unfortunately it's been too little too late. That would been too little too late. That would been too little too late. That would have been great during the pandemic. uh have been great during the pandemic. uh have been great during the pandemic. uh because we could have used these thyic because we could have used these thyic because we could have used these thyic you know focused interventions whether you know focused interventions whether you know focused interventions whether it be zinc or you know uh thyic peptides it be zinc or you know uh thyic peptides it be zinc or you know uh thyic peptides or your purified thymic extracts to or your purified thymic extracts to or your purified thymic extracts to augment immunity of the population as a augment immunity of the population as a augment immunity of the population as a whole especially because Dr. whole especially because Dr. whole especially because Dr. was doing this in the 70s in Russia. was doing this in the 70s in Russia. was doing this in the 70s in Russia. Even in Russia, they don't really look Even in Russia, they don't really look Even in Russia, they don't really look kindly to this research. Um, the Soviet kindly to this research. Um, the Soviet kindly to this research. Um, the Soviet era research has been kind of pushed era research has been kind of pushed era research has been kind of pushed aside and it's like more big farmer aside and it's like more big farmer aside and it's like more big farmer style because it's more profitable style because it's more profitable style because it's more profitable because how many thymuses are you going because how many thymuses are you going because how many thymuses are you going to inject into people and how many to inject into people and how many to inject into people and how many thymuses exist on the planet to make thymuses exist on the planet to make thymuses exist on the planet to make these different peptides from these different peptides from these different peptides from &gt;&gt; but you could inject a lot of synthetic &gt;&gt; but you could inject a lot of synthetic &gt;&gt; but you could inject a lot of synthetic thymus and alpha TB500. Yes. thymus and alpha TB500. Yes. thymus and alpha TB500. Yes. &gt;&gt; Um, and maybe BPC so Wolverine stack &gt;&gt; Um, and maybe BPC so Wolverine stack &gt;&gt; Um, and maybe BPC so Wolverine stack plus you know. plus you know. plus you know. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So it'd be very interesting if &gt;&gt; Yeah. So it'd be very interesting if &gt;&gt; Yeah. So it'd be very interesting if we can get that cuz now that everyone's we can get that cuz now that everyone's we can get that cuz now that everyone's getting like these puno scans and getting like these puno scans and getting like these puno scans and different full body MRIs, we can see the different full body MRIs, we can see the different full body MRIs, we can see the thymus size. thymus size. thymus size. &gt;&gt; I was going to ask you can I get &gt;&gt; I was going to ask you can I get &gt;&gt; I was going to ask you can I get some sense of my thymic size and output some sense of my thymic size and output some sense of my thymic size and output from a blood draw or do I have to do from a blood draw or do I have to do from a blood draw or do I have to do whole body imaging? I've done whole body whole body imaging? I've done whole body whole body imaging? I've done whole body imaging. It is somewhat costly and imaging. It is somewhat costly and imaging. It is somewhat costly and that's a prohibitive barrier for that's a prohibitive barrier for that's a prohibitive barrier for people. But if people can afford it, for people. But if people can afford it, for people. But if people can afford it, I actually think it can be useful. I actually think it can be useful. I actually think it can be useful. I have a number of friends including a have a number of friends including a have a number of friends including a neurosurgeon friend who said that he's neurosurgeon friend who said that he's neurosurgeon friend who said that he's um some people are still alive now um some people are still alive now um some people are still alive now because they got that scan. A lot of because they got that scan. A lot of because they got that scan. A lot of people get scared about what they see. people get scared about what they see. people get scared about what they see. Wouldn't you rather be scared about what Wouldn't you rather be scared about what Wouldn't you rather be scared about what you see and be told that it's okay than you see and be told that it's okay than you see and be told that it's okay than not know it's there and then have a not know it's there and then have a not know it's there and then have a catastrophic event? catastrophic event? catastrophic event? &gt;&gt; We always have a patient that comes in, &gt;&gt; We always have a patient that comes in, &gt;&gt; We always have a patient that comes in, you know, car accident, young 45year-old you know, car accident, young 45year-old you know, car accident, young 45year-old car accident, comes in, has a pancreatic car accident, comes in, has a pancreatic car accident, comes in, has a pancreatic mass that they would have never known mass that they would have never known mass that they would have never known about had they not had that accident. about had they not had that accident. about had they not had that accident. They get a CT scan just to check for any They get a CT scan just to check for any They get a CT scan just to check for any kind of internal bleeding. They find the kind of internal bleeding. They find the kind of internal bleeding. They find the pancreatic mass that gets removed. It pancreatic mass that gets removed. It pancreatic mass that gets removed. It ends up being a malignant mass that had ends up being a malignant mass that had ends up being a malignant mass that had they waited six months, they would have, they waited six months, they would have, they waited six months, they would have, you know, had stage four pancreatic you know, had stage four pancreatic you know, had stage four pancreatic cancer and passed away. So that's cancer and passed away. So that's cancer and passed away. So that's a theory. There is a concern about false a theory. There is a concern about false a theory. There is a concern about false positives and false negatives when it positives and false negatives when it positives and false negatives when it comes to these screening modalities. comes to these screening modalities. comes to these screening modalities. Like any screening modality is not Like any screening modality is not Like any screening modality is not perfect. So there's a big debate on perfect. So there's a big debate on perfect. So there's a big debate on whether or not to do these that will whether or not to do these that will whether or not to do these that will leave to people and their physicians. leave to people and their physicians. leave to people and their physicians. But I'm I've been trying to lobby them But I'm I've been trying to lobby them But I'm I've been trying to lobby them to give the thymic score to everybody to give the thymic score to everybody to give the thymic score to everybody who gets one of these scans because they who gets one of these scans because they who gets one of these scans because they could see like, hey, can you see could see like, hey, can you see could see like, hey, can you see where the thymus is at where the thymus is at where the thymus is at &gt;&gt; because, you know, someone might come &gt;&gt; because, you know, someone might come &gt;&gt; because, you know, someone might come in, you know, for five different scans in, you know, for five different scans in, you know, for five different scans over 5 years, they did a TRT protocol or over 5 years, they did a TRT protocol or over 5 years, they did a TRT protocol or a GH protocol or whatever it may be. And a GH protocol or whatever it may be. And a GH protocol or whatever it may be. And we could see did that improve uh thymics we could see did that improve uh thymics we could see did that improve uh thymics status or make it worse or different status or make it worse or different status or make it worse or different infections, different interventions. infections, different interventions. infections, different interventions. That'd be very interesting to kind of That'd be very interesting to kind of That'd be very interesting to kind of tease out on blood tests. We we've been tease out on blood tests. We we've been tease out on blood tests. We we've been trying to work with a couple different trying to work with a couple different trying to work with a couple different labs to figure out a thymic score. M the labs to figure out a thymic score. M the labs to figure out a thymic score. M the most commercially available is going to most commercially available is going to most commercially available is going to be a lymphosy count which look at CD4 be a lymphosy count which look at CD4 be a lymphosy count which look at CD4 to CD8. There's an ideal CD4 to CD8 to CD8. There's an ideal CD4 to CD8 to CD8. There's an ideal CD4 to CD8 ratio that's more youthful. You don't ratio that's more youthful. You don't ratio that's more youthful. You don't want to have more CD8 cells than CD4 want to have more CD8 cells than CD4 want to have more CD8 cells than CD4 cells. You don't want to have too few of cells. You don't want to have too few of cells. You don't want to have too few of either of them. That goes more into like either of them. That goes more into like either of them. That goes more into like the HIV literature. But the most the HIV literature. But the most the HIV literature. But the most simple thing that almost every single simple thing that almost every single simple thing that almost every single person has gotten done but no one's person has gotten done but no one's person has gotten done but no one's looked at is their lymphosy to monocy looked at is their lymphosy to monocy looked at is their lymphosy to monocy ratio on their CBC. So almost ratio on their CBC. So almost ratio on their CBC. So almost everybody's gone to CBC with diff. It's everybody's gone to CBC with diff. It's everybody's gone to CBC with diff. It's a $3 lab test. If you type in any a $3 lab test. If you type in any a $3 lab test. If you type in any disorder, cardiovascular disease, disorder, cardiovascular disease, disorder, cardiovascular disease, cancer, uh diabetes and put lymphosytes cancer, uh diabetes and put lymphosytes cancer, uh diabetes and put lymphosytes to monocyt ratio, there's a study that to monocyt ratio, there's a study that to monocyt ratio, there's a study that will talk about how like low lymphosy to will talk about how like low lymphosy to will talk about how like low lymphosy to monocy ratio is associated with poor monocy ratio is associated with poor monocy ratio is associated with poor outcomes when it comes to that disease outcomes when it comes to that disease outcomes when it comes to that disease state. So it gives you kind of a general state. So it gives you kind of a general state. So it gives you kind of a general gestalt of what's going on with immunity gestalt of what's going on with immunity gestalt of what's going on with immunity because you want a high absolute because you want a high absolute because you want a high absolute lymphosy count not too high because it's lymphosy count not too high because it's lymphosy count not too high because it's associated with like lymphas but associated with like lymphas but associated with like lymphas but somewhere the hazard when you look at somewhere the hazard when you look at somewhere the hazard when you look at the charts around 1,000 total the charts around 1,000 total the charts around 1,000 total lymphosytes is um where the hazard of lymphosytes is um where the hazard of lymphosytes is um where the hazard of different cancer sites starts to different cancer sites starts to different cancer sites starts to increase a young healthy person will be increase a young healthy person will be increase a young healthy person will be between you know 1500 and 33,000 total between you know 1500 and 33,000 total between you know 1500 and 33,000 total lymphosytes and you want the ratio to lymphosytes and you want the ratio to lymphosytes and you want the ratio to the monocytes. Monocytes are different the monocytes. Monocytes are different the monocytes. Monocytes are different types of uh immune cells that are more types of uh immune cells that are more types of uh immune cells that are more inflammatory. So if you have a robust inflammatory. So if you have a robust inflammatory. So if you have a robust amount of lymphosytes with low amount of amount of lymphosytes with low amount of amount of lymphosytes with low amount of monocytes that suggests you have a more monocytes that suggests you have a more monocytes that suggests you have a more let's say ready and robust immune state. let's say ready and robust immune state. let's say ready and robust immune state. &gt;&gt; So $3 lab test that everybody gets &gt;&gt; So $3 lab test that everybody gets &gt;&gt; So $3 lab test that everybody gets almost every lab testing company now almost every lab testing company now almost every lab testing company now checks it and no one really do reports checks it and no one really do reports checks it and no one really do reports on it. But you can kind of u stratify on it. But you can kind of u stratify on it. But you can kind of u stratify people into disease risk based on that people into disease risk based on that people into disease risk based on that score. &gt;&gt; Out of a hundred randomly pulled um &gt;&gt; Out of a hundred randomly pulled um &gt;&gt; Out of a hundred randomly pulled um physicians who receive their license in physicians who receive their license in physicians who receive their license in the United States, how many of them the United States, how many of them the United States, how many of them probably know what you just described? probably know what you just described? probably know what you just described? &gt;&gt; Uh zero. &gt;&gt; Uh zero. &gt;&gt; Uh zero. &gt;&gt; Why not? It it's like rabbit holes that &gt;&gt; Why not? It it's like rabbit holes that &gt;&gt; Why not? It it's like rabbit holes that you kind of go down and find out. Like I you kind of go down and find out. Like I you kind of go down and find out. Like I I've been lobbing everyone in the I've been lobbing everyone in the I've been lobbing everyone in the hospital to look at this. hospital to look at this. hospital to look at this. &gt;&gt; But it's very easy, right? The data are &gt;&gt; But it's very easy, right? The data are &gt;&gt; But it's very easy, right? The data are there. &gt;&gt; No, I look &gt;&gt; No, I look &gt;&gt; No, I look &gt;&gt; It's not like you're saying, "Oh, you &gt;&gt; It's not like you're saying, "Oh, you &gt;&gt; It's not like you're saying, "Oh, you got to do all this additional work. You got to do all this additional work. You got to do all this additional work. You got to build insurance. I mean, it's got to build insurance. I mean, it's got to build insurance. I mean, it's there." &gt;&gt; Like I started to care about the &gt;&gt; Like I started to care about the &gt;&gt; Like I started to care about the thymus uh post pandemic because I thymus uh post pandemic because I thymus uh post pandemic because I noticed people's lymph counts were noticed people's lymph counts were noticed people's lymph counts were lower. &gt;&gt; And I could notice that, you know, &gt;&gt; And I could notice that, you know, &gt;&gt; And I could notice that, you know, anecdotally or looking at, you know, anecdotally or looking at, you know, anecdotally or looking at, you know, small data sets like, "Hey, people had small data sets like, "Hey, people had small data sets like, "Hey, people had lower lymphosy counts had worse disease lower lymphosy counts had worse disease lower lymphosy counts had worse disease or like earlier like people that had or like earlier like people that had or like earlier like people that had cancers in their late 30s, early 40s." cancers in their late 30s, early 40s." cancers in their late 30s, early 40s." I'm like, "Huh, they all had like lower I'm like, "Huh, they all had like lower I'm like, "Huh, they all had like lower lymphosy counts." So I started to like lymphosy counts." So I started to like lymphosy counts." So I started to like dig into the literature and I'm lobbying dig into the literature and I'm lobbying dig into the literature and I'm lobbying a lot of the hematologists and a lot of the hematologists and a lot of the hematologists and infectious disease doctors in my infectious disease doctors in my infectious disease doctors in my hospital to start to look at this. hospital to start to look at this. hospital to start to look at this. Unfortunately they kind of are Unfortunately they kind of are Unfortunately they kind of are textbook. It's not part of the textbook. It's not part of the textbook. It's not part of the guidelines. It's it's in a space that's guidelines. It's it's in a space that's guidelines. It's it's in a space that's not p pathology. So it's not clear like not p pathology. So it's not clear like not p pathology. So it's not clear like hey if I check your lymph site to hey if I check your lymph site to hey if I check your lymph site to monocite count right now is it going to monocite count right now is it going to monocite count right now is it going to change my management of you in the change my management of you in the change my management of you in the hospital today? Not really. It's more of hospital today? Not really. It's more of hospital today? Not really. It's more of a long-term look. So that's where all a long-term look. So that's where all a long-term look. So that's where all these direct to health uh direct to these direct to health uh direct to these direct to health uh direct to consumer um companies have an consumer um companies have an consumer um companies have an opportunity to kind of modulate the way opportunity to kind of modulate the way opportunity to kind of modulate the way medicine is practiced in the United medicine is practiced in the United medicine is practiced in the United States. But if we have this metric States. But if we have this metric States. But if we have this metric that we can study, why not use it and that we can study, why not use it and that we can study, why not use it and then like try different interventions then like try different interventions then like try different interventions and see what actually helps people like and see what actually helps people like and see what actually helps people like we've gotten sometimes peptides. We've we've gotten sometimes peptides. We've we've gotten sometimes peptides. We've had people go from like a 4:1 lymph to had people go from like a 4:1 lymph to had people go from like a 4:1 lymph to monocy ratio to an 8 to1 ratio. Now is monocy ratio to an 8 to1 ratio. Now is monocy ratio to an 8 to1 ratio. Now is that significant? That seems to be that significant? That seems to be that significant? That seems to be significant. Um but no one's really kind significant. Um but no one's really kind significant. Um but no one's really kind of discussing it unfortunately. of discussing it unfortunately. of discussing it unfortunately. &gt;&gt; I know who I'm putting my vote in for &gt;&gt; I know who I'm putting my vote in for &gt;&gt; I know who I'm putting my vote in for surgeon general and uh if ever there's a surgeon general and uh if ever there's a surgeon general and uh if ever there's a turnover. I don't haven't explored the turnover. I don't haven't explored the turnover. I don't haven't explored the most recent person. So that's not a most recent person. So that's not a most recent person. So that's not a comment on her. It's um I know they comment on her. It's um I know they comment on her. It's um I know they elected to not uh vote Casey in. Um but elected to not uh vote Casey in. Um but elected to not uh vote Casey in. Um but uh so that's not truly not a mention. I uh so that's not truly not a mention. I uh so that's not truly not a mention. I haven't done but I think uh your voice haven't done but I think uh your voice haven't done but I think uh your voice should be heard uh far and wide on these should be heard uh far and wide on these should be heard uh far and wide on these things that I mean like more data is things that I mean like more data is things that I mean like more data is good. The scientist in me just says you good. The scientist in me just says you good. The scientist in me just says you got the data. Data could be informative. got the data. Data could be informative. got the data. Data could be informative. Take a look. Take a look. Take a look. &gt;&gt; There's a category of peptides such as &gt;&gt; There's a category of peptides such as &gt;&gt; There's a category of peptides such as growth hormone secret testin MK677 that growth hormone secret testin MK677 that growth hormone secret testin MK677 that we could we could do the deep dive on we could we could do the deep dive on we could we could do the deep dive on all those but I'll just batch those and all those but I'll just batch those and all those but I'll just batch those and maybe we parse them a little bit. and maybe we parse them a little bit. and maybe we parse them a little bit. and things like melanotans. Um these are and things like melanotans. Um these are and things like melanotans. Um these are &gt;&gt; to my understanding FDA approved for &gt;&gt; to my understanding FDA approved for &gt;&gt; to my understanding FDA approved for certain indications. So they've gone certain indications. So they've gone certain indications. So they've gone through the randomized control trials through the randomized control trials through the randomized control trials for like uh growth hormone secret dogs for like uh growth hormone secret dogs for like uh growth hormone secret dogs for uh small stature in kids. They might for uh small stature in kids. They might for uh small stature in kids. They might use it for that or for um postsurgical use it for that or for um postsurgical use it for that or for um postsurgical uh burn uh recovery. I think some HIV uh burn uh recovery. I think some HIV uh burn uh recovery. I think some HIV HIV. So the idea here, the sort of HIV HIV. So the idea here, the sort of HIV HIV. So the idea here, the sort of framework that I'm teeing up is that framework that I'm teeing up is that framework that I'm teeing up is that these molecules are have been that these molecules are have been that these molecules are have been explored. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; For their known biological function in &gt;&gt; For their known biological function in &gt;&gt; For their known biological function in animals. It's established these animals. It's established these animals. It's established these molecules lead to an increase in growth molecules lead to an increase in growth molecules lead to an increase in growth hormone above what would normally be hormone above what would normally be hormone above what would normally be secreted. They do it indirectly by so secreted. They do it indirectly by so secreted. They do it indirectly by so they're sort of the gas pedal on that they're sort of the gas pedal on that they're sort of the gas pedal on that system. Growth hormone secret cause more system. Growth hormone secret cause more system. Growth hormone secret cause more growth hormone to be secreted, not growth hormone to be secreted, not growth hormone to be secreted, not actual growth hormone. They vary in actual growth hormone. They vary in actual growth hormone. They vary in terms of how much they stimulate hunger terms of how much they stimulate hunger terms of how much they stimulate hunger or don't stimulate hunger. Yep. or don't stimulate hunger. Yep. or don't stimulate hunger. Yep. &gt;&gt; And on you should take them if you're &gt;&gt; And on you should take them if you're &gt;&gt; And on you should take them if you're going to take them before sleep, but not going to take them before sleep, but not going to take them before sleep, but not having eaten in the last two or three having eaten in the last two or three having eaten in the last two or three hours. All all that stuff. We can save hours. All all that stuff. We can save hours. All all that stuff. We can save ourselves some time here. ourselves some time here. ourselves some time here. &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; Y &gt;&gt; most people who are taking these things, &gt;&gt; most people who are taking these things, &gt;&gt; most people who are taking these things, whether they get it from pharma or whether they get it from pharma or whether they get it from pharma or compounding pharmacy or gray market, compounding pharmacy or gray market, compounding pharmacy or gray market, research purposes only, um research purposes only, um research purposes only, um &gt;&gt; or black market, god forbid, they're &gt;&gt; or black market, god forbid, they're &gt;&gt; or black market, god forbid, they're doing this because they want to lose doing this because they want to lose doing this because they want to lose fat, gain muscle, recover from exercise fat, gain muscle, recover from exercise fat, gain muscle, recover from exercise more quickly, and look more youthful. more quickly, and look more youthful. more quickly, and look more youthful. &gt;&gt; Yep. Can we assume that those effects &gt;&gt; Yep. Can we assume that those effects &gt;&gt; Yep. Can we assume that those effects are real given that they were FDA are real given that they were FDA are real given that they were FDA approved for other things? approved for other things? approved for other things? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So when it comes to let's parse &gt;&gt; Yeah. So when it comes to let's parse &gt;&gt; Yeah. So when it comes to let's parse out the effects and the different out the effects and the different out the effects and the different types of compounds that exist in this types of compounds that exist in this types of compounds that exist in this category. So there's the grein side the category. So there's the grein side the category. So there's the grein side the grelin agonist like MK67 not FDA grelin agonist like MK67 not FDA grelin agonist like MK67 not FDA approved orally available pill that you approved orally available pill that you approved orally available pill that you makes you bleed out uh growth hormone makes you bleed out uh growth hormone makes you bleed out uh growth hormone like you make so much growth hormone in like you make so much growth hormone in like you make so much growth hormone in response to that and in non-pulsatile response to that and in non-pulsatile response to that and in non-pulsatile fashion. Growth hormone is a very fashion. Growth hormone is a very fashion. Growth hormone is a very circadian hormone that gets released in circadian hormone that gets released in circadian hormone that gets released in the first you know 90 minutes of a the first you know 90 minutes of a the first you know 90 minutes of a slowwave sleep. Um, and if you miss that slowwave sleep. Um, and if you miss that slowwave sleep. Um, and if you miss that big pulse, you're going to get small big pulse, you're going to get small big pulse, you're going to get small pulses throughout the day. The question pulses throughout the day. The question pulses throughout the day. The question is, is that big pulse better than small is, is that big pulse better than small is, is that big pulse better than small little, you know, u mini pulses little, you know, u mini pulses little, you know, u mini pulses throughout the day. The secrets will uh throughout the day. The secrets will uh throughout the day. The secrets will uh address the broader category of address the broader category of address the broader category of something called somatopause. So, you've something called somatopause. So, you've something called somatopause. So, you've heard of menopause, you've heard of heard of menopause, you've heard of heard of menopause, you've heard of maybe andropause. Somatopause is this maybe andropause. Somatopause is this maybe andropause. Somatopause is this event that happens somewhere in the 30s event that happens somewhere in the 30s event that happens somewhere in the 30s where growth hormone production where growth hormone production where growth hormone production dramatically decreases. So if we kind of dramatically decreases. So if we kind of dramatically decreases. So if we kind of paint a picture, your pineal glands paint a picture, your pineal glands paint a picture, your pineal glands aging before puberty, your thymus right aging before puberty, your thymus right aging before puberty, your thymus right after puberty, you know, in your 20s, after puberty, you know, in your 20s, after puberty, you know, in your 20s, and in your 30s, you're having and in your 30s, you're having and in your 30s, you're having somatopause. That's where your growth somatopause. That's where your growth somatopause. That's where your growth hormone production is decreasing. You're hormone production is decreasing. You're hormone production is decreasing. You're having they call it adrenopause where having they call it adrenopause where having they call it adrenopause where your adrenals stop making as much DHEA your adrenals stop making as much DHEA your adrenals stop making as much DHEA and the different ratio of cortisol. And and the different ratio of cortisol. And and the different ratio of cortisol. And then you're having menopause, andropause then you're having menopause, andropause then you're having menopause, andropause and all the other chronic conditions. So and all the other chronic conditions. So and all the other chronic conditions. So it's like your first 50 years of your it's like your first 50 years of your it's like your first 50 years of your life, that's what you have to expect. life, that's what you have to expect. life, that's what you have to expect. The question has been, and it's a big The question has been, and it's a big The question has been, and it's a big debate in the medical community, is debate in the medical community, is debate in the medical community, is replacing growth hormone and addressing replacing growth hormone and addressing replacing growth hormone and addressing somatopause useful because you can somatopause useful because you can somatopause useful because you can measure if we had your IGF-1 when you're measure if we had your IGF-1 when you're measure if we had your IGF-1 when you're 18 and your IGF-1 when you're 30 and 50, 18 and your IGF-1 when you're 30 and 50, 18 and your IGF-1 when you're 30 and 50, it's going to be a dramatic decrease in it's going to be a dramatic decrease in it's going to be a dramatic decrease in that. Should we now replenish this that. Should we now replenish this that. Should we now replenish this IGF-1? The proponents will say IGF-1 is IGF-1? The proponents will say IGF-1 is IGF-1? The proponents will say IGF-1 is important for skin and good quality important for skin and good quality important for skin and good quality sleep and for muscle recovery and joints sleep and for muscle recovery and joints sleep and for muscle recovery and joints and all these things and those are true. and all these things and those are true. and all these things and those are true. We know growth hormone has all these We know growth hormone has all these We know growth hormone has all these beneficial effects on that. We also know beneficial effects on that. We also know beneficial effects on that. We also know growth hormone is thymore regenerative growth hormone is thymore regenerative growth hormone is thymore regenerative because it stimulates the regrowth of an because it stimulates the regrowth of an because it stimulates the regrowth of an aged involuted thymus gland. Based on aged involuted thymus gland. Based on aged involuted thymus gland. Based on Dr. Fee's work, the question is, is Dr. Fee's work, the question is, is Dr. Fee's work, the question is, is there an ankcogenic signal when it comes there an ankcogenic signal when it comes there an ankcogenic signal when it comes to growth hormone? to growth hormone? to growth hormone? &gt;&gt; Does it cause cancer? &gt;&gt; Does it cause cancer? &gt;&gt; Does it cause cancer? &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Can it sorry, can it promote more rapid &gt;&gt; Can it sorry, can it promote more rapid &gt;&gt; Can it sorry, can it promote more rapid growth of other of existing cancer? I growth of other of existing cancer? I growth of other of existing cancer? I don't think anyone thinks it causes don't think anyone thinks it causes don't think anyone thinks it causes canc. And this is the big debate when canc. And this is the big debate when canc. And this is the big debate when people are like BBC causes cancer. people are like BBC causes cancer. people are like BBC causes cancer. There's no muten effect from BP is BPC There's no muten effect from BP is BPC There's no muten effect from BP is BPC like smoking a cigarette. Smoking a like smoking a cigarette. Smoking a like smoking a cigarette. Smoking a cigarette. you get carcinogenic damage cigarette. you get carcinogenic damage cigarette. you get carcinogenic damage to the lung tissue that causes a cancer to the lung tissue that causes a cancer to the lung tissue that causes a cancer later on. There's no direct mechanism later on. There's no direct mechanism later on. There's no direct mechanism that would link any of these peptides to that would link any of these peptides to that would link any of these peptides to a carcinogen carcinogenic effect. But is a carcinogen carcinogenic effect. But is a carcinogen carcinogenic effect. But is it you know a growth factor that could it you know a growth factor that could it you know a growth factor that could grow a cancer potentially? There isn't grow a cancer potentially? There isn't grow a cancer potentially? There isn't good data showing that the debate good data showing that the debate good data showing that the debate may be like hey by boosting thymic may be like hey by boosting thymic may be like hey by boosting thymic function from growth hormone are you function from growth hormone are you function from growth hormone are you increasing immunity and then immune increasing immunity and then immune increasing immunity and then immune surveillance of different tumors right surveillance of different tumors right surveillance of different tumors right and therefore decreasing and then and therefore decreasing and then and therefore decreasing and then causing the scale. There's a big debate causing the scale. There's a big debate causing the scale. There's a big debate of whether growth hormone is even of whether growth hormone is even of whether growth hormone is even beneficial when it comes to aging beneficial when it comes to aging beneficial when it comes to aging because growth hormone does grow certain because growth hormone does grow certain because growth hormone does grow certain tissues. There's models where people are tissues. There's models where people are tissues. There's models where people are growth hormone deficient and they live a growth hormone deficient and they live a growth hormone deficient and they live a lot longer lot longer lot longer &gt;&gt; and growth hormone is not positive when &gt;&gt; and growth hormone is not positive when &gt;&gt; and growth hormone is not positive when it comes to a cardio metabolic it comes to a cardio metabolic it comes to a cardio metabolic perspective. &gt;&gt; And in species like dogs where there's &gt;&gt; And in species like dogs where there's &gt;&gt; And in species like dogs where there's tremendous variation in the amount of tremendous variation in the amount of tremendous variation in the amount of IGF-1 that's made between say a IGF-1 that's made between say a IGF-1 that's made between say a chihuahua and a great dane. The breed chihuahua and a great dane. The breed chihuahua and a great dane. The breed that makes more IGF-1 downstream of that makes more IGF-1 downstream of that makes more IGF-1 downstream of growth hormone of course lives a lot growth hormone of course lives a lot growth hormone of course lives a lot shorter lives than smaller versions of shorter lives than smaller versions of shorter lives than smaller versions of the same species. So, you want a dog the same species. So, you want a dog the same species. So, you want a dog around for a long time, get a Chihuahua. around for a long time, get a Chihuahua. around for a long time, get a Chihuahua. You want a real dog, get a excuse me, You want a real dog, get a excuse me, You want a real dog, get a excuse me, you want a dog that lives a long time, you want a dog that lives a long time, you want a dog that lives a long time, get a great Dana or a bulldog. There's get a great Dana or a bulldog. There's get a great Dana or a bulldog. There's that whole discussion of what's better. that whole discussion of what's better. that whole discussion of what's better. And then you get into antagonistic And then you get into antagonistic And then you get into antagonistic pleotropy. Is this something that's good pleotropy. Is this something that's good pleotropy. Is this something that's good in youth but detrimental for longevity in youth but detrimental for longevity in youth but detrimental for longevity or is it prolongevity? And that's big or is it prolongevity? And that's big or is it prolongevity? And that's big the big debate in the longevity field, the big debate in the longevity field, the big debate in the longevity field, whatever that, you know, field is of whatever that, you know, field is of whatever that, you know, field is of whether or not to use growth hormone. whether or not to use growth hormone. whether or not to use growth hormone. So, now growth hormone has become very So, now growth hormone has become very So, now growth hormone has become very difficult to acquire through clinical difficult to acquire through clinical difficult to acquire through clinical prescriptions after the whole anabolic prescriptions after the whole anabolic prescriptions after the whole anabolic steroids act and buried bonds and all steroids act and buried bonds and all steroids act and buried bonds and all that stuff. So people have now all that stuff. So people have now all that stuff. So people have now shifted to using secrets in lie of shifted to using secrets in lie of shifted to using secrets in lie of growth hormone. growth hormone. growth hormone. &gt;&gt; Also growth hormone is very expensive. &gt;&gt; Also growth hormone is very expensive. &gt;&gt; Also growth hormone is very expensive. &gt;&gt; Very expensive. Yeah. Like Fizer's pens &gt;&gt; Very expensive. Yeah. Like Fizer's pens &gt;&gt; Very expensive. Yeah. Like Fizer's pens are in the thousands of dollars. So are in the thousands of dollars. So are in the thousands of dollars. So like if you want if you're rich you can like if you want if you're rich you can like if you want if you're rich you can afford to you know have a growth hormone afford to you know have a growth hormone afford to you know have a growth hormone have it but otherwise a security go cost have it but otherwise a security go cost have it but otherwise a security go cost you know less than 100 bucks. you know less than 100 bucks. you know less than 100 bucks. &gt;&gt; I'm told that growth hormone uh doesn't &gt;&gt; I'm told that growth hormone uh doesn't &gt;&gt; I'm told that growth hormone uh doesn't shut down one's own production. shut down one's own production. shut down one's own production. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not it's not a uh strong &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not it's not a uh strong &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not it's not a uh strong shutdown like the uh testicular axis. shutdown like the uh testicular axis. shutdown like the uh testicular axis. I'm also told that when people take it, I'm also told that when people take it, I'm also told that when people take it, they feel awesome, they feel awesome, they feel awesome, &gt;&gt; which is scary to say on a podcast &gt;&gt; which is scary to say on a podcast &gt;&gt; which is scary to say on a podcast because you're like, "Oh, no. I don't because you're like, "Oh, no. I don't because you're like, "Oh, no. I don't want everyone running out." And, you want everyone running out." And, you want everyone running out." And, you know, young people are already making know, young people are already making know, young people are already making tons of it. But, I mean, tons of it. But, I mean, tons of it. But, I mean, &gt;&gt; that combination of looking younger, &gt;&gt; that combination of looking younger, &gt;&gt; that combination of looking younger, feeling great, cognitively feeling great, cognitively feeling great, cognitively feeling great. I mean, I have some friends great. I mean, I have some friends great. I mean, I have some friends who've taken like an IU a night or even who've taken like an IU a night or even who've taken like an IU a night or even two IUs a night, you know, five nights a two IUs a night, you know, five nights a two IUs a night, you know, five nights a week for years. And week for years. And week for years. And &gt;&gt; you go, "Hey, like, are you worried &gt;&gt; you go, "Hey, like, are you worried &gt;&gt; you go, "Hey, like, are you worried about some of the tumor effects?" And about some of the tumor effects?" And about some of the tumor effects?" And they're like, you just function at a they're like, you just function at a they're like, you just function at a whole other level. and then you go, "Oh whole other level. and then you go, "Oh whole other level. and then you go, "Oh god, that's really enticing." But, you god, that's really enticing." But, you god, that's really enticing." But, you know, even with great imaging, you don't know, even with great imaging, you don't know, even with great imaging, you don't know if you've got tumors that you're know if you've got tumors that you're know if you've got tumors that you're accelerating in that case. So, it's kind accelerating in that case. So, it's kind accelerating in that case. So, it's kind of scary. of scary. of scary. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and we don't have a data set &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and we don't have a data set &gt;&gt; Yeah. And and we don't have a data set that would show that. Like, where's the that would show that. Like, where's the that would show that. Like, where's the body count from growth hormone? Uh body count from growth hormone? Uh body count from growth hormone? Uh like the bodybuilder body counts are like the bodybuilder body counts are like the bodybuilder body counts are from other compounds, not doing from other compounds, not doing from other compounds, not doing everything. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. I mean, when you go into &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. I mean, when you go into &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. I mean, when you go into a gym, you can tell who's doing a gym, you can tell who's doing a gym, you can tell who's doing growth hormone versus not based on their growth hormone versus not based on their growth hormone versus not based on their skin shining. like you see a 45-year-old skin shining. like you see a 45-year-old skin shining. like you see a 45-year-old dude that's through sematopause but has dude that's through sematopause but has dude that's through sematopause but has perfect young skin and perfect young skin and perfect young skin and &gt;&gt; you know there's Botox and all other &gt;&gt; you know there's Botox and all other &gt;&gt; you know there's Botox and all other things involved but you can tell there's things involved but you can tell there's things involved but you can tell there's that growth hormone look the hair looks that growth hormone look the hair looks that growth hormone look the hair looks a little bit healthier a little bit healthier a little bit healthier &gt;&gt; because growth hormone favors the &gt;&gt; because growth hormone favors the &gt;&gt; because growth hormone favors the conversion of T4 to T3 so it changes the conversion of T4 to T3 so it changes the conversion of T4 to T3 so it changes the thyroid dynamics it can have thyroid dynamics it can have thyroid dynamics it can have protesticular effects as well from the protesticular effects as well from the protesticular effects as well from the IGF-1 perspective so there's a lot of IGF-1 perspective so there's a lot of IGF-1 perspective so there's a lot of you know youthful effects to it the you know youthful effects to it the you know youthful effects to it the question is that been a good idea to question is that been a good idea to question is that been a good idea to replace it traditionally like the replace it traditionally like the replace it traditionally like the medical field's kind of anti um using medical field's kind of anti um using medical field's kind of anti um using these secrets to augment sematopause but these secrets to augment sematopause but these secrets to augment sematopause but I think there's going to be a role for I think there's going to be a role for I think there's going to be a role for it perhaps cyclally because I don't it perhaps cyclally because I don't it perhaps cyclally because I don't think anything in nature is year think anything in nature is year think anything in nature is year round so what if you did a cyclical round so what if you did a cyclical round so what if you did a cyclical cycle of and this is not medical advice cycle of and this is not medical advice cycle of and this is not medical advice but theoretical cyclical cycle of but theoretical cyclical cycle of but theoretical cyclical cycle of tesmoral for uh a certain amount of time tesmoral for uh a certain amount of time tesmoral for uh a certain amount of time got your IGF-1 to a certain level under got your IGF-1 to a certain level under got your IGF-1 to a certain level under clinician guidance measured your clinician guidance measured your clinician guidance measured your thymus on an MRI before and after and thymus on an MRI before and after and thymus on an MRI before and after and then you saw that the thymus grew and then you saw that the thymus grew and then you saw that the thymus grew and you had you know higher CD4CA count that you had you know higher CD4CA count that you had you know higher CD4CA count that would be pretty interesting would be pretty interesting would be pretty interesting &gt;&gt; be interesting a few years back and I've &gt;&gt; be interesting a few years back and I've &gt;&gt; be interesting a few years back and I've told this story publicly before I tried told this story publicly before I tried told this story publicly before I tried um smearin Yeah, um smearin Yeah, um smearin Yeah, &gt;&gt; it's different than obviously than &gt;&gt; it's different than obviously than &gt;&gt; it's different than obviously than testom but similar in the sense the end testom but similar in the sense the end testom but similar in the sense the end point is you're seeking is more uh point is you're seeking is more uh point is you're seeking is more uh growth hormone IGF-1 and it dramatically growth hormone IGF-1 and it dramatically growth hormone IGF-1 and it dramatically increased my deep sleep and like nuked increased my deep sleep and like nuked increased my deep sleep and like nuked my REM sleep. It's like the opposite of my REM sleep. It's like the opposite of my REM sleep. It's like the opposite of pinealon together. pinealon together. pinealon together. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So well didn't try that. The other &gt;&gt; Yeah. So well didn't try that. The other &gt;&gt; Yeah. So well didn't try that. The other thing that it did and the reason I thing that it did and the reason I thing that it did and the reason I halted it almost right away because I halted it almost right away because I halted it almost right away because I was really just running it as an was really just running it as an was really just running it as an experiment on myself was that it spiked experiment on myself was that it spiked experiment on myself was that it spiked my PSA, my prostate specific antigen. It my PSA, my prostate specific antigen. It my PSA, my prostate specific antigen. It had always been in range and had always been in range and had always been in range and relatively low. Boom. Spiked it and I relatively low. Boom. Spiked it and I relatively low. Boom. Spiked it and I was like, "Wo, that's wild." And I don't was like, "Wo, that's wild." And I don't was like, "Wo, that's wild." And I don't want that. Off it. want that. Off it. want that. Off it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; It reverted to a low level. So that was &gt;&gt; It reverted to a low level. So that was &gt;&gt; It reverted to a low level. So that was pretty striking. So obviously, you know, pretty striking. So obviously, you know, pretty striking. So obviously, you know, hyper respponsive prostate to smearin. hyper respponsive prostate to smearin. hyper respponsive prostate to smearin. Maybe it wouldn't have been to testo, Maybe it wouldn't have been to testo, Maybe it wouldn't have been to testo, etc. But but those are the kinds of etc. But but those are the kinds of etc. But but those are the kinds of things the growth hormone itself that things the growth hormone itself that things the growth hormone itself that growth hormone secretion. That's a good growth hormone secretion. That's a good growth hormone secretion. That's a good point. As you age, your prostate gets point. As you age, your prostate gets point. As you age, your prostate gets bigger. The bane of every man is going bigger. The bane of every man is going bigger. The bane of every man is going to be BPH. like that's going to be the to be BPH. like that's going to be the to be BPH. like that's going to be the reason that you hate your life when reason that you hate your life when reason that you hate your life when you're in your 60s and 70s because you you're in your 60s and 70s because you you're in your 60s and 70s because you have to wake up at night to pee have to wake up at night to pee have to wake up at night to pee &gt;&gt; and then when you're at, you know, an &gt;&gt; and then when you're at, you know, an &gt;&gt; and then when you're at, you know, an amusement park, you're going to have to amusement park, you're going to have to amusement park, you're going to have to find the nearest bathroom very find the nearest bathroom very find the nearest bathroom very frequently because your bladder size is frequently because your bladder size is frequently because your bladder size is &gt;&gt; it'll go it out. There's there's some &gt;&gt; it'll go it out. There's there's some &gt;&gt; it'll go it out. There's there's some prostate peptides we're looking at. So, prostate peptides we're looking at. So, prostate peptides we're looking at. So, &gt;&gt; there's a young guy old guy like &gt;&gt; there's a young guy old guy like &gt;&gt; there's a young guy old guy like taunting like, you know, you got 10 more taunting like, you know, you got 10 more taunting like, you know, you got 10 more years before you're miserable. Thanks. years before you're miserable. Thanks. years before you're miserable. Thanks. &gt;&gt; There's prostate peptides that uh &gt;&gt; There's prostate peptides that uh &gt;&gt; There's prostate peptides that uh Cington looked at that we're trying to Cington looked at that we're trying to Cington looked at that we're trying to translate some of that literature. translate some of that literature. translate some of that literature. &gt;&gt; You'll save me. &gt;&gt; You'll save me. &gt;&gt; You'll save me. &gt;&gt; No, there's people uh this guy &gt;&gt; No, there's people uh this guy &gt;&gt; No, there's people uh this guy named Brennan Henry who's translated named Brennan Henry who's translated named Brennan Henry who's translated like thousands of these papers from like thousands of these papers from like thousands of these papers from Russian to English. So shout out to Russian to English. So shout out to Russian to English. So shout out to Amnoiliation, but he's translated a lot Amnoiliation, but he's translated a lot Amnoiliation, but he's translated a lot of this Russian literature and helped us of this Russian literature and helped us of this Russian literature and helped us from that. So that's great. But the from that. So that's great. But the from that. So that's great. But the prostate is growing with age under the prostate is growing with age under the prostate is growing with age under the control of DHT and estrogen and then control of DHT and estrogen and then control of DHT and estrogen and then probably growth hormone. So the question probably growth hormone. So the question probably growth hormone. So the question is, do you want to be messing with that is, do you want to be messing with that is, do you want to be messing with that and increasing the size of that? There's and increasing the size of that? There's and increasing the size of that? There's there's concerns about, you know, there's concerns about, you know, there's concerns about, you know, cardiac growth, liver growth. So there's cardiac growth, liver growth. So there's cardiac growth, liver growth. So there's all these things, but also growth all these things, but also growth all these things, but also growth hormone and the secrets have a hormone and the secrets have a hormone and the secrets have a negative effect on insulin negative effect on insulin negative effect on insulin sensitivity, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; So people's A1C's will usually jump. &gt;&gt; So people's A1C's will usually jump. &gt;&gt; So people's A1C's will usually jump. Like the joke in the bodybuilding Like the joke in the bodybuilding Like the joke in the bodybuilding community is you have to get lean enough community is you have to get lean enough community is you have to get lean enough and healthy enough to be able to take and healthy enough to be able to take and healthy enough to be able to take growth hormone. growth hormone. growth hormone. &gt;&gt; Oh, what's happening? &gt;&gt; Oh, what's happening? &gt;&gt; Oh, what's happening? &gt;&gt; Growth hormone or the secretogs. &gt;&gt; Growth hormone or the secretogs. &gt;&gt; Growth hormone or the secretogs. &gt;&gt; The growth hormone more so the &gt;&gt; The growth hormone more so the &gt;&gt; The growth hormone more so the &gt;&gt; it can make you insulin insensitive. &gt;&gt; it can make you insulin insensitive. &gt;&gt; it can make you insulin insensitive. &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh especially with more like &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh especially with more like &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh especially with more like tesmlin especially when combined with tesmlin especially when combined with tesmlin especially when combined with epomorlin. Ceremorine is kind of a epomorlin. Ceremorine is kind of a epomorlin. Ceremorine is kind of a weaker um GHR. Tesmorine especially when weaker um GHR. Tesmorine especially when weaker um GHR. Tesmorine especially when combined with eporin. Tesmor is FDA combined with eporin. Tesmor is FDA combined with eporin. Tesmor is FDA approved. Eporin is not. The the GHR approved. Eporin is not. The the GHR approved. Eporin is not. The the GHR versus GHRP kind of in the weeds there. versus GHRP kind of in the weeds there. versus GHRP kind of in the weeds there. Those two together can create a giant Those two together can create a giant Those two together can create a giant growth hormone response where your IGF-1 growth hormone response where your IGF-1 growth hormone response where your IGF-1 is in the 380s, 390s. Um, so that's is in the 380s, 390s. Um, so that's is in the 380s, 390s. Um, so that's quite high like puberty that's quite high like puberty that's quite high like puberty levels of IGF-1 levels of IGF-1 levels of IGF-1 &gt;&gt; and you're hungry all the time. &gt;&gt; and you're hungry all the time. &gt;&gt; and you're hungry all the time. &gt;&gt; Yeah. With MK for sure with &gt;&gt; Yeah. With MK for sure with &gt;&gt; Yeah. With MK for sure with tessimorin. So tesmorland has more tessimorin. So tesmorland has more tessimorin. So tesmorland has more fidelity uh less grein effects fidelity uh less grein effects fidelity uh less grein effects especially um because you can have grein especially um because you can have grein especially um because you can have grein effects, prolactin effects and cortisol effects, prolactin effects and cortisol effects, prolactin effects and cortisol effects from whenever you're mucking effects from whenever you're mucking effects from whenever you're mucking around with the pituitary because around with the pituitary because around with the pituitary because they're all in that in that same area. they're all in that in that same area. they're all in that in that same area. Um, I think MK bleeds out the worst when Um, I think MK bleeds out the worst when Um, I think MK bleeds out the worst when it comes to having the other effects. MK it comes to having the other effects. MK it comes to having the other effects. MK is not a peptide. It's a non-eptide is not a peptide. It's a non-eptide is not a peptide. It's a non-eptide GHRP. &gt;&gt; What's happened now is people are now &gt;&gt; What's happened now is people are now &gt;&gt; What's happened now is people are now stacking their GLP-1 as their insulin stacking their GLP-1 as their insulin stacking their GLP-1 as their insulin sensitivity tool, their growth hormone sensitivity tool, their growth hormone sensitivity tool, their growth hormone or their GHR or their GHR or their GHR &gt;&gt; and their androen modulation therapies &gt;&gt; and their androen modulation therapies &gt;&gt; and their androen modulation therapies as this trinity stack. as this trinity stack. as this trinity stack. &gt;&gt; Trinity stack &gt;&gt; Trinity stack &gt;&gt; Trinity stack &gt;&gt; to get very fit, very healthy quickly. &gt;&gt; to get very fit, very healthy quickly. &gt;&gt; to get very fit, very healthy quickly. So a lot of these transformations you So a lot of these transformations you So a lot of these transformations you see in CEOs and celebrities and stuff is see in CEOs and celebrities and stuff is see in CEOs and celebrities and stuff is using a combination of those three using a combination of those three using a combination of those three things. You know your TRT plus maybe things. You know your TRT plus maybe things. You know your TRT plus maybe anavar with tzeptide or retrruide anavar with tzeptide or retrruide anavar with tzeptide or retrruide whatever it may be and then using a whatever it may be and then using a whatever it may be and then using a growth hormone modulation with your if growth hormone modulation with your if growth hormone modulation with your if you can afford growth hormone or that's you can afford growth hormone or that's you can afford growth hormone or that's more epor and you're seeing people lose more epor and you're seeing people lose more epor and you're seeing people lose a lot of fat gain a lot of muscle in a lot of fat gain a lot of muscle in a lot of fat gain a lot of muscle in short amounts of time. Is that healthy? short amounts of time. Is that healthy? short amounts of time. Is that healthy? We'll find out. But that is like the We'll find out. But that is like the We'll find out. But that is like the celebrity protocol. celebrity protocol. celebrity protocol. &gt;&gt; Very interesting. And I'm guessing that &gt;&gt; Very interesting. And I'm guessing that &gt;&gt; Very interesting. And I'm guessing that for women the it's the combination of for women the it's the combination of for women the it's the combination of growth hormone secret plus um something growth hormone secret plus um something growth hormone secret plus um something like and we'll talk about these now uh like and we'll talk about these now uh like and we'll talk about these now uh reatride or um one of the other GLPs. reatride or um one of the other GLPs. reatride or um one of the other GLPs. I'm going to acknowledge because people I'm going to acknowledge because people I'm going to acknowledge because people are going to start like dart throwing are going to start like dart throwing are going to start like dart throwing darts at me about this. Yes, reatride is darts at me about this. Yes, reatride is darts at me about this. Yes, reatride is hitting things other than the GLP hitting things other than the GLP hitting things other than the GLP pathway. It's also GIP and glucagon pathway. It's also GIP and glucagon pathway. It's also GIP and glucagon pathway but most people put it under the pathway but most people put it under the pathway but most people put it under the category of GLP. So you are an category of GLP. So you are an category of GLP. So you are an encyclopedic my friend. I really encyclopedic my friend. I really encyclopedic my friend. I really appreciate the clarity and the really appreciate the clarity and the really appreciate the clarity and the thoughtfulness of your answers on these. thoughtfulness of your answers on these. thoughtfulness of your answers on these. And as people are probably becoming And as people are probably becoming And as people are probably becoming aware, we could spend 50 hours talking aware, we could spend 50 hours talking aware, we could spend 50 hours talking about salank about cerebral ly. I think about salank about cerebral ly. I think about salank about cerebral ly. I think we will have to have you back to we will have to have you back to we will have to have you back to explore those other ones. There are a explore those other ones. There are a explore those other ones. There are a few other things I'd like to talk about few other things I'd like to talk about few other things I'd like to talk about if you're willing to give us the time. if you're willing to give us the time. if you're willing to give us the time. We should close the hatch on We should close the hatch on We should close the hatch on &gt;&gt; GHKCU. I misspoke and I saw it in your &gt;&gt; GHKCU. I misspoke and I saw it in your &gt;&gt; GHKCU. I misspoke and I saw it in your eyes. You're like, he said it wrong. Do eyes. You're like, he said it wrong. Do eyes. You're like, he said it wrong. Do I correct him? Yes, correct me. Everyone I correct him? Yes, correct me. Everyone I correct him? Yes, correct me. Everyone else does. Um GHKCU for the collagen else does. Um GHKCU for the collagen else does. Um GHKCU for the collagen effects. It's available in a lot of effects. It's available in a lot of effects. It's available in a lot of creams, assuming it's real, assuming creams, assuming it's real, assuming creams, assuming it's real, assuming people are doing this medically people are doing this medically people are doing this medically supervised. Um, is there any benefit to supervised. Um, is there any benefit to supervised. Um, is there any benefit to putting it directly on crow's feet or putting it directly on crow's feet or putting it directly on crow's feet or other wrinkles or face versus injecting other wrinkles or face versus injecting other wrinkles or face versus injecting it for it to go systemically? it for it to go systemically? it for it to go systemically? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think if you have a well- &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think if you have a well- &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think if you have a well- formulated topical that's actually not formulated topical that's actually not formulated topical that's actually not broken down because a lot of these, you broken down because a lot of these, you broken down because a lot of these, you know, from these research chemites, they know, from these research chemites, they know, from these research chemites, they sell topicals now because everyone's in sell topicals now because everyone's in sell topicals now because everyone's in skincare. Uh, they're, you know, poor skincare. Uh, they're, you know, poor skincare. Uh, they're, you know, poor quality. They're not even blue. Like the quality. They're not even blue. Like the quality. They're not even blue. Like the GHK should be blue, but that is GHK should be blue, but that is GHK should be blue, but that is blue &gt;&gt; from the copper. Yeah. &gt;&gt; from the copper. Yeah. &gt;&gt; from the copper. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay, that makes sense. My copper pills &gt;&gt; Okay, that makes sense. My copper pills &gt;&gt; Okay, that makes sense. My copper pills are blue. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. are blue. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. are blue. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. Okay. &gt;&gt; But that doesn't mean that it's real. &gt;&gt; But that doesn't mean that it's real. &gt;&gt; But that doesn't mean that it's real. Could be copper that's fallen out of the Could be copper that's fallen out of the Could be copper that's fallen out of the G the complex of the GHK. So yeah, you G the complex of the GHK. So yeah, you G the complex of the GHK. So yeah, you want a well formulated like a good want a well formulated like a good want a well formulated like a good skinare brand that knows how to skinare brand that knows how to skinare brand that knows how to formulate these uh and deliver them into formulate these uh and deliver them into formulate these uh and deliver them into the skin cuz that's another the skin cuz that's another the skin cuz that's another thing. So like you know every skincare thing. So like you know every skincare thing. So like you know every skincare brand has their now GHK formulation cuz brand has their now GHK formulation cuz brand has their now GHK formulation cuz people are demanding it but it's been people are demanding it but it's been people are demanding it but it's been around for 30 40 years on topical. The around for 30 40 years on topical. The around for 30 40 years on topical. The injectable is not FDA approved of injectable is not FDA approved of injectable is not FDA approved of course. I think it's going to be on the course. I think it's going to be on the course. I think it's going to be on the second round of discussions when it second round of discussions when it second round of discussions when it comes to the peptides coming back to comes to the peptides coming back to comes to the peptides coming back to category one. The first round is going category one. The first round is going category one. The first round is going to have these seven peptides BPC, TB, to have these seven peptides BPC, TB, to have these seven peptides BPC, TB, etc. I think the second round is going etc. I think the second round is going etc. I think the second round is going to look at GHK. I don't imagine that to look at GHK. I don't imagine that to look at GHK. I don't imagine that makes that there's no good human that makes that there's no good human that makes that there's no good human data on that. But topically, there's data on that. But topically, there's data on that. But topically, there's great human data on like different great human data on like different great human data on like different aesthetic outcomes, especially when aesthetic outcomes, especially when aesthetic outcomes, especially when coupled with red light therapy um coupled with red light therapy um coupled with red light therapy um because it seems that the blue because it seems that the blue because it seems that the blue pigment and the red light seem to be pigment and the red light seem to be pigment and the red light seem to be synergistic in that effect. There's also synergistic in that effect. There's also synergistic in that effect. There's also some uh literature when it comes to some uh literature when it comes to some uh literature when it comes to GHKU um for post um UV damage. So people GHKU um for post um UV damage. So people GHKU um for post um UV damage. So people that are, you know, sun friendly um can that are, you know, sun friendly um can that are, you know, sun friendly um can use GHKCU topically to alleviate some of use GHKCU topically to alleviate some of use GHKCU topically to alleviate some of the photo damage. Of course, the photo damage. Of course, the photo damage. Of course, dermatologists are going to get mad at dermatologists are going to get mad at dermatologists are going to get mad at us and say like you just use us and say like you just use us and say like you just use sunscreen and don't get the damage in sunscreen and don't get the damage in sunscreen and don't get the damage in the first place. But for people that you the first place. But for people that you the first place. But for people that you know aren't as responsible, you can use know aren't as responsible, you can use know aren't as responsible, you can use GHKCU as a you know, post sunscreen. GHKCU as a you know, post sunscreen. GHKCU as a you know, post sunscreen. Listen to the derms who are slightly Listen to the derms who are slightly Listen to the derms who are slightly more sun positive like especially low more sun positive like especially low more sun positive like especially low UV index sun when the sun is low in low UV index sun when the sun is low in low UV index sun when the sun is low in the sky. the sky. the sky. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Uh Dr. Abud Bakri is perhaps the only &gt;&gt; Uh Dr. Abud Bakri is perhaps the only &gt;&gt; Uh Dr. Abud Bakri is perhaps the only other person on the planet besides um my other person on the planet besides um my other person on the planet besides um my friend Samra Hatar who's been on this friend Samra Hatar who's been on this friend Samra Hatar who's been on this podcast who's as excited about circadian podcast who's as excited about circadian podcast who's as excited about circadian biology as an organizing feature uh as I biology as an organizing feature uh as I biology as an organizing feature uh as I am. There are a couple others out there am. There are a couple others out there am. There are a couple others out there but in terms of people who are like but in terms of people who are like but in terms of people who are like really grounded in what's real that he's really grounded in what's real that he's really grounded in what's real that he's um he I put him in that category whether um he I put him in that category whether um he I put him in that category whether he likes it or not. So people are taking he likes it or not. So people are taking he likes it or not. So people are taking GHKCU cream putting it on and then doing red cream putting it on and then doing red cream putting it on and then doing red light therapy and there are human data light therapy and there are human data light therapy and there are human data that perhaps can augment some of that perhaps can augment some of that perhaps can augment some of the collagen repairative effects. the collagen repairative effects. the collagen repairative effects. the photoagging effects, some of the photoagging effects, some of the photoagging effects, some of the effects of aging when compared to like effects of aging when compared to like effects of aging when compared to like different retinols and stuff like that. different retinols and stuff like that. different retinols and stuff like that. I think the consensus in the field I think the consensus in the field I think the consensus in the field now is to use it with the rest of your now is to use it with the rest of your now is to use it with the rest of your skincare routine, not in place of it. skincare routine, not in place of it. skincare routine, not in place of it. &gt;&gt; Um, but a lot of people, especially bros &gt;&gt; Um, but a lot of people, especially bros &gt;&gt; Um, but a lot of people, especially bros that have never been into skincare, are that have never been into skincare, are that have never been into skincare, are now into skincare because of now into skincare because of now into skincare because of &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, there's that, but it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, there's that, but it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, there's that, but it's promising. &gt;&gt; Bros are into skinincare. &gt;&gt; Bros are into skinincare. &gt;&gt; Bros are into skinincare. &gt;&gt; Be a documentary before long like what &gt;&gt; Be a documentary before long like what &gt;&gt; Be a documentary before long like what do you call that? The manosphere. It's do you call that? The manosphere. It's do you call that? The manosphere. It's like the skinosphere. like the skinosphere. like the skinosphere. &gt;&gt; Well, with looks maxing, that's &gt;&gt; Well, with looks maxing, that's &gt;&gt; Well, with looks maxing, that's it's the looks maxing peptide now. it's the looks maxing peptide now. it's the looks maxing peptide now. GHK because all these guys that are into GHK because all these guys that are into GHK because all these guys that are into looks maxing will use GHK. looks maxing will use GHK. looks maxing will use GHK. &gt;&gt; They're dipping their hammer in GHK CU &gt;&gt; They're dipping their hammer in GHK CU &gt;&gt; They're dipping their hammer in GHK CU and tapping themselves. And by the and tapping themselves. And by the and tapping themselves. And by the way, if you want great longwavelength way, if you want great longwavelength way, if you want great longwavelength red near infrared and infrared light to red near infrared and infrared light to red near infrared and infrared light to augment your GHK CU uh peptide, by the augment your GHK CU uh peptide, by the augment your GHK CU uh peptide, by the way, I'm not suggesting that. There's way, I'm not suggesting that. There's way, I'm not suggesting that. There's this thing called sunlight that provides this thing called sunlight that provides this thing called sunlight that provides that. You just have to be careful not to that. You just have to be careful not to that. You just have to be careful not to get too much UV in the process. So get too much UV in the process. So get too much UV in the process. So before uh people start thinking before uh people start thinking before uh people start thinking they absolutely need a red light device. they absolutely need a red light device. they absolutely need a red light device. &gt;&gt; Full spectrum, too. full spectrum, &gt;&gt; Full spectrum, too. full spectrum, &gt;&gt; Full spectrum, too. full spectrum, balanced, great article in Nature we can balanced, great article in Nature we can balanced, great article in Nature we can link to recently that describes the link to recently that describes the link to recently that describes the different uh spectrums coming out of different uh spectrums coming out of different uh spectrums coming out of different devices and that thing that we different devices and that thing that we different devices and that thing that we call the sun which is the best source of call the sun which is the best source of call the sun which is the best source of all of that all of that all of that &gt;&gt; and better blue light too &gt;&gt; and better blue light too &gt;&gt; and better blue light too &gt;&gt; and better &gt;&gt; and better &gt;&gt; and better &gt;&gt; because we're deprived of 480 nmters in &gt;&gt; because we're deprived of 480 nmters in &gt;&gt; because we're deprived of 480 nmters in this setup that you have full spectrum this setup that you have full spectrum this setup that you have full spectrum lighting that we don't know about. lighting that we don't know about. lighting that we don't know about. &gt;&gt; I don't get paid to say what I'm about &gt;&gt; I don't get paid to say what I'm about &gt;&gt; I don't get paid to say what I'm about to say but I'm really excited about to say but I'm really excited about to say but I'm really excited about something. For a long time, I've used something. For a long time, I've used something. For a long time, I've used Bon Chargar's bulbs cuz they have these Bon Chargar's bulbs cuz they have these Bon Chargar's bulbs cuz they have these bulbs that switch from full spectrum in bulbs that switch from full spectrum in bulbs that switch from full spectrum in the day. Then you, you know, flip the day. Then you, you know, flip the day. Then you, you know, flip the same switch and it goes to yellow and same switch and it goes to yellow and same switch and it goes to yellow and then flip the switch again and it then flip the switch again and it then flip the switch again and it goes to red. I find the red to be kind goes to red. I find the red to be kind goes to red. I find the red to be kind of difficult to navigate at night. Raw of difficult to navigate at night. Raw of difficult to navigate at night. Raw optics. &gt;&gt; Yep. Then you want &gt;&gt; Yep. Then you want &gt;&gt; Yep. Then you want &gt;&gt; made one that goes from like a morning &gt;&gt; made one that goes from like a morning &gt;&gt; made one that goes from like a morning really bright light full spectrum with a really bright light full spectrum with a really bright light full spectrum with a with some a lot of blue in there on with some a lot of blue in there on with some a lot of blue in there on purpose to wake you, you know, part of purpose to wake you, you know, part of purpose to wake you, you know, part of the way the way the way &gt;&gt; and the right blue. The 480 cyan blue &gt;&gt; and the right blue. The 480 cyan blue &gt;&gt; and the right blue. The 480 cyan blue &gt;&gt; switch the same switch. Don't have to &gt;&gt; switch the same switch. Don't have to &gt;&gt; switch the same switch. Don't have to change the bulb. goes to kind of a late change the bulb. goes to kind of a late change the bulb. goes to kind of a late morning mode to afternoon mode and then morning mode to afternoon mode and then morning mode to afternoon mode and then goes to candle light mode in the goes to candle light mode in the goes to candle light mode in the evening. And here's the cool thing. Not evening. And here's the cool thing. Not evening. And here's the cool thing. Not only did they get the spectrum and the only did they get the spectrum and the only did they get the spectrum and the balance right, but it doesn't flicker. balance right, but it doesn't flicker. balance right, but it doesn't flicker. They got rid of the flicker that you get They got rid of the flicker that you get They got rid of the flicker that you get from LEDs and yet it's an LED, so it's from LEDs and yet it's an LED, so it's from LEDs and yet it's an LED, so it's &gt;&gt; energy efficient. Yep. Infrared and &gt;&gt; energy efficient. Yep. Infrared and &gt;&gt; energy efficient. Yep. Infrared and &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I have no affiliation to them &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I have no affiliation to them &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I have no affiliation to them whatsoever. I pay full price for these whatsoever. I pay full price for these whatsoever. I pay full price for these things. And I have to say, I really, things. And I have to say, I really, things. And I have to say, I really, really like them. Even my bulldog puppy really like them. Even my bulldog puppy really like them. Even my bulldog puppy has a little one. I have this little has a little one. I have this little has a little one. I have this little monkey holding a lamp and I say, "When monkey holding a lamp and I say, "When monkey holding a lamp and I say, "When the monkey goes to candle light, you're the monkey goes to candle light, you're the monkey goes to candle light, you're going to sleep." and he knows he's going to sleep." and he knows he's going to sleep." and he knows he's learning when it goes to Cantalite. Now learning when it goes to Cantalite. Now learning when it goes to Cantalite. Now he's sorry he's a dromat not a tri he's sorry he's a dromat not a tri he's sorry he's a dromat not a tri chromat but that's a different podcast. chromat but that's a different podcast. chromat but that's a different podcast. All right GLPS yep now we can All right GLPS yep now we can All right GLPS yep now we can comfortably exhale into your colleagues comfortably exhale into your colleagues comfortably exhale into your colleagues can you can feel completely comfortable can you can feel completely comfortable can you can feel completely comfortable about anything that uh that they might about anything that uh that they might about anything that uh that they might think or say because the GLPs are the think or say because the GLPs are the think or say because the GLPs are the reason why people are comfortable reason why people are comfortable reason why people are comfortable injecting themselves. It's why this injecting themselves. It's why this injecting themselves. It's why this whole thing of peptides has really taken whole thing of peptides has really taken whole thing of peptides has really taken off. BPC kind of rode in on the GLPs in off. BPC kind of rode in on the GLPs in off. BPC kind of rode in on the GLPs in my opinion even though it's been around my opinion even though it's been around my opinion even though it's been around for a long time and so have all the for a long time and so have all the for a long time and so have all the other peptides we've been talking about. other peptides we've been talking about. other peptides we've been talking about. &gt;&gt; So what are your thoughts? I've never &gt;&gt; So what are your thoughts? I've never &gt;&gt; So what are your thoughts? I've never taken one of these. Um first things taken one of these. Um first things taken one of these. Um first things first, we're hearing that some people I first, we're hearing that some people I first, we're hearing that some people I think Sam Alman actually talked about think Sam Alman actually talked about think Sam Alman actually talked about this publicly um overdose with Cara this publicly um overdose with Cara this publicly um overdose with Cara Swisser about what he thought yeah where Swisser about what he thought yeah where Swisser about what he thought yeah where he overdosed actually a compound he overdosed actually a compound he overdosed actually a compound pharmacy issue he thought was what did pharmacy issue he thought was what did pharmacy issue he thought was what did it. I trust him to do the right it. I trust him to do the right it. I trust him to do the right calculation. And so it does sound like calculation. And so it does sound like calculation. And so it does sound like that was a compounding pharmacy issue. that was a compounding pharmacy issue. that was a compounding pharmacy issue. &gt;&gt; Could afford it? Is the buy the farmer a &gt;&gt; Could afford it? Is the buy the farmer a &gt;&gt; Could afford it? Is the buy the farmer a great option? great option? great option? &gt;&gt; I think back then people were just &gt;&gt; I think back then people were just &gt;&gt; I think back then people were just getting them where they can. I didn't getting them where they can. I didn't getting them where they can. I didn't ask him why uh why that happened, but ask him why uh why that happened, but ask him why uh why that happened, but nonetheless, get the dosage right. Make nonetheless, get the dosage right. Make nonetheless, get the dosage right. Make sure you're getting the right stuff sure you're getting the right stuff sure you're getting the right stuff clean. But he talked about the kind of clean. But he talked about the kind of clean. But he talked about the kind of lack of uh motivation, which many people lack of uh motivation, which many people lack of uh motivation, which many people have described anecdotally um like, have described anecdotally um like, have described anecdotally um like, okay, lowered their food drive, but okay, lowered their food drive, but okay, lowered their food drive, but lowered their drive period. lowered their drive period. lowered their drive period. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Makes sense, &gt;&gt; Makes sense, &gt;&gt; Makes sense, &gt;&gt; you know, depending on which pathways &gt;&gt; you know, depending on which pathways &gt;&gt; you know, depending on which pathways are being affected. But do you think are being affected. But do you think are being affected. But do you think that's a real effect? Is that something that's a real effect? Is that something that's a real effect? Is that something that people need to be concerned about? that people need to be concerned about? that people need to be concerned about? Do you think people can micro dose this Do you think people can micro dose this Do you think people can micro dose this stuff? Because a lot of people are micro stuff? Because a lot of people are micro stuff? Because a lot of people are micro doing it regardless of what their source doing it regardless of what their source doing it regardless of what their source is. They're taking a lot less than the is. They're taking a lot less than the is. They're taking a lot less than the kind of standard clinical trials will kind of standard clinical trials will kind of standard clinical trials will be. And we're leaving out red tide for be. And we're leaving out red tide for be. And we're leaving out red tide for now because it's so new. We're going to now because it's so new. We're going to now because it's so new. We're going to talk about it, but I'm talking about the talk about it, but I'm talking about the talk about it, but I'm talking about the &gt;&gt; standard ifide. &gt;&gt; standard ifide. &gt;&gt; standard ifide. Yeah. I'll tell you that you have your Yeah. I'll tell you that you have your Yeah. I'll tell you that you have your you know semiglutide which is obey and you know semiglutide which is obey and you know semiglutide which is obey and uh the wgov is the FDA approved version uh the wgov is the FDA approved version uh the wgov is the FDA approved version for the weight loss. For teptide you for the weight loss. For teptide you for the weight loss. For teptide you have zeppbound and moner. Zapbound being have zeppbound and moner. Zapbound being have zeppbound and moner. Zapbound being the FDA approved version for weight loss the FDA approved version for weight loss the FDA approved version for weight loss that allows them to keep their patents that allows them to keep their patents that allows them to keep their patents for longer. um these medications are for longer. um these medications are for longer. um these medications are good kind of transforming medicine good kind of transforming medicine good kind of transforming medicine especially where I practice right especially where I practice right especially where I practice right if you if we kind of zoom out our if you if we kind of zoom out our if you if we kind of zoom out our medical system if we didn't have these medical system if we didn't have these medical system if we didn't have these interventions was going to collapse on interventions was going to collapse on interventions was going to collapse on itself thanks to the obesity itself thanks to the obesity itself thanks to the obesity pre-diabetes diabetes epidemics because pre-diabetes diabetes epidemics because pre-diabetes diabetes epidemics because we don't have enough clinicians or we don't have enough clinicians or we don't have enough clinicians or finances to get everybody who was finances to get everybody who was finances to get everybody who was pre-diabetic in the in the last you know pre-diabetic in the in the last you know pre-diabetic in the in the last you know 20 years and they all transitioned to 20 years and they all transitioned to 20 years and they all transitioned to diabetes and ended up with you know diabetes and ended up with you know diabetes and ended up with you know diabetic medications and dialysis and diabetic medications and dialysis and diabetic medications and dialysis and eventually cardiovascular disease and eventually cardiovascular disease and eventually cardiovascular disease and all these things we don't have the all these things we don't have the all these things we don't have the resources to take care of all these resources to take care of all these resources to take care of all these people like our medical system was going people like our medical system was going people like our medical system was going to collapse and there wasn't enough to collapse and there wasn't enough to collapse and there wasn't enough finances to take care of it. Now these finances to take care of it. Now these finances to take care of it. Now these GLP1s are coming in and kind of GLP1s are coming in and kind of GLP1s are coming in and kind of transforming that phase of medicine transforming that phase of medicine transforming that phase of medicine because now we have a chance to because now we have a chance to because now we have a chance to dramatically change the rate of obesity dramatically change the rate of obesity dramatically change the rate of obesity uh diabetes pre-diabetes and all these uh diabetes pre-diabetes and all these uh diabetes pre-diabetes and all these cardio metabolic disorders. So where do cardio metabolic disorders. So where do cardio metabolic disorders. So where do we stand? We needed something to happen. we stand? We needed something to happen. we stand? We needed something to happen. I mean, ideally, everybody, you know, I mean, ideally, everybody, you know, I mean, ideally, everybody, you know, would get morning sunlight and eat only would get morning sunlight and eat only would get morning sunlight and eat only healthy foods, unprocessed foods, and healthy foods, unprocessed foods, and healthy foods, unprocessed foods, and have low stress and sleep great at night have low stress and sleep great at night have low stress and sleep great at night and maybe no one would develop to become and maybe no one would develop to become and maybe no one would develop to become obese. But the reality is people become obese. But the reality is people become obese. But the reality is people become overweight, obese. They get stuck in overweight, obese. They get stuck in overweight, obese. They get stuck in that hole. And if you just try to step that hole. And if you just try to step that hole. And if you just try to step out of the hole the way you came in, out of the hole the way you came in, out of the hole the way you came in, sometimes that doesn't work. You need a sometimes that doesn't work. You need a sometimes that doesn't work. You need a different path out of that problem. And different path out of that problem. And different path out of that problem. And that that's been, you know, the diet and that that's been, you know, the diet and that that's been, you know, the diet and exercise literature for the last 40 exercise literature for the last 40 exercise literature for the last 40 years. Millions of books have been sold years. Millions of books have been sold years. Millions of books have been sold on how to get people leaner. We now have on how to get people leaner. We now have on how to get people leaner. We now have interventions medically that can interventions medically that can interventions medically that can dramatically change people's weights for dramatically change people's weights for dramatically change people's weights for the first time. We've had drugs in the first time. We've had drugs in the first time. We've had drugs in the past that you know 5 10% of body weight. past that you know 5 10% of body weight. past that you know 5 10% of body weight. Now with the GLP1s we're getting 10 20 Now with the GLP1s we're getting 10 20 Now with the GLP1s we're getting 10 20 even 30% of body weight being shaved off even 30% of body weight being shaved off even 30% of body weight being shaved off of people especially with the new of people especially with the new of people especially with the new reduced data. Is there a free lunch? reduced data. Is there a free lunch? reduced data. Is there a free lunch? That's the big question. Like like we That's the big question. Like like we That's the big question. Like like we kind of talked about earlier there's kind of talked about earlier there's kind of talked about earlier there's always been these medical mishaps that always been these medical mishaps that always been these medical mishaps that have happened. So far the data is very have happened. So far the data is very have happened. So far the data is very promising when it comes to GLP1s and promising when it comes to GLP1s and promising when it comes to GLP1s and that we are now reversing this rate of that we are now reversing this rate of that we are now reversing this rate of chronic disease. Is it going to stay chronic disease. Is it going to stay chronic disease. Is it going to stay that way? That's a good question. I'm that way? That's a good question. I'm that way? That's a good question. I'm cautiously uh optimistic when it I'm cautiously uh optimistic when it I'm cautiously uh optimistic when it comes to these medications. I've been comes to these medications. I've been comes to these medications. I've been prescribing them since I was a resident. prescribing them since I was a resident. prescribing them since I was a resident. Uh in my VA clinic, I was putting all Uh in my VA clinic, I was putting all Uh in my VA clinic, I was putting all these vets that are, you know, 300 lb on these vets that are, you know, 300 lb on these vets that are, you know, 300 lb on GLV1s, they were losing 50, 100 lb. GLV1s, they were losing 50, 100 lb. GLV1s, they were losing 50, 100 lb. Before it was FDA approved for weight Before it was FDA approved for weight Before it was FDA approved for weight loss. We knew that if you put loss. We knew that if you put loss. We knew that if you put diabetics on this drug, they would lose diabetics on this drug, they would lose diabetics on this drug, they would lose weight thanks to a lot of the weight thanks to a lot of the weight thanks to a lot of the bodybuilders um that kind of pioneered bodybuilders um that kind of pioneered bodybuilders um that kind of pioneered that. &gt;&gt; When did the bodybuilders first start &gt;&gt; When did the bodybuilders first start &gt;&gt; When did the bodybuilders first start using GLPS? using GLPS? using GLPS? &gt;&gt; Uh late 20110s. Wow. &gt;&gt; Uh late 20110s. Wow. &gt;&gt; Uh late 20110s. Wow. &gt;&gt; And then the signal I don't I don't &gt;&gt; And then the signal I don't I don't &gt;&gt; And then the signal I don't I don't think Norvo or Lily wanted to make these think Norvo or Lily wanted to make these think Norvo or Lily wanted to make these for obesity. They were focused on making for obesity. They were focused on making for obesity. They were focused on making diabetes drugs because like if we zoom diabetes drugs because like if we zoom diabetes drugs because like if we zoom out even further, this is another animal out even further, this is another animal out even further, this is another animal derived compound, right? It's found in derived compound, right? It's found in derived compound, right? It's found in the saliva of the Hila monsters. the saliva of the Hila monsters. the saliva of the Hila monsters. GLP1 was discovered. It's too um short GLP1 was discovered. It's too um short GLP1 was discovered. It's too um short acting to have worked on its own. Then acting to have worked on its own. Then acting to have worked on its own. Then pharmaceutical companies, this is where pharmaceutical companies, this is where pharmaceutical companies, this is where you got to give pharma their credit. you got to give pharma their credit. you got to give pharma their credit. they developed these drugs into more they developed these drugs into more they developed these drugs into more functioning versions that had you know functioning versions that had you know functioning versions that had you know longer half- lives and could stick longer half- lives and could stick longer half- lives and could stick around in the serum for longer to have around in the serum for longer to have around in the serum for longer to have the clinical effect. So then we started the clinical effect. So then we started the clinical effect. So then we started noticing that diabetics like my noticing that diabetics like my noticing that diabetics like my grandma got uh Betta which was one of grandma got uh Betta which was one of grandma got uh Betta which was one of these first uh GOP one drugs like 25 these first uh GOP one drugs like 25 these first uh GOP one drugs like 25 years ago. It was the out of all the years ago. It was the out of all the years ago. It was the out of all the drugs she was on the reason I went into drugs she was on the reason I went into drugs she was on the reason I went into medicine that was the drug that changed medicine that was the drug that changed medicine that was the drug that changed her whole trajectory because she had her whole trajectory because she had her whole trajectory because she had less insulin needs and she was losing less insulin needs and she was losing less insulin needs and she was losing weight and more energetic. So we had weight and more energetic. So we had weight and more energetic. So we had seen the effects on diabetics and then seen the effects on diabetics and then seen the effects on diabetics and then you get luraglutide dlutide and then you get luraglutide dlutide and then you get luraglutide dlutide and then eventually semiglutide was the is the eventually semiglutide was the is the eventually semiglutide was the is the blockbuster but you get all these blockbuster but you get all these blockbuster but you get all these positive effects coming from these drugs positive effects coming from these drugs positive effects coming from these drugs on diabetics. It gets translated into on diabetics. It gets translated into on diabetics. It gets translated into obese people and overweight patients. obese people and overweight patients. obese people and overweight patients. The question is what is the long-term The question is what is the long-term The question is what is the long-term effect of this? Do you have to stay on effect of this? Do you have to stay on effect of this? Do you have to stay on this drug forever? Um can you titer it this drug forever? Um can you titer it this drug forever? Um can you titer it off? The the pharmaceutical companies off? The the pharmaceutical companies off? The the pharmaceutical companies have not given us good guidelines on have not given us good guidelines on have not given us good guidelines on that. They've shown us what happens if that. They've shown us what happens if that. They've shown us what happens if you stop the drug. You can max out on you stop the drug. You can max out on you stop the drug. You can max out on maximum dose. Pull the brakes on. People maximum dose. Pull the brakes on. People maximum dose. Pull the brakes on. People tend to sometimes gain the weight. Some tend to sometimes gain the weight. Some tend to sometimes gain the weight. Some people don't, but some people will people don't, but some people will people don't, but some people will regain back to baseline. Because if you regain back to baseline. Because if you regain back to baseline. Because if you think about it, the better way to think about it, the better way to think about it, the better way to think about weight loss, it's a calculation about weight loss, it's a calculation about weight loss, it's a calculation your brain does every single day with your brain does every single day with your brain does every single day with all the different hormones and all the different hormones and all the different hormones and peptides that are made from the gut, the peptides that are made from the gut, the peptides that are made from the gut, the GIP, GLP, glucagon, insulin, GIP, GLP, glucagon, insulin, GIP, GLP, glucagon, insulin, testosterone, estrogen, all these things testosterone, estrogen, all these things testosterone, estrogen, all these things kind of modulate. And there's this thing kind of modulate. And there's this thing kind of modulate. And there's this thing called a set point theory or settling called a set point theory or settling called a set point theory or settling points and they integrate. Should I eat points and they integrate. Should I eat points and they integrate. Should I eat or not eat, right? So the GP1 is a giant or not eat, right? So the GP1 is a giant or not eat, right? So the GP1 is a giant signal to the brain of don't eat. So signal to the brain of don't eat. So signal to the brain of don't eat. So we're modulating this pathway. we're modulating this pathway. we're modulating this pathway. What happens to all these young kids What happens to all these young kids What happens to all these young kids that are 18 19 years old on 5 milligrams that are 18 19 years old on 5 milligrams that are 18 19 years old on 5 milligrams of ratutide uh that have lost 30 40 of ratutide uh that have lost 30 40 of ratutide uh that have lost 30 40 pounds? Are they going to have to be on pounds? Are they going to have to be on pounds? Are they going to have to be on that for life now to maintain that for life now to maintain that for life now to maintain that weight? &gt;&gt; Can I ask you about that? Because when &gt;&gt; Can I ask you about that? Because when &gt;&gt; Can I ask you about that? Because when people say people say people say perhaps you have to be on a drug for the perhaps you have to be on a drug for the perhaps you have to be on a drug for the rest of your life, I think okay, what's rest of your life, I think okay, what's rest of your life, I think okay, what's the availability? What's the cost? the availability? What's the cost? the availability? What's the cost? &gt;&gt; What's the real world cost of taking six &gt;&gt; What's the real world cost of taking six &gt;&gt; What's the real world cost of taking six months off because you can't access it? months off because you can't access it? months off because you can't access it? Y there's a shortage and maybe better Y there's a shortage and maybe better Y there's a shortage and maybe better drugs will come along. Like I don't drugs will come along. Like I don't drugs will come along. Like I don't necessarily have a problem with it. necessarily have a problem with it. necessarily have a problem with it. Although if you talk to type 1 diabetics Although if you talk to type 1 diabetics Although if you talk to type 1 diabetics in the old days, they weren't crazy in the old days, they weren't crazy in the old days, they weren't crazy about the idea that they had to about the idea that they had to about the idea that they had to constantly inject themselves with constantly inject themselves with constantly inject themselves with insulin. Now there are better insulin. Now there are better insulin. Now there are better delivery devices. I kind of feel like delivery devices. I kind of feel like delivery devices. I kind of feel like eventually there'll be some slowrelease eventually there'll be some slowrelease eventually there'll be some slowrelease um polymer that will just kind of give um polymer that will just kind of give um polymer that will just kind of give you a micro dose of it. You could dial you a micro dose of it. You could dial you a micro dose of it. You could dial it up if you want. it up if you want. it up if you want. &gt;&gt; Those are all pills. Now &gt;&gt; Those are all pills. Now &gt;&gt; Those are all pills. Now &gt;&gt; personally I don't worry so much about &gt;&gt; personally I don't worry so much about &gt;&gt; personally I don't worry so much about like for the rest of your life. I worry like for the rest of your life. I worry like for the rest of your life. I worry more about the much shorter life if more about the much shorter life if more about the much shorter life if people are obese. But what about these people are obese. But what about these people are obese. But what about these brain effects? I do worry about a brain effects? I do worry about a brain effects? I do worry about a brain that's developing in the context brain that's developing in the context brain that's developing in the context of a you know thousandfold or more of a you know thousandfold or more of a you know thousandfold or more increase in these GLPs because when we increase in these GLPs because when we increase in these GLPs because when we had um Zach Knight on the podcast, he's had um Zach Knight on the podcast, he's had um Zach Knight on the podcast, he's not a clinician, he's a scientist up at not a clinician, he's a scientist up at not a clinician, he's a scientist up at UCSF, Howard Hughes investigator, which UCSF, Howard Hughes investigator, which UCSF, Howard Hughes investigator, which means he's like a superstar and deserves means he's like a superstar and deserves means he's like a superstar and deserves to be in that category. He described to be in that category. He described to be in that category. He described that the diabetic drugs would increase that the diabetic drugs would increase that the diabetic drugs would increase GLP by like double, quadruple, but GLP by like double, quadruple, but GLP by like double, quadruple, but the weight loss effects weren't really the weight loss effects weren't really the weight loss effects weren't really there. But the drugs that you rattled there. But the drugs that you rattled there. But the drugs that you rattled off a few minutes ago, Monaro, Zmpic, off a few minutes ago, Monaro, Zmpic, off a few minutes ago, Monaro, Zmpic, etc. And certainly Red True Tide. We're etc. And certainly Red True Tide. We're etc. And certainly Red True Tide. We're talking about thousandfold increases in talking about thousandfold increases in talking about thousandfold increases in GPS, we don't know what the long-term GPS, we don't know what the long-term GPS, we don't know what the long-term effects of those are on like effects of those are on like effects of those are on like neuroplasticity and learning. Could be neuroplasticity and learning. Could be neuroplasticity and learning. Could be great. Yes. great. Yes. great. Yes. &gt;&gt; Could be positive. We shouldn't always &gt;&gt; Could be positive. We shouldn't always &gt;&gt; Could be positive. We shouldn't always assume those effects are bad. assume those effects are bad. assume those effects are bad. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like the effects for like let's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like the effects for like let's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like the effects for like let's say a 60-year-old pre-diabetic diabetic say a 60-year-old pre-diabetic diabetic say a 60-year-old pre-diabetic diabetic on Alzheimer's disease seems to be on Alzheimer's disease seems to be on Alzheimer's disease seems to be potentially positive. I think the potentially positive. I think the potentially positive. I think the study last year didn't show a good study last year didn't show a good study last year didn't show a good signal on our Alzheimer's prevention, signal on our Alzheimer's prevention, signal on our Alzheimer's prevention, but we know diabetes and cardio but we know diabetes and cardio but we know diabetes and cardio metabolic disease speeds up that metabolic disease speeds up that metabolic disease speeds up that transition. So controlling insulin transition. So controlling insulin transition. So controlling insulin dynamics might be beneficial there and dynamics might be beneficial there and dynamics might be beneficial there and the obesity is not great for the obesity is not great for the obesity is not great for Alzheimer's risk. The question is what Alzheimer's risk. The question is what Alzheimer's risk. The question is what about for like these cognitive effects? about for like these cognitive effects? about for like these cognitive effects? Is the effect happening from the drug Is the effect happening from the drug Is the effect happening from the drug itself? Is it from misuse of the drug? itself? Is it from misuse of the drug? itself? Is it from misuse of the drug? Too too high of a dose. You're not Too too high of a dose. You're not Too too high of a dose. You're not getting enough electrolytes. You're not getting enough electrolytes. You're not getting enough electrolytes. You're not getting enough micronutrients, getting enough micronutrients, getting enough micronutrients, macronutrients. You know, your blood macronutrients. You know, your blood macronutrients. You know, your blood sugar is low. Because a lot of these sugar is low. Because a lot of these sugar is low. Because a lot of these patients, the way we approach it is patients, the way we approach it is patients, the way we approach it is training wheel effect when it comes to training wheel effect when it comes to training wheel effect when it comes to GLP-p1s. Like, hey, you come to us, GLP-p1s. Like, hey, you come to us, GLP-p1s. Like, hey, you come to us, you're a patient, you want to use GLP1s, you're a patient, you want to use GLP1s, you're a patient, you want to use GLP1s, we'll give you a lowest dose as possible we'll give you a lowest dose as possible we'll give you a lowest dose as possible that has an effect for you, GLP-1 in that has an effect for you, GLP-1 in that has an effect for you, GLP-1 in conjunction with lifestyle modification, conjunction with lifestyle modification, conjunction with lifestyle modification, dietary advice, exercise programs, etc., dietary advice, exercise programs, etc., dietary advice, exercise programs, etc., and then hopefully peel away those etc., and then hopefully peel away those etc., and then hopefully peel away those training wheels or keep them on if those training wheels or keep them on if those training wheels or keep them on if you need them until we get to the end you need them until we get to the end you need them until we get to the end point that we want. Now, when people do point that we want. Now, when people do point that we want. Now, when people do it that way, I don't hear a lot of these it that way, I don't hear a lot of these it that way, I don't hear a lot of these effects anecdotally from Brookley effects anecdotally from Brookley effects anecdotally from Brookley patients that we hear about online where patients that we hear about online where patients that we hear about online where people are like, "Oh, I'm depressed. I people are like, "Oh, I'm depressed. I people are like, "Oh, I'm depressed. I hate my life from these drugs." And hate my life from these drugs." And hate my life from these drugs." And the question is, are they just, you the question is, are they just, you the question is, are they just, you know, a lot of people have low blood know, a lot of people have low blood know, a lot of people have low blood pressure from these drugs because pressure from these drugs because pressure from these drugs because they're not, you know, consuming enough they're not, you know, consuming enough they're not, you know, consuming enough electrolytes or enough food period? electrolytes or enough food period? electrolytes or enough food period? &gt;&gt; Cuz like some people will take a mega &gt;&gt; Cuz like some people will take a mega &gt;&gt; Cuz like some people will take a mega dose of these drugs and end up not dose of these drugs and end up not dose of these drugs and end up not eating like a day goes by, they've eaten eating like a day goes by, they've eaten eating like a day goes by, they've eaten one meal. That's not conducive to one meal. That's not conducive to one meal. That's not conducive to good feeling good. everyone, you know, good feeling good. everyone, you know, good feeling good. everyone, you know, the reason people are eating in the reason people are eating in the reason people are eating in the first place is because eating is such first place is because eating is such first place is because eating is such a pleasurable experience for humans and a pleasurable experience for humans and a pleasurable experience for humans and a social experience, etc., etc. The a social experience, etc., etc. The a social experience, etc., etc. The other thing is if you're not eating with other thing is if you're not eating with other thing is if you're not eating with people on the same table, are you having people on the same table, are you having people on the same table, are you having less of that socialization aspect? A lot less of that socialization aspect? A lot less of that socialization aspect? A lot of times you meet up to eat or drink or of times you meet up to eat or drink or of times you meet up to eat or drink or whatever it may be. So I'm very curious whatever it may be. So I'm very curious whatever it may be. So I'm very curious when it comes to the cognitive effects, when it comes to the cognitive effects, when it comes to the cognitive effects, is it from the drug directly interacting is it from the drug directly interacting is it from the drug directly interacting with receptors in the brain when we with receptors in the brain when we with receptors in the brain when we we've seen that the right amount of dose we've seen that the right amount of dose we've seen that the right amount of dose decreases inflammation in the brain or decreases inflammation in the brain or decreases inflammation in the brain or is it because of the social aspects of is it because of the social aspects of is it because of the social aspects of the drug changing the way you behave and the drug changing the way you behave and the drug changing the way you behave and therefore leading to negative out? dare therefore leading to negative out? dare therefore leading to negative out? dare you think of confounding variables. It's you think of confounding variables. It's you think of confounding variables. It's like, no, it's so cool cuz you're like, no, it's so cool cuz you're like, no, it's so cool cuz you're willing to go outside the box and say, willing to go outside the box and say, willing to go outside the box and say, "Hey, listen, this might be due to some "Hey, listen, this might be due to some "Hey, listen, this might be due to some of the um downstream consequences of the um downstream consequences of the um downstream consequences of reduced appetite." reduced appetite." reduced appetite." &gt;&gt; Yeah. And we know the literature shows &gt;&gt; Yeah. And we know the literature shows &gt;&gt; Yeah. And we know the literature shows that people now are having less alcohol that people now are having less alcohol that people now are having less alcohol cravings from this. It might be changing cravings from this. It might be changing cravings from this. It might be changing the way the dopanergic signaling is the way the dopanergic signaling is the way the dopanergic signaling is happening in the brain, which is happening in the brain, which is happening in the brain, which is concerning, right? Because a lot of concerning, right? Because a lot of concerning, right? Because a lot of people will be stacking this with, you people will be stacking this with, you people will be stacking this with, you know, ADHD medications. Uh they might be know, ADHD medications. Uh they might be know, ADHD medications. Uh they might be using some of these peptide stimulants, using some of these peptide stimulants, using some of these peptide stimulants, um smax link, whatever it may be. So the um smax link, whatever it may be. So the um smax link, whatever it may be. So the question because what happens is people question because what happens is people question because what happens is people go to these websites, they buy one go to these websites, they buy one go to these websites, they buy one more peptide and they got a great result more peptide and they got a great result more peptide and they got a great result and they'll be like, you know, let me and they'll be like, you know, let me and they'll be like, you know, let me add three more peptides on peptides. add three more peptides on peptides. add three more peptides on peptides. &gt;&gt; Yes, it's a increasing AOV problem. So &gt;&gt; Yes, it's a increasing AOV problem. So &gt;&gt; Yes, it's a increasing AOV problem. So the average sale value goes up the average sale value goes up the average sale value goes up &gt;&gt; from these research sites. &gt;&gt; from these research sites. &gt;&gt; from these research sites. &gt;&gt; We'll see where GLP ones go. The &gt;&gt; We'll see where GLP ones go. The &gt;&gt; We'll see where GLP ones go. The the reality is it's here. There the reality is it's here. There the reality is it's here. There there is no pre GLP1 world for us as there is no pre GLP1 world for us as there is no pre GLP1 world for us as clinicians, as health enthusiasts. We're clinicians, as health enthusiasts. We're clinicians, as health enthusiasts. We're in a postg world and everything kind of in a postg world and everything kind of in a postg world and everything kind of dictates downstream from that. The dictates downstream from that. The dictates downstream from that. The people I know who've taken um these and people I know who've taken um these and people I know who've taken um these and I don't know exactly which are taking I don't know exactly which are taking I don't know exactly which are taking much lower dosages than were prescribed much lower dosages than were prescribed much lower dosages than were prescribed to them and they are indeed sharing them to them and they are indeed sharing them to them and they are indeed sharing them with getting the prescription than with getting the prescription than with getting the prescription than people are sharing them. People are cost people are sharing them. People are cost people are sharing them. People are cost sharing now people are trying to get sharing now people are trying to get sharing now people are trying to get them from other sources. Several of them from other sources. Several of them from other sources. Several of those people say they feel like those people say they feel like those people say they feel like they can think better. But I told them, they can think better. But I told them, they can think better. But I told them, well yeah, if your insulin sensitivity well yeah, if your insulin sensitivity well yeah, if your insulin sensitivity is improved, if you're carrying less is improved, if you're carrying less is improved, if you're carrying less body fat, body fat's an endocrine organ. body fat, body fat's an endocrine organ. body fat, body fat's an endocrine organ. It's you know you need some body fat. It's you know you need some body fat. It's you know you need some body fat. But &gt;&gt; there could be a number of reasons for &gt;&gt; there could be a number of reasons for &gt;&gt; there could be a number of reasons for that. I don't know if these are direct that. I don't know if these are direct that. I don't know if these are direct effects on the brain. effects on the brain. effects on the brain. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I mean leptin sensitivity &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I mean leptin sensitivity &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I mean leptin sensitivity increases as you decrease the body fat increases as you decrease the body fat increases as you decrease the body fat mass. There's there's GP1 receptors on mass. There's there's GP1 receptors on mass. There's there's GP1 receptors on the palm neurons in the brain and no the palm neurons in the brain and no the palm neurons in the brain and no one's kind of examined what that means one's kind of examined what that means one's kind of examined what that means downstream for the leptin melano uh downstream for the leptin melano uh downstream for the leptin melano uh leptin melanocortin pathway and what leptin melanocortin pathway and what leptin melanocortin pathway and what that means for energy status you know that means for energy status you know that means for energy status you know thyroid hormone production reproductive thyroid hormone production reproductive thyroid hormone production reproductive status. We know a lot of people are oyic status. We know a lot of people are oyic status. We know a lot of people are oyic babies in that a lady will be babies in that a lady will be babies in that a lady will be subfertile or infertile start a weight subfertile or infertile start a weight subfertile or infertile start a weight loss drug and then find out by accident loss drug and then find out by accident loss drug and then find out by accident she's pregnant. she's pregnant. she's pregnant. &gt;&gt; Was she obese before? Yeah, there's &gt;&gt; Was she obese before? Yeah, there's &gt;&gt; Was she obese before? Yeah, there's these are overweight obese women that these are overweight obese women that these are overweight obese women that are having um their fertility improve as are having um their fertility improve as are having um their fertility improve as a result of losing the weight because we a result of losing the weight because we a result of losing the weight because we know &gt;&gt; uh your leptin status is a key driver of &gt;&gt; uh your leptin status is a key driver of &gt;&gt; uh your leptin status is a key driver of fertility because if you're having fertility because if you're having fertility because if you're having low leptin levels, you're starving. You low leptin levels, you're starving. You low leptin levels, you're starving. You shouldn't be fertile. If you have too shouldn't be fertile. If you have too shouldn't be fertile. If you have too much leptin and you're at leptin much leptin and you're at leptin much leptin and you're at leptin resistant, you shouldn't be having kids resistant, you shouldn't be having kids resistant, you shouldn't be having kids either. So, both of those things either. So, both of those things either. So, both of those things kind of get modulated by these drugs as kind of get modulated by these drugs as kind of get modulated by these drugs as well. &gt;&gt; There was a science paper some years ago &gt;&gt; There was a science paper some years ago &gt;&gt; There was a science paper some years ago that leptin hitting a certain threshold that leptin hitting a certain threshold that leptin hitting a certain threshold is actually what signals the onset of is actually what signals the onset of is actually what signals the onset of puberty in females. Is that still puberty in females. Is that still puberty in females. Is that still considered true? I think that's considered true? I think that's considered true? I think that's part of it that's part of it that's part of it &gt;&gt; makes sense like enough body fat to &gt;&gt; makes sense like enough body fat to &gt;&gt; makes sense like enough body fat to signal that there are enough resources signal that there are enough resources signal that there are enough resources and then um animals or that was an and then um animals or that was an and then um animals or that was an animal study or the idea was that people animal study or the idea was that people animal study or the idea was that people perhaps also become females become perhaps also become females become perhaps also become females become reproductively competent at the point reproductively competent at the point reproductively competent at the point where there's enough energetic resources where there's enough energetic resources where there's enough energetic resources that &gt;&gt; interesting. Have you ever taken one of &gt;&gt; interesting. Have you ever taken one of &gt;&gt; interesting. Have you ever taken one of these? &gt;&gt; Oh wow. Yes. I uh I uh had a family &gt;&gt; Oh wow. Yes. I uh I uh had a family &gt;&gt; Oh wow. Yes. I uh I uh had a family member with a GLP1 pen uh from four member with a GLP1 pen uh from four member with a GLP1 pen uh from four years ago that um said it wasn't years ago that um said it wasn't years ago that um said it wasn't working. So I'm like okay let's see working. So I'm like okay let's see working. So I'm like okay let's see what's going on here. I got a pen. Don't what's going on here. I got a pen. Don't what's going on here. I got a pen. Don't do Don't do this at home. And I was do Don't do this at home. And I was do Don't do this at home. And I was like, "Yeah, it's not working. Like, like, "Yeah, it's not working. Like, like, "Yeah, it's not working. Like, it's bunked. They got it from overseas. it's bunked. They got it from overseas. it's bunked. They got it from overseas. It was a brand name Ozamic pen, but It was a brand name Ozamic pen, but It was a brand name Ozamic pen, but gotten from overseas." Got the pen. I gotten from overseas." Got the pen. I gotten from overseas." Got the pen. I was like, "You know what? If it's bunk, was like, "You know what? If it's bunk, was like, "You know what? If it's bunk, let's see what it is. Don't do this at let's see what it is. Don't do this at let's see what it is. Don't do this at home." Biohackers in me came out and home." Biohackers in me came out and home." Biohackers in me came out and tried it. I injected a I think it was a tried it. I injected a I think it was a tried it. I injected a I think it was a milligram of ombic. milligram of ombic. milligram of ombic. &gt;&gt; What's a standard dose? &gt;&gt; What's a standard dose? &gt;&gt; What's a standard dose? &gt;&gt; You start at 0.25 and escalate to 0.5. &gt;&gt; You start at 0.25 and escalate to 0.5. &gt;&gt; You start at 0.25 and escalate to 0.5. &gt;&gt; You went straight to a milligram. &gt;&gt; You went straight to a milligram. &gt;&gt; You went straight to a milligram. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz I was like, "Ah." They're &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz I was like, "Ah." They're &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz I was like, "Ah." They're like, "It doesn't work. I'm eating like, "It doesn't work. I'm eating like, "It doesn't work. I'm eating so much." I'm like, "Okay, whatever." so much." I'm like, "Okay, whatever." so much." I'm like, "Okay, whatever." You got bunk pen from overseas. I You got bunk pen from overseas. I You got bunk pen from overseas. I go to do a shift. I was on a night shift go to do a shift. I was on a night shift go to do a shift. I was on a night shift that day and I've never had Charizard that day and I've never had Charizard that day and I've never had Charizard like projectile vomiting like projectile vomiting like projectile vomiting &gt;&gt; and low blood sugar presumably. &gt;&gt; and low blood sugar presumably. &gt;&gt; and low blood sugar presumably. &gt;&gt; The blood sugar effect for &gt;&gt; The blood sugar effect for &gt;&gt; The blood sugar effect for non-diabetics don't get that low, but it non-diabetics don't get that low, but it non-diabetics don't get that low, but it was just miserable. Like I would I would was just miserable. Like I would I would was just miserable. Like I would I would go admit a patient, go upstairs, vomit go admit a patient, go upstairs, vomit go admit a patient, go upstairs, vomit in the in the call room. in the in the call room. in the in the call room. &gt;&gt; You just gave a really good reason why &gt;&gt; You just gave a really good reason why &gt;&gt; You just gave a really good reason why people shouldn't just do what you just people shouldn't just do what you just people shouldn't just do what you just described. &gt;&gt; No, they shouldn't do that. Uh then go &gt;&gt; No, they shouldn't do that. Uh then go &gt;&gt; No, they shouldn't do that. Uh then go back to back to the ER, admit a patient, back to back to the ER, admit a patient, back to back to the ER, admit a patient, and then it was it was the most and then it was it was the most and then it was it was the most miserable night of my life. Uh so be miserable night of my life. Uh so be miserable night of my life. Uh so be very careful how you use these drugs. very careful how you use these drugs. very careful how you use these drugs. That's why titrate very slowly. Um That's why titrate very slowly. Um That's why titrate very slowly. Um luckily with the newer ones the effects luckily with the newer ones the effects luckily with the newer ones the effects are much less like people who report and are much less like people who report and are much less like people who report and retroide even have less of these retroide even have less of these retroide even have less of these gastrointestinal effects gastrointestinal effects gastrointestinal effects &gt;&gt; but um that's a peptide gone wrong &gt;&gt; but um that's a peptide gone wrong &gt;&gt; but um that's a peptide gone wrong story. &gt;&gt; Peptide gone wrong. Um reatride. Yep. &gt;&gt; Peptide gone wrong. Um reatride. Yep. &gt;&gt; Peptide gone wrong. Um reatride. Yep. &gt;&gt; I put out a post on X. I thought and I &gt;&gt; I put out a post on X. I thought and I &gt;&gt; I put out a post on X. I thought and I do still think that it that Red True do still think that it that Red True do still think that it that Red True Tide is going to be a trillion dollar Tide is going to be a trillion dollar Tide is going to be a trillion dollar industry. Not because so many people are industry. Not because so many people are industry. Not because so many people are necessarily going to use it for weight necessarily going to use it for weight necessarily going to use it for weight loss, &gt;&gt; but because many people will use it for &gt;&gt; but because many people will use it for &gt;&gt; but because many people will use it for weight loss. Many people will use it for weight loss. Many people will use it for weight loss. Many people will use it for other things because you can be sure, other things because you can be sure, other things because you can be sure, absolutely sure that Lily is going to absolutely sure that Lily is going to absolutely sure that Lily is going to find other find other find other &gt;&gt; ways to market it. And you can protect a &gt;&gt; ways to market it. And you can protect a &gt;&gt; ways to market it. And you can protect a patent by finding additional uses for patent by finding additional uses for patent by finding additional uses for things. I mean, a lot of the things. I mean, a lot of the things. I mean, a lot of the blockbuster drugs for eye diseases, um, blockbuster drugs for eye diseases, um, blockbuster drugs for eye diseases, um, the patents to prevent generic forms um, the patents to prevent generic forms um, the patents to prevent generic forms um, were continued by Here's the deal, were continued by Here's the deal, were continued by Here's the deal, folks. companies are really incentivized folks. companies are really incentivized folks. companies are really incentivized to take the hundreds of millions of to take the hundreds of millions of to take the hundreds of millions of dollars that they spent on clinical dollars that they spent on clinical dollars that they spent on clinical trials and research and development and trials and research and development and trials and research and development and not have to do it again. So, if you can not have to do it again. So, if you can not have to do it again. So, if you can find another valid use for a drug, you find another valid use for a drug, you find another valid use for a drug, you don't have to run all the safety stuff, don't have to run all the safety stuff, don't have to run all the safety stuff, you don't have to do a lot of stuff, you don't have to do a lot of stuff, you don't have to do a lot of stuff, you just have to show efficacy and a few just have to show efficacy and a few just have to show efficacy and a few other things, but that's the way that other things, but that's the way that other things, but that's the way that drug companies continue to play the game drug companies continue to play the game drug companies continue to play the game um to protect their investment, um to protect their investment, um to protect their investment, right? I mean, it's you can understand right? I mean, it's you can understand right? I mean, it's you can understand why they do it. If you like or not, why they do it. If you like or not, why they do it. If you like or not, that's your business. But um so that's your business. But um so that's your business. But um so I'm guessing that Reddit True Tide is I'm guessing that Reddit True Tide is I'm guessing that Reddit True Tide is going we're going to discover that it's going we're going to discover that it's going we're going to discover that it's um useful for a number of things and um useful for a number of things and um useful for a number of things and from the clinical trials there's a from the clinical trials there's a from the clinical trials there's a reason to believe that's going to be the reason to believe that's going to be the reason to believe that's going to be the case. &gt;&gt; And the big thing they're trying to do &gt;&gt; And the big thing they're trying to do &gt;&gt; And the big thing they're trying to do now is classify as a biologic. So now is classify as a biologic. So now is classify as a biologic. So Retroide has 39 amino acids. Uh to be a Retroide has 39 amino acids. Uh to be a Retroide has 39 amino acids. Uh to be a biologic you have to be above 40 amino biologic you have to be above 40 amino biologic you have to be above 40 amino acids. &gt;&gt; And once you get to above 40 amino &gt;&gt; And once you get to above 40 amino &gt;&gt; And once you get to above 40 amino acids, if you are a biologic, then the acids, if you are a biologic, then the acids, if you are a biologic, then the patent lasts patent lasts patent lasts &gt;&gt; way longer. I don't know the exact &gt;&gt; way longer. I don't know the exact &gt;&gt; way longer. I don't know the exact number. &gt;&gt; It's like 15 years. &gt;&gt; It's like 15 years. &gt;&gt; It's like 15 years. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Much much longer. If it's a if &gt;&gt; Yeah. Much much longer. If it's a if &gt;&gt; Yeah. Much much longer. If it's a if it's 40 or below amino acids, then it's 40 or below amino acids, then it's 40 or below amino acids, then it's something like five to seven years. something like five to seven years. something like five to seven years. &gt;&gt; Someone in law will have that. &gt;&gt; Someone in law will have that. &gt;&gt; Someone in law will have that. &gt;&gt; So, we're talking like hundreds of &gt;&gt; So, we're talking like hundreds of &gt;&gt; So, we're talking like hundreds of hundreds of millions of dollars, maybe hundreds of millions of dollars, maybe hundreds of millions of dollars, maybe billions of dollars. If it's a if you billions of dollars. If it's a if you billions of dollars. If it's a if you and you can tinker with this, you can and you can tinker with this, you can and you can tinker with this, you can amino acids amino acids amino acids &gt;&gt; and more importantly, no one can &gt;&gt; and more importantly, no one can &gt;&gt; and more importantly, no one can compound it if it's a biologic or if compound it if it's a biologic or if compound it if it's a biologic or if it's very difficult to compound like the it's very difficult to compound like the it's very difficult to compound like the right certificates. Something right certificates. Something right certificates. Something similar happened with ACG where it was similar happened with ACG where it was similar happened with ACG where it was taken out of the compounders um taken out of the compounders um taken out of the compounders um recently. &gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. So ACG um &gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. So ACG um &gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. So ACG um &gt;&gt; human coriotic ginatotropin this is &gt;&gt; human coriotic ginatotropin this is &gt;&gt; human coriotic ginatotropin this is commonly prescribed for trying to commonly prescribed for trying to commonly prescribed for trying to restore fertility to uh to men but it's restore fertility to uh to men but it's restore fertility to uh to men but it's main mostly being given in IVF cycles to main mostly being given in IVF cycles to main mostly being given in IVF cycles to women. &gt;&gt; Yep. Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yep. Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yep. Yeah, &gt;&gt; there's a big controversy about ACG &gt;&gt; there's a big controversy about ACG &gt;&gt; there's a big controversy about ACG compounders and who can compound and who compounders and who can compound and who compounders and who can compound and who can't that's beyond this. But uh can't that's beyond this. But uh can't that's beyond this. But uh this is a very important thing cuz if this is a very important thing cuz if this is a very important thing cuz if Lily gets rea then the compounders are out of luck then the compounders are out of luck then the compounders are out of luck because the compounders all have the because the compounders all have the because the compounders all have the formula for reetta they're ready to make formula for reetta they're ready to make formula for reetta they're ready to make it like they can get the API from China it like they can get the API from China it like they can get the API from China and start compounding it as soon and start compounding it as soon and start compounding it as soon as it's available. It'll it will make as it's available. It'll it will make as it's available. It'll it will make them all billions of dollars but if Lily them all billions of dollars but if Lily them all billions of dollars but if Lily is able to do this they'll be able to is able to do this they'll be able to is able to do this they'll be able to protect themselves from what was going protect themselves from what was going protect themselves from what was going to happen. You see the Trump to happen. You see the Trump to happen. You see the Trump administration now is trying to get with administration now is trying to get with administration now is trying to get with Trump RX Lily and Novaist to drop their Trump RX Lily and Novaist to drop their Trump RX Lily and Novaist to drop their prices to make it more available which prices to make it more available which prices to make it more available which has happened like now I think you can has happened like now I think you can has happened like now I think you can get a you know $300 monthly dose of get a you know $300 monthly dose of get a you know $300 monthly dose of Tresepite available through these Tresepite available through these Tresepite available through these websites &gt;&gt; used to be 1 1500 &gt;&gt; used to be 1 1500 &gt;&gt; used to be 1 1500 &gt;&gt; yeah 1 without insurance some insurance &gt;&gt; yeah 1 without insurance some insurance &gt;&gt; yeah 1 without insurance some insurance will cover it some wouldn't you'd will cover it some wouldn't you'd will cover it some wouldn't you'd have to get you know savvy clinician have to get you know savvy clinician have to get you know savvy clinician that will advocate on your on your that will advocate on your on your that will advocate on your on your behalf to get these covered but cash pay behalf to get these covered but cash pay behalf to get these covered but cash pay between you know even some of the between you know even some of the between you know even some of the pills I think you can pay 150 bucks a pills I think you can pay 150 bucks a pills I think you can pay 150 bucks a month for the oroplon which is not a month for the oroplon which is not a month for the oroplon which is not a peptide but still GLP1 agonist um which peptide but still GLP1 agonist um which peptide but still GLP1 agonist um which kind of gets to the point like it kind of gets to the point like it kind of gets to the point like it doesn't matter if it's a peptide or not. doesn't matter if it's a peptide or not. doesn't matter if it's a peptide or not. What matters is where it touches, What matters is where it touches, What matters is where it touches, what receptor it touches because orupon what receptor it touches because orupon what receptor it touches because orupon is more similar to semiglutide. Both of is more similar to semiglutide. Both of is more similar to semiglutide. Both of them are GLP-1 drugs. One's a peptide, them are GLP-1 drugs. One's a peptide, them are GLP-1 drugs. One's a peptide, one's not. Then BBC is to semiglutide. one's not. Then BBC is to semiglutide. one's not. Then BBC is to semiglutide. So like everyone online talk about So like everyone online talk about So like everyone online talk about peptides are good or peptides are bad. peptides are good or peptides are bad. peptides are good or peptides are bad. There's no actual scientific category of There's no actual scientific category of There's no actual scientific category of peptides that gives you a functional peptides that gives you a functional peptides that gives you a functional definition that's discussable between definition that's discussable between definition that's discussable between two people because what do you mean by two people because what do you mean by two people because what do you mean by peptide? Do you mean carnosine or do you peptide? Do you mean carnosine or do you peptide? Do you mean carnosine or do you mean ratitude? mean ratitude? mean ratitude? &gt;&gt; Excellent point. uh speaks to a lot of &gt;&gt; Excellent point. uh speaks to a lot of &gt;&gt; Excellent point. uh speaks to a lot of the confusion. Um you are a beam of the confusion. Um you are a beam of the confusion. Um you are a beam of clarifying information uh on this. I clarifying information uh on this. I clarifying information uh on this. I actually am going to put in a vote um actually am going to put in a vote um actually am going to put in a vote um publicly right here and now, but also uh publicly right here and now, but also uh publicly right here and now, but also uh I'm going to do what I can to contact I'm going to do what I can to contact I'm going to do what I can to contact folks that are relevant. I think you folks that are relevant. I think you folks that are relevant. I think you should, no joke, I think you should be should, no joke, I think you should be should, no joke, I think you should be in charge of a nomenclature committee. I in charge of a nomenclature committee. I in charge of a nomenclature committee. I think for in the world of genetics think for in the world of genetics think for in the world of genetics for a long time that people would just for a long time that people would just for a long time that people would just name genes Sonic Hedgehog or you know name genes Sonic Hedgehog or you know name genes Sonic Hedgehog or you know you know sink one or people name it you know sink one or people name it you know sink one or people name it after their cousin or what and it was a after their cousin or what and it was a after their cousin or what and it was a mess and so what ends up happening is mess and so what ends up happening is mess and so what ends up happening is you find similarity between genes across you find similarity between genes across you find similarity between genes across different laboratories and eventually different laboratories and eventually different laboratories and eventually you have a meeting and you come up with you have a meeting and you come up with you have a meeting and you come up with a you have a nomenclature committee and a you have a nomenclature committee and a you have a nomenclature committee and then you say this is you know ephrine 1 then you say this is you know ephrine 1 then you say this is you know ephrine 1 2 3 4 5 6 these are the sequences the 2 3 4 5 6 these are the sequences the 2 3 4 5 6 these are the sequences the general public doesn't think about general public doesn't think about general public doesn't think about molecules in that way no but the general molecules in that way no but the general molecules in that way no but the general public are diving right into this they public are diving right into this they public are diving right into this they are the experiment and so what I think are the experiment and so what I think are the experiment and so what I think would be very useful would be a um would be very useful would be a um would be very useful would be a um clear and accessible nomenclature to clear and accessible nomenclature to clear and accessible nomenclature to divide up what we've talked about today divide up what we've talked about today divide up what we've talked about today you know BPC-157 you know BPC-157 you know BPC-157 um you know peptides with and without um you know peptides with and without um you know peptides with and without known receptors the regenerative known receptors the regenerative known receptors the regenerative peptides as you've called them like peptides as you've called them like peptides as you've called them like thymus and alpha TB500 which are thymus and alpha TB500 which are thymus and alpha TB500 which are amunogenic peptides I think amunogenic peptides I think amunogenic peptides I think &gt;&gt; the word peptides is just too general &gt;&gt; the word peptides is just too general &gt;&gt; the word peptides is just too general too general too general too general &gt;&gt; I'm putting my vote in for you not that &gt;&gt; I'm putting my vote in for you not that &gt;&gt; I'm putting my vote in for you not that you don't already have enough to do to you don't already have enough to do to you don't already have enough to do to um come up with some nomen clature that um come up with some nomen clature that um come up with some nomen clature that maybe I can help propagate and some of maybe I can help propagate and some of maybe I can help propagate and some of the other people in the podcast the other people in the podcast the other people in the podcast community. We'll even contact our community. We'll even contact our community. We'll even contact our close friends in um legacy our close friends in um legacy our close friends in um legacy media and explain to them how this works media and explain to them how this works media and explain to them how this works and maybe they can help propagate just and maybe they can help propagate just and maybe they can help propagate just for sake of clarity. Yep. for sake of clarity. Yep. for sake of clarity. Yep. &gt;&gt; Right. We're not taking the stance these &gt;&gt; Right. We're not taking the stance these &gt;&gt; Right. We're not taking the stance these are good or bad but just for sake of are good or bad but just for sake of are good or bad but just for sake of clarity as given that there's so many clarity as given that there's so many clarity as given that there's so many people that are peptide curious. Okay. people that are peptide curious. Okay. people that are peptide curious. Okay. So before we wrap So before we wrap So before we wrap &gt;&gt; I solicited X and Instagram for &gt;&gt; I solicited X and Instagram for &gt;&gt; I solicited X and Instagram for questions about peptides. I did not questions about peptides. I did not questions about peptides. I did not reveal exactly who you are, but I gave reveal exactly who you are, but I gave reveal exactly who you are, but I gave some of your credentials and got back some of your credentials and got back some of your credentials and got back many, many excellent questions. Most of many, many excellent questions. Most of many, many excellent questions. Most of which, thanks to you, were answered which, thanks to you, were answered which, thanks to you, were answered during the course of our conversation up during the course of our conversation up during the course of our conversation up until now. But there are a couple of until now. But there are a couple of until now. But there are a couple of them that many people asked, we didn't them that many people asked, we didn't them that many people asked, we didn't touch on, at least not directly. One touch on, at least not directly. One touch on, at least not directly. One thing that's come up several times is thing that's come up several times is thing that's come up several times is the question about for women who have the question about for women who have the question about for women who have endometriosis or fibroids or other endometriosis or fibroids or other endometriosis or fibroids or other things related to reproductive health things related to reproductive health things related to reproductive health and potential. Can things like BPC57 and potential. Can things like BPC57 and potential. Can things like BPC57 help and or hurt those circumstances help and or hurt those circumstances help and or hurt those circumstances given their potential role in given their potential role in given their potential role in angioenesis and the other things you angioenesis and the other things you angioenesis and the other things you described? &gt;&gt; No literature exists on either animal or &gt;&gt; No literature exists on either animal or &gt;&gt; No literature exists on either animal or human data that relates to those human data that relates to those human data that relates to those peptides. I'd say those are more peptides. I'd say those are more peptides. I'd say those are more hormonal/ metabolic issues that a hormonal/ metabolic issues that a hormonal/ metabolic issues that a good obgine should take care of. good obgine should take care of. good obgine should take care of. They're very difficult to treat They're very difficult to treat They're very difficult to treat conditions and very miserable to have conditions and very miserable to have conditions and very miserable to have for people and they have fertility for people and they have fertility for people and they have fertility implications. But those are more on the implications. But those are more on the implications. But those are more on the hormonal side. I think the hormonal side. I think the hormonal side. I think the hormonal lever is way stronger than a peptide lever is way stronger than a peptide lever is way stronger than a peptide level like BBC or any of those. And as level like BBC or any of those. And as level like BBC or any of those. And as far as I'm concerned, there's no case far as I'm concerned, there's no case far as I'm concerned, there's no case reports or studies that would suggest reports or studies that would suggest reports or studies that would suggest positive or negative. CNS effects positive or negative. CNS effects positive or negative. CNS effects central nervous system, excuse me, of central nervous system, excuse me, of central nervous system, excuse me, of BPC57 or other peptides that we've BPC57 or other peptides that we've BPC57 or other peptides that we've talked about that are don't fall under talked about that are don't fall under talked about that are don't fall under the, you know, typical um umbrella that the, you know, typical um umbrella that the, you know, typical um umbrella that people, you know, go to when they think people, you know, go to when they think people, you know, go to when they think about BPC57. Now, you talked about some about BPC57. Now, you talked about some about BPC57. Now, you talked about some of the uh stuff related to alcohol and of the uh stuff related to alcohol and of the uh stuff related to alcohol and perhaps other things like aderall, but perhaps other things like aderall, but perhaps other things like aderall, but anything known about, you know, people anything known about, you know, people anything known about, you know, people feeling better or worse on different feeling better or worse on different feeling better or worse on different peptides just psychologically, peptides just psychologically, peptides just psychologically, neurologically? &gt;&gt; TBI, I'll throw TBI in there for myself. &gt;&gt; TBI, I'll throw TBI in there for myself. &gt;&gt; TBI, I'll throw TBI in there for myself. I don't have TBI fortunately, but I don't have TBI fortunately, but I don't have TBI fortunately, but I know many people that do. They reach out know many people that do. They reach out know many people that do. They reach out to me. Could it be beneficial in those to me. Could it be beneficial in those to me. Could it be beneficial in those cases? &gt;&gt; Yeah, there were studies in Russia on &gt;&gt; Yeah, there were studies in Russia on &gt;&gt; Yeah, there were studies in Russia on TBI when it comes to cortexin and TBI when it comes to cortexin and TBI when it comes to cortexin and cerebralin, which would probably never cerebralin, which would probably never cerebralin, which would probably never be available in the United States. So, be available in the United States. So, be available in the United States. So, we'll skip those. Uh there's we'll skip those. Uh there's we'll skip those. Uh there's no good data on BBC TBI. They no good data on BBC TBI. They no good data on BBC TBI. They theoretically could be useful from a theoretically could be useful from a theoretically could be useful from a from anti-stress perspective. That would from anti-stress perspective. That would from anti-stress perspective. That would be interesting to explore that. BBC's be interesting to explore that. BBC's be interesting to explore that. BBC's neurological effects are very neurological effects are very neurological effects are very homeostatic in nature. They don't let homeostatic in nature. They don't let homeostatic in nature. They don't let you get too high in the in the mice data you get too high in the in the mice data you get too high in the in the mice data at least. the mice can't get too drunk at least. the mice can't get too drunk at least. the mice can't get too drunk and they can't withdraw from malcol. and they can't withdraw from malcol. and they can't withdraw from malcol. They can't get too high on the mice They can't get too high on the mice They can't get too high on the mice methamphetamines and they can't get too methamphetamines and they can't get too methamphetamines and they can't get too high on the methamphetamines and they high on the methamphetamines and they high on the methamphetamines and they don't withdraw either. So there's a don't withdraw either. So there's a don't withdraw either. So there's a homeostatic mechanism that might explain homeostatic mechanism that might explain homeostatic mechanism that might explain some of these anhidonia uh side effects some of these anhidonia uh side effects some of these anhidonia uh side effects that people are reporting where BBC that people are reporting where BBC that people are reporting where BBC modulates the gut brain access in a way modulates the gut brain access in a way modulates the gut brain access in a way which we do not understand. It's kind of which we do not understand. It's kind of which we do not understand. It's kind of woowoo that makes it so that your brain woowoo that makes it so that your brain woowoo that makes it so that your brain can't go too far in one direction. Maybe can't go too far in one direction. Maybe can't go too far in one direction. Maybe in putting if we think of a just so in putting if we think of a just so in putting if we think of a just so story it's putting you into a rest and story it's putting you into a rest and story it's putting you into a rest and digest state to heal whatever problem digest state to heal whatever problem digest state to heal whatever problem you have. If that's why BBC exists as a you have. If that's why BBC exists as a you have. If that's why BBC exists as a big parent compound that might be part big parent compound that might be part big parent compound that might be part of the fact that if you secrete BBC your of the fact that if you secrete BBC your of the fact that if you secrete BBC your body goes into like a convolescent mode body goes into like a convolescent mode body goes into like a convolescent mode because it will it will take away because it will it will take away because it will it will take away stimulants it will take away sedatives stimulants it will take away sedatives stimulants it will take away sedatives um don't try this of course but there um don't try this of course but there um don't try this of course but there seems to be a homeostatic mechanism in seems to be a homeostatic mechanism in seems to be a homeostatic mechanism in BPC that needs to be explored further BPC that needs to be explored further BPC that needs to be explored further with good data very interesting thank with good data very interesting thank with good data very interesting thank you the major question was what should you the major question was what should you the major question was what should people do if they are actually people do if they are actually people do if they are actually interested in obtaining peptides let's interested in obtaining peptides let's interested in obtaining peptides let's just set the GLPs aside because it's just set the GLPs aside because it's just set the GLPs aside because it's kind of a separate category and they kind of a separate category and they kind of a separate category and they want to explore their use and they want to explore their use and they want to explore their use and they want to be as safe as possible. Where to be as safe as possible. Where to be as safe as possible. Where shouldn't they look? shouldn't they look? shouldn't they look? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Is how I'll phrase the question. Um &gt;&gt; Is how I'll phrase the question. Um &gt;&gt; Is how I'll phrase the question. Um where should they look? Who should they where should they look? Who should they where should they look? Who should they talk to? At what point do they can they talk to? At what point do they can they talk to? At what point do they can they be confident that what they're taking is be confident that what they're taking is be confident that what they're taking is what you know the bottle claims and what you know the bottle claims and what you know the bottle claims and that it's you know free of contaminants that it's you know free of contaminants that it's you know free of contaminants um and so on. I many questions but um and so on. I many questions but um and so on. I many questions but I think this is like kind of the I think this is like kind of the I think this is like kind of the question. &gt;&gt; Yep. It's it's the most difficult &gt;&gt; Yep. It's it's the most difficult &gt;&gt; Yep. It's it's the most difficult question to answer because uh the question to answer because uh the question to answer because uh the majority of people are getting their majority of people are getting their majority of people are getting their peptides from research only websites. Uh peptides from research only websites. Uh peptides from research only websites. Uh unfortunately those are not reliable. We unfortunately those are not reliable. We unfortunately those are not reliable. We don't know what's in them. They they don't know what's in them. They they don't know what's in them. They they could be good, could be bad, could be as could be good, could be bad, could be as could be good, could be bad, could be as good as a compound pharmacy, could be good as a compound pharmacy, could be good as a compound pharmacy, could be much worse, could be the wrong peptide much worse, could be the wrong peptide much worse, could be the wrong peptide in the vial. So we don't know what's in the vial. So we don't know what's in the vial. So we don't know what's in there. What should happen over the in there. What should happen over the in there. What should happen over the next 6 12 24 months is there will be a next 6 12 24 months is there will be a next 6 12 24 months is there will be a lot of physicianled options for patients lot of physicianled options for patients lot of physicianled options for patients to get peptides. Number one, you should to get peptides. Number one, you should to get peptides. Number one, you should encourage your physician if you don't encourage your physician if you don't encourage your physician if you don't have one. Uh, get one and get a good have one. Uh, get one and get a good have one. Uh, get one and get a good relationship with one because having a relationship with one because having a relationship with one because having a good relationship with your physician is good relationship with your physician is good relationship with your physician is a key aspect of driving good health. But a key aspect of driving good health. But a key aspect of driving good health. But having a physician that's educated on having a physician that's educated on having a physician that's educated on peptides to my doctor friends, all of peptides to my doctor friends, all of peptides to my doctor friends, all of you guys are now live in a peptide era. you guys are now live in a peptide era. you guys are now live in a peptide era. You have no choice but to get educated. You have no choice but to get educated. You have no choice but to get educated. So get educated. We should create So get educated. We should create So get educated. We should create resources for that. There will be a lot resources for that. There will be a lot resources for that. There will be a lot of telemet options opening up soon uh of telemet options opening up soon uh of telemet options opening up soon uh through various companies that will through various companies that will through various companies that will offer these peptides and it will be good offer these peptides and it will be good offer these peptides and it will be good for the consumer because it'll be a race for the consumer because it'll be a race for the consumer because it'll be a race down in price and then we'll know which down in price and then we'll know which down in price and then we'll know which compoundingies are better which compoundingies are better which compoundingies are better which ones are worse so you can get a better ones are worse so you can get a better ones are worse so you can get a better source peptides but you should get them source peptides but you should get them source peptides but you should get them from clinicians. The question that's from clinicians. The question that's from clinicians. The question that's going to happen is there's going to be a going to happen is there's going to be a going to happen is there's going to be a lot of these orally available peptides lot of these orally available peptides lot of these orally available peptides and they're going to be all over and they're going to be all over and they're going to be all over supplement websites like you you'll find supplement websites like you you'll find supplement websites like you you'll find them with your magnesium and your them with your magnesium and your them with your magnesium and your creatine and then your pinealon or your creatine and then your pinealon or your creatine and then your pinealon or your BPC157. The question is what is that BPC157. The question is what is that BPC157. The question is what is that going to look like? So we'd like, you going to look like? So we'd like, you going to look like? So we'd like, you know, our FDA overlords to give us know, our FDA overlords to give us know, our FDA overlords to give us some guidance there on what can and some guidance there on what can and some guidance there on what can and cannot be sold and bought. But it should cannot be sold and bought. But it should cannot be sold and bought. But it should be physician le. You should be doing be physician le. You should be doing be physician le. You should be doing this under the guidance of a physician this under the guidance of a physician this under the guidance of a physician that's monitoring you. You know, you that's monitoring you. You know, you that's monitoring you. You know, you shouldn't be taking testes in without shouldn't be taking testes in without shouldn't be taking testes in without checking IGF-1 levels. Uh a GLP1 even checking IGF-1 levels. Uh a GLP1 even checking IGF-1 levels. Uh a GLP1 even should be monitored with the physicians should be monitored with the physicians should be monitored with the physicians that can counsel you on too much that can counsel you on too much that can counsel you on too much weight loss. Like some of these some of weight loss. Like some of these some of weight loss. Like some of these some of these celebrities should have had better these celebrities should have had better these celebrities should have had better clinicians monitoring their GLP1 clinicians monitoring their GLP1 clinicians monitoring their GLP1 journeys cuz they lost way too much journeys cuz they lost way too much journeys cuz they lost way too much weight. That doesn't look healthy at weight. That doesn't look healthy at weight. That doesn't look healthy at all. Unless someone's first of all all. Unless someone's first of all all. Unless someone's first of all someone's not having the basics in place someone's not having the basics in place someone's not having the basics in place there's no I point in putting all these there's no I point in putting all these there's no I point in putting all these peptides in like peptides in like peptides in like &gt;&gt; morning sunlight sleep darkness at night &gt;&gt; morning sunlight sleep darkness at night &gt;&gt; morning sunlight sleep darkness at night yes good diet minimally processed food yes good diet minimally processed food yes good diet minimally processed food &gt;&gt; yes the next phase of peptide curious &gt;&gt; yes the next phase of peptide curious &gt;&gt; yes the next phase of peptide curious and peptide driven discussions is going and peptide driven discussions is going and peptide driven discussions is going to be like how do you incorporate it to be like how do you incorporate it to be like how do you incorporate it into a giant health system like you do into a giant health system like you do into a giant health system like you do morning sunlight blue light blockers and morning sunlight blue light blockers and morning sunlight blue light blockers and epitalon you do you know BPC and you epitalon you do you know BPC and you epitalon you do you know BPC and you work out in the gym or whatever it may work out in the gym or whatever it may work out in the gym or whatever it may be there's going to be you know be there's going to be you know be there's going to be you know protocols that develop but I think protocols that develop but I think protocols that develop but I think within six months there'll be very good within six months there'll be very good within six months there'll be very good physician options for everybody Abud, physician options for everybody Abud, physician options for everybody Abud, amazing. Thank you so much for coming amazing. Thank you so much for coming amazing. Thank you so much for coming here today and again shedding so much here today and again shedding so much here today and again shedding so much light on what all of these things are. light on what all of these things are. light on what all of these things are. You have an clearly a virtuoso level um You have an clearly a virtuoso level um You have an clearly a virtuoso level um understanding and ability to communicate understanding and ability to communicate understanding and ability to communicate about the history of these things, what about the history of these things, what about the history of these things, what they are, what they aren't, what we they are, what they aren't, what we they are, what they aren't, what we know, what we still don't know, um the know, what we still don't know, um the know, what we still don't know, um the potential upsides, the potential upsides, the potential upsides, the potential hazards, the uh the regulation, and on hazards, the uh the regulation, and on hazards, the uh the regulation, and on and on. Um there are 50 other topics and on. Um there are 50 other topics and on. Um there are 50 other topics that you and I must talk about at some that you and I must talk about at some that you and I must talk about at some point. your knowledge of hormones in men point. your knowledge of hormones in men point. your knowledge of hormones in men and women, pregnancy and women's and women, pregnancy and women's and women, pregnancy and women's hormones affecting the fetus, how hormones affecting the fetus, how hormones affecting the fetus, how progesterone impacts DHT and male progesterone impacts DHT and male progesterone impacts DHT and male offspring. Incredible. Absolutely want offspring. Incredible. Absolutely want offspring. Incredible. Absolutely want to have you back to have that to have you back to have that to have you back to have that discussion, but we'll let people digest discussion, but we'll let people digest discussion, but we'll let people digest this in the meantime. We'll put links to this in the meantime. We'll put links to this in the meantime. We'll put links to where people can find you. And I just where people can find you. And I just where people can find you. And I just want to say thank you for doing what you want to say thank you for doing what you want to say thank you for doing what you do. And if you don't mind me sharing, do. And if you don't mind me sharing, do. And if you don't mind me sharing, you're 33 years old. you're 33 years old. you're 33 years old. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right. &gt;&gt; I love that you're a clinician and &gt;&gt; I love that you're a clinician and &gt;&gt; I love that you're a clinician and you're practicing medicine, but please you're practicing medicine, but please you're practicing medicine, but please keep wherever you can keep please keep wherever you can keep please keep wherever you can keep up your efforts as a public educator. up your efforts as a public educator. up your efforts as a public educator. come back and talk to us again. Uh come back and talk to us again. Uh come back and talk to us again. Uh you're a gift to us all and um thank you you're a gift to us all and um thank you you're a gift to us all and um thank you so much. so much. so much. &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here &gt;&gt; Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here and thank you for the kind words. and thank you for the kind words. and thank you for the kind words. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Abud Bachri. To discussion with Dr. Abud Bachri. To discussion with Dr. Abud Bachri. To learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find learn more about his work and to find links to the various things we links to the various things we links to the various things we discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note discussed, please see the show note captions. I should also mention that Dr. captions. I should also mention that Dr. captions. I should also mention that Dr. Bachri has just released a new app which Bachri has just released a new app which Bachri has just released a new app which is focused on circadian biology which we is focused on circadian biology which we is focused on circadian biology which we didn't talk about today, but he's a true didn't talk about today, but he's a true didn't talk about today, but he's a true expert there as well. You can also find expert there as well. You can also find expert there as well. You can also find a link to that app in the show notes a link to that app in the show notes a link to that app in the show notes caption. If you're learning from and or caption. If you're learning from and or caption. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. I do in the comments section on YouTube. I do in the comments section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network subscribe to our Neural Network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Abud Bakri. today's discussion with Dr. Abud Bakri. today's discussion with Dr. Abud Bakri. And last but certainly not least, thank And last but certainly not least, thank And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.