Longevity ultimately is be being able to Longevity ultimately is be being able to Longevity ultimately is be being able to maintain function as you age because maintain function as you age because maintain function as you age because again it's not the number of again it's not the number of again it's not the number of years but the quality of the years. So years but the quality of the years. So years but the quality of the years. So all muscles in your body serve a all muscles in your body serve a all muscles in your body serve a function. You're training these muscles function. You're training these muscles function. You're training these muscles to get stronger and you're training to get stronger and you're training to get stronger and you're training these your balance and you're these your balance and you're these your balance and you're these are all skills that can be learned and are all skills that can be learned and are all skills that can be learned and improved. They're all trainable. If it's improved. They're all trainable. If it's improved. They're all trainable. If it's trainable, it's fixable. trainable, it's fixable. trainable, it's fixable. &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is Jeff Cavalier. Jeff Cavalier is today is Jeff Cavalier. Jeff Cavalier is today is Jeff Cavalier. Jeff Cavalier is a master of science in physical therapy a master of science in physical therapy a master of science in physical therapy and a certified strength and a certified strength and a certified strength and conditioning specialist. He is conditioning specialist. He is conditioning specialist. He is considered one of the world's foremost considered one of the world's foremost considered one of the world's foremost experts in training for both men and experts in training for both men and experts in training for both men and women to increase the strength and size women to increase the strength and size women to increase the strength and size of their muscles, their overall health of their muscles, their overall health of their muscles, their overall health and longevity. Today we discuss some of and longevity. Today we discuss some of and longevity. Today we discuss some of the things that are not often discussed the things that are not often discussed the things that are not often discussed and considered the small things but that and considered the small things but that and considered the small things but that are actually the big things because they are actually the big things because they are actually the big things because they allow you to do the big things for your allow you to do the big things for your allow you to do the big things for your health and fitness and longevity decade health and fitness and longevity decade health and fitness and longevity decade after decade after decade and to do so after decade after decade and to do so after decade after decade and to do so painfree and while making continual painfree and while making continual painfree and while making continual progress. We also discuss the typical progress. We also discuss the typical progress. We also discuss the typical big things, the specific multi- joint big things, the specific multi- joint big things, the specific multi- joint exercises and cardio workouts that exercises and cardio workouts that exercises and cardio workouts that create the greatest results. Today create the greatest results. Today create the greatest results. Today you'll learn some simple exercises that you'll learn some simple exercises that you'll learn some simple exercises that will strengthen and protect your back, will strengthen and protect your back, will strengthen and protect your back, your shoulders, even improve your foot your shoulders, even improve your foot your shoulders, even improve your foot strength, which most people don't think strength, which most people don't think strength, which most people don't think about, but turns out to be foundational about, but turns out to be foundational about, but turns out to be foundational for everything, your pressing and for everything, your pressing and for everything, your pressing and pulling movements, leg training, and pulling movements, leg training, and pulling movements, leg training, and your cardio. And that will allow you to your cardio. And that will allow you to your cardio. And that will allow you to live your daily life with vigor and ease live your daily life with vigor and ease live your daily life with vigor and ease at any age. I must say, I'm a longtime at any age. I must say, I'm a longtime at any age. I must say, I'm a longtime fan of Jeff's work, which he's been fan of Jeff's work, which he's been fan of Jeff's work, which he's been publishing to YouTube and elsewhere as publishing to YouTube and elsewhere as publishing to YouTube and elsewhere as Athleen X. As you'll soon realize from Athleen X. As you'll soon realize from Athleen X. As you'll soon realize from today's episode, Jeff is far more than today's episode, Jeff is far more than today's episode, Jeff is far more than just another fitness trainer. He has just another fitness trainer. He has just another fitness trainer. He has deep knowledge of human physiology and deep knowledge of human physiology and deep knowledge of human physiology and kinesiology and he really understands kinesiology and he really understands kinesiology and he really understands that everybody's situation and body is that everybody's situation and body is that everybody's situation and body is different and thus needs different tools different and thus needs different tools different and thus needs different tools to address and solve their specific to address and solve their specific to address and solve their specific problems and to achieve their desired problems and to achieve their desired problems and to achieve their desired results. I should also mention that Jeff results. I should also mention that Jeff results. I should also mention that Jeff and I went to the legendary Gold's Gym and I went to the legendary Gold's Gym and I went to the legendary Gold's Gym in Venice, California, where he took me in Venice, California, where he took me in Venice, California, where he took me through an arm workout, so biceps and through an arm workout, so biceps and through an arm workout, so biceps and triceps and forearms. and he showed me triceps and forearms. and he showed me triceps and forearms. and he showed me what has become his kind of signature what has become his kind of signature what has become his kind of signature move, which is face pulls, which are move, which is face pulls, which are move, which is face pulls, which are essential for improving your posture, essential for improving your posture, essential for improving your posture, for your rear delts, and for general for your rear delts, and for general for your rear delts, and for general stability of the shoulders. So, you can stability of the shoulders. So, you can stability of the shoulders. So, you can find a link to those workouts in the find a link to those workouts in the find a link to those workouts in the show note captions. Before we begin, I'd show note captions. Before we begin, I'd show note captions. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the science and science related tools to the science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for today's discussion sponsors. And now for today's discussion sponsors. And now for today's discussion with Jeff Cavalier. Jeff Cavalier, with Jeff Cavalier. Jeff Cavalier, with Jeff Cavalier. Jeff Cavalier, welcome back. welcome back. welcome back. &gt;&gt; Thank you for having me. This time &gt;&gt; Thank you for having me. This time &gt;&gt; Thank you for having me. This time actually nice to come out to California. actually nice to come out to California. actually nice to come out to California. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; A little workout in. &gt;&gt; A little workout in. &gt;&gt; A little workout in. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have a studio this time. Last &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have a studio this time. Last &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have a studio this time. Last time I think we were in a in a rented time I think we were in a in a rented time I think we were in a in a rented apartment in New York City. apartment in New York City. apartment in New York City. &gt;&gt; It worked. &gt;&gt; It worked. &gt;&gt; It worked. &gt;&gt; I said it then, I'll say it again. &gt;&gt; I said it then, I'll say it again. &gt;&gt; I said it then, I'll say it again. You're the man. I've been watching your You're the man. I've been watching your You're the man. I've been watching your videos and following your training videos and following your training videos and following your training advice for many years. I would say Mike advice for many years. I would say Mike advice for many years. I would say Mike Mener, Dorian Yates, and you. That's Mener, Dorian Yates, and you. That's Mener, Dorian Yates, and you. That's &gt;&gt; that's uh &gt;&gt; that's uh &gt;&gt; that's uh &gt;&gt; I've merged the principles and um &gt;&gt; I've merged the principles and um &gt;&gt; I've merged the principles and um &gt;&gt; very high humbling praise for me for &gt;&gt; very high humbling praise for me for &gt;&gt; very high humbling praise for me for sure. &gt;&gt; Well, you're 50. &gt;&gt; Well, you're 50. &gt;&gt; Well, you're 50. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Never touched gear. That's uh slang for &gt;&gt; Never touched gear. That's uh slang for &gt;&gt; Never touched gear. That's uh slang for steroids. You're not on TRT. You've steroids. You're not on TRT. You've steroids. You're not on TRT. You've never done it. never done it. never done it. &gt;&gt; And you look amazing. I know you're very &gt;&gt; And you look amazing. I know you're very &gt;&gt; And you look amazing. I know you're very disciplined with your diet, your disciplined with your diet, your disciplined with your diet, your training, but you know, you have a training, but you know, you have a training, but you know, you have a you're married. You have two kids. You you're married. You have two kids. You you're married. You have two kids. You you put in the work all over life. and you put in the work all over life. and you put in the work all over life. and you know you're a testament to what's you know you're a testament to what's you know you're a testament to what's possible if people do things right. So possible if people do things right. So possible if people do things right. So today I want to talk about a number of today I want to talk about a number of today I want to talk about a number of things but something that I believe is things but something that I believe is things but something that I believe is not discussed enough which you discuss a not discussed enough which you discuss a not discussed enough which you discuss a lot and it's just been transformative lot and it's just been transformative lot and it's just been transformative for me because I also happen to be 50 is for me because I also happen to be 50 is for me because I also happen to be 50 is we both know that the big things like we both know that the big things like we both know that the big things like doing the regular compound multi- joint doing the regular compound multi- joint doing the regular compound multi- joint lifts regularly that's all critical. We lifts regularly that's all critical. We lifts regularly that's all critical. We know the big stuff is critical and know the big stuff is critical and know the big stuff is critical and people talk about the big stuff all the people talk about the big stuff all the people talk about the big stuff all the time, but you talk about the small stuff time, but you talk about the small stuff time, but you talk about the small stuff that makes the big stuff possible for that makes the big stuff possible for that makes the big stuff possible for decade after decade. And I credit you decade after decade. And I credit you decade after decade. And I credit you for fixing my back pain. I credit you for fixing my back pain. I credit you for fixing my back pain. I credit you for the fact that I basically have no for the fact that I basically have no for the fact that I basically have no pain despite training very hard for, you pain despite training very hard for, you pain despite training very hard for, you know, more than three decades. So, let's know, more than three decades. So, let's know, more than three decades. So, let's talk about the small stuff, which is not talk about the small stuff, which is not talk about the small stuff, which is not actually the small stuff. These I think actually the small stuff. These I think actually the small stuff. These I think of it as the kind of hinges and of it as the kind of hinges and of it as the kind of hinges and uh bolts on the system that allow that uh bolts on the system that allow that uh bolts on the system that allow that system to work. So system to work. So system to work. So low back, shoulders, neck, these are the low back, shoulders, neck, these are the low back, shoulders, neck, these are the pieces that nobody wants to train, no pieces that nobody wants to train, no pieces that nobody wants to train, no one wants to think about, no one wants one wants to think about, no one wants one wants to think about, no one wants to talk about. So let's start right to talk about. So let's start right to talk about. So let's start right there. How can we keep our lower back there. How can we keep our lower back there. How can we keep our lower back strong and painfree strong and painfree strong and painfree while also doing things like deadlifts while also doing things like deadlifts while also doing things like deadlifts and squats, etc. I'm glad you're talking and squats, etc. I'm glad you're talking and squats, etc. I'm glad you're talking about all of this. Obviously, it's like about all of this. Obviously, it's like about all of this. Obviously, it's like uh it's such music to my ears. But I uh it's such music to my ears. But I uh it's such music to my ears. But I think the background of being a physical think the background of being a physical think the background of being a physical therapist is what set the stage for therapist is what set the stage for therapist is what set the stage for my focus on these things. Cuz when I was my focus on these things. Cuz when I was my focus on these things. Cuz when I was younger, prehysical therapy days, uh I younger, prehysical therapy days, uh I younger, prehysical therapy days, uh I did all the dumb stuff, too. And I did all the dumb stuff, too. And I did all the dumb stuff, too. And I did all the things, just the big things, and all the things, just the big things, and all the things, just the big things, and realized that it wasn't necessarily a realized that it wasn't necessarily a realized that it wasn't necessarily a path to longevity. But in the in the path to longevity. But in the in the path to longevity. But in the in the immediate and in my 20s, I was literally immediate and in my 20s, I was literally immediate and in my 20s, I was literally breaking down then. Like I had knee pain breaking down then. Like I had knee pain breaking down then. Like I had knee pain then. I had back pain then. I had then. I had back pain then. I had then. I had back pain then. I had shoulder pain then. So, I think people shoulder pain then. So, I think people shoulder pain then. So, I think people who are in their 20s these days have the who are in their 20s these days have the who are in their 20s these days have the luxury of having access to videos like luxury of having access to videos like luxury of having access to videos like this where they don't just say, "Oh, this where they don't just say, "Oh, this where they don't just say, "Oh, that's just um maybe a hard workout." that's just um maybe a hard workout." that's just um maybe a hard workout." Now, they start to say, "Well, maybe I'm Now, they start to say, "Well, maybe I'm Now, they start to say, "Well, maybe I'm actually doing some damage here, right? actually doing some damage here, right? actually doing some damage here, right? Maybe I do need to pay attention to the Maybe I do need to pay attention to the Maybe I do need to pay attention to the smaller things." And when you have smaller things." And when you have smaller things." And when you have enough videos out there that showcase enough videos out there that showcase enough videos out there that showcase these small things, for instance, you these small things, for instance, you these small things, for instance, you mentioned back pain. We talk about a mentioned back pain. We talk about a mentioned back pain. We talk about a major cause of back pain not being major cause of back pain not being major cause of back pain not being structural back pain, right? A lot of structural back pain, right? A lot of structural back pain, right? A lot of the times the back pain that we suffer the times the back pain that we suffer the times the back pain that we suffer from in our lives is not surgical. It from in our lives is not surgical. It from in our lives is not surgical. It doesn't need surgical treatment. It just doesn't need surgical treatment. It just doesn't need surgical treatment. It just needs the right addressing of the needs the right addressing of the needs the right addressing of the muscles that contribute to that or how muscles that contribute to that or how muscles that contribute to that or how we allow muscles to get tight that we allow muscles to get tight that we allow muscles to get tight that shouldn't get tight if we did full range shouldn't get tight if we did full range shouldn't get tight if we did full range of motion on certain exercises. Right? of motion on certain exercises. Right? of motion on certain exercises. Right? So in particular, I mentioned the So in particular, I mentioned the So in particular, I mentioned the glute medius, right? And the glute medius, right? And the glute medius, right? And the glute medius is a muscle that is going to medius is a muscle that is going to medius is a muscle that is going to control hip position, hip movement. So control hip position, hip movement. So control hip position, hip movement. So if it's controlling the position of our if it's controlling the position of our if it's controlling the position of our hips, that means it's controlling our hips, that means it's controlling our hips, that means it's controlling our pelvis. And if our pelvis is tilted or pelvis. And if our pelvis is tilted or pelvis. And if our pelvis is tilted or twisted or forward or backward, twisted or forward or backward, twisted or forward or backward, obviously the spine is literally obviously the spine is literally obviously the spine is literally adapting to the position of the pelvis adapting to the position of the pelvis adapting to the position of the pelvis beneath it because it's connected beneath it because it's connected beneath it because it's connected through the sacrum. So how is that not through the sacrum. So how is that not through the sacrum. So how is that not important? Right? So all these muscles important? Right? So all these muscles important? Right? So all these muscles that connect to the pelvis that change that connect to the pelvis that change that connect to the pelvis that change its position are inadvertently going to its position are inadvertently going to its position are inadvertently going to change the position of the low back change the position of the low back change the position of the low back directly the lumbar spine that is going directly the lumbar spine that is going directly the lumbar spine that is going to likely cause dysfunction down the to likely cause dysfunction down the to likely cause dysfunction down the road if you don't address that. So it is road if you don't address that. So it is road if you don't address that. So it is these little tiny muscles and these little tiny muscles and these little tiny muscles and these little tiny exercises. So, I made a little tiny exercises. So, I made a little tiny exercises. So, I made a video years ago about an exercise that video years ago about an exercise that video years ago about an exercise that you could do to help to loosen up if you could do to help to loosen up if you could do to help to loosen up if there was a knot in the glute there was a knot in the glute there was a knot in the glute medius, right? An area of spasm, a medius, right? An area of spasm, a medius, right? An area of spasm, a localized area of spasm. Because when localized area of spasm. Because when localized area of spasm. Because when the spasm's there, you adjust the way the spasm's there, you adjust the way the spasm's there, you adjust the way you move, right? You're in pain. So, you move, right? You're in pain. So, you move, right? You're in pain. So, you're trying to move around that spasm. you're trying to move around that spasm. you're trying to move around that spasm. Something as simple as a leg raise down Something as simple as a leg raise down Something as simple as a leg raise down and back while holding down that and back while holding down that and back while holding down that pressure point on the glute medius helps pressure point on the glute medius helps pressure point on the glute medius helps to alleviate some of that to alleviate some of that to alleviate some of that discomfort and in and that spasm to discomfort and in and that spasm to discomfort and in and that spasm to the point where you could restore normal the point where you could restore normal the point where you could restore normal motion again because you're not avoiding motion again because you're not avoiding motion again because you're not avoiding pain and all of a sudden the back pain and all of a sudden the back pain and all of a sudden the back pain goes away. There's nothing structurally goes away. There's nothing structurally goes away. There's nothing structurally there. Fine. That's a great video. It there. Fine. That's a great video. It there. Fine. That's a great video. It helped. I think 50 million people have helped. I think 50 million people have helped. I think 50 million people have seen it. We'll put a link to it. This is seen it. We'll put a link to it. This is seen it. We'll put a link to it. This is the one where people you should everyone the one where people you should everyone the one where people you should everyone you should watch the video. This you should watch the video. This you should watch the video. This literally erased my back pain. What I literally erased my back pain. What I literally erased my back pain. What I thought was going to require surgery. thought was going to require surgery. thought was going to require surgery. You lie on your side. You uh, you know, You lie on your side. You uh, you know, You lie on your side. You uh, you know, one leg, you know, is in front of the one leg, you know, is in front of the one leg, you know, is in front of the other, toe down on the ground, you put other, toe down on the ground, you put other, toe down on the ground, you put it up and back. Um, Jeff provides a it up and back. Um, Jeff provides a it up and back. Um, Jeff provides a beautiful description of what is beautiful description of what is beautiful description of what is essentially a very simple movement, but essentially a very simple movement, but essentially a very simple movement, but if you do it properly, the pain if you do it properly, the pain if you do it properly, the pain evaporates. It's wild. And I thought it evaporates. It's wild. And I thought it evaporates. It's wild. And I thought it was a back issue, but it was a glute was a back issue, but it was a glute was a back issue, but it was a glute medius issue. medius issue. medius issue. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And again, you feel you can you &gt;&gt; Yeah. And again, you feel you can you &gt;&gt; Yeah. And again, you feel you can you can feel referred pain anywhere. But but can feel referred pain anywhere. But but can feel referred pain anywhere. But but what happens next is great, you what happens next is great, you what happens next is great, you solve that area of spasm. Why do we get solve that area of spasm. Why do we get solve that area of spasm. Why do we get spasm? Oftent times it's because we're spasm? Oftent times it's because we're spasm? Oftent times it's because we're providing artificial stability to an providing artificial stability to an providing artificial stability to an area of weakness because spasm is area of weakness because spasm is area of weakness because spasm is basically the muscles holding on and basically the muscles holding on and basically the muscles holding on and saying, "I need to protect this area." saying, "I need to protect this area." saying, "I need to protect this area." And so if the muscles around the low And so if the muscles around the low And so if the muscles around the low back are protecting that area, there's a back are protecting that area, there's a back are protecting that area, there's a reason for it. It's probably because the reason for it. It's probably because the reason for it. It's probably because the muscles that are supposed to be stronger muscles that are supposed to be stronger muscles that are supposed to be stronger are not strong enough. So that doesn't are not strong enough. So that doesn't are not strong enough. So that doesn't mean that you do this one thing, you're mean that you do this one thing, you're mean that you do this one thing, you're done. Yes, you might have no back pain done. Yes, you might have no back pain done. Yes, you might have no back pain that day or you might have relieved that day or you might have relieved that day or you might have relieved that episode, but it means that there's an episode, but it means that there's an episode, but it means that there's an area of weakness that could benefit from area of weakness that could benefit from area of weakness that could benefit from strengthening it. So you come back and strengthening it. So you come back and strengthening it. So you come back and you start to do glute media you start to do glute media you start to do glute media strengthening. I demonstrate an strengthening. I demonstrate an strengthening. I demonstrate an exercise where you put yourself up exercise where you put yourself up exercise where you put yourself up against the wall, right? And you stand against the wall, right? And you stand against the wall, right? And you stand on the leg outside the wall, furthest on the leg outside the wall, furthest on the leg outside the wall, furthest away from the wall, and you let yourself away from the wall, and you let yourself away from the wall, and you let yourself drop. You just let your hips drop, drop. You just let your hips drop, drop. You just let your hips drop, right? They get lazy. When they drop right? They get lazy. When they drop right? They get lazy. When they drop like that, you're the only way you can like that, you're the only way you can like that, you're the only way you can get them level again is to slide get them level again is to slide get them level again is to slide yourself back towards the wall. And yourself back towards the wall. And yourself back towards the wall. And that's abduction of the hip that way to that's abduction of the hip that way to that's abduction of the hip that way to get you back to level again. That is the get you back to level again. That is the get you back to level again. That is the glute medius dysfunction to get you back glute medius dysfunction to get you back glute medius dysfunction to get you back to that level position. Well, to that level position. Well, to that level position. Well, ironically, every time you lift a foot ironically, every time you lift a foot ironically, every time you lift a foot off the ground to walk, you're getting a off the ground to walk, you're getting a off the ground to walk, you're getting a pelvis that drops side to side, right? pelvis that drops side to side, right? pelvis that drops side to side, right? Every time you go in single leg stance, Every time you go in single leg stance, Every time you go in single leg stance, the pelvis is going to drop a little the pelvis is going to drop a little the pelvis is going to drop a little bit. The people that have less control bit. The people that have less control bit. The people that have less control of that have more of what they call a of that have more of what they call a of that have more of what they call a trendelenberg gate where the pelvis trendelenberg gate where the pelvis trendelenberg gate where the pelvis rocks side to side as they walk. rocks side to side as they walk. rocks side to side as they walk. &gt;&gt; It's like if you were looking at them &gt;&gt; It's like if you were looking at them &gt;&gt; It's like if you were looking at them from the back, you know, uh pick your uh from the back, you know, uh pick your uh from the back, you know, uh pick your uh preferred opposite gender folks and then preferred opposite gender folks and then preferred opposite gender folks and then uh the butt swinging from side to side. uh the butt swinging from side to side. uh the butt swinging from side to side. &gt;&gt; Might look good on Instagram, but it's &gt;&gt; Might look good on Instagram, but it's &gt;&gt; Might look good on Instagram, but it's not going to it's not going to do good not going to it's not going to do good not going to it's not going to do good for your back, right? So, you go back for your back, right? So, you go back for your back, right? So, you go back and forth. Well, all that uncontrolled and forth. Well, all that uncontrolled and forth. Well, all that uncontrolled motion starts to wreak havoc and motion starts to wreak havoc and motion starts to wreak havoc and eventually those muscles start to say, I eventually those muscles start to say, I eventually those muscles start to say, I got I got to provide this artificial got I got to provide this artificial got I got to provide this artificial stability. So, what do I do? I spasm. stability. So, what do I do? I spasm. stability. So, what do I do? I spasm. And so if you don't extend the plan And so if you don't extend the plan And so if you don't extend the plan beyond the fix, how do you then build beyond the fix, how do you then build beyond the fix, how do you then build that strength up to prevent it from that strength up to prevent it from that strength up to prevent it from coming back? And so I'm all about not coming back? And so I'm all about not coming back? And so I'm all about not just the fixes, but really about the just the fixes, but really about the just the fixes, but really about the preventative things you can do to preventative things you can do to preventative things you can do to save this off long term. So we'll talk save this off long term. So we'll talk save this off long term. So we'll talk about the structure of a bas a really about the structure of a bas a really about the structure of a bas a really good basic program. And many people talk good basic program. And many people talk good basic program. And many people talk about that, you know, sets, reps, about that, you know, sets, reps, about that, you know, sets, reps, splits, etc. But let's just assume for a splits, etc. But let's just assume for a splits, etc. But let's just assume for a second that somebody listening to this second that somebody listening to this second that somebody listening to this is training their lower body twice a is training their lower body twice a is training their lower body twice a week. &gt;&gt; They're doing compound exercises and &gt;&gt; They're doing compound exercises and &gt;&gt; They're doing compound exercises and some isolation exercises, but they're some isolation exercises, but they're some isolation exercises, but they're dealing with some back pain or they're dealing with some back pain or they're dealing with some back pain or they're not like 20s, they're in their 20s or not like 20s, they're in their 20s or not like 20s, they're in their 20s or 30s or structurally they're blessed and 30s or structurally they're blessed and 30s or structurally they're blessed and they're not dealing with it. What are they're not dealing with it. What are they're not dealing with it. What are some additional things that we would some additional things that we would some additional things that we would call small things that make the big call small things that make the big call small things that make the big things possible for much longer and also things possible for much longer and also things possible for much longer and also make people stronger at the big things make people stronger at the big things make people stronger at the big things that people can do? Would you say uh that people can do? Would you say uh that people can do? Would you say uh back hyperextensions? Would you say back hyperextensions? Would you say back hyperextensions? Would you say watch your video on medial uh glute watch your video on medial uh glute watch your video on medial uh glute medius training? What would be the medius training? What would be the medius training? What would be the exercise to insert and how many times exercise to insert and how many times exercise to insert and how many times per week to do it and when? per week to do it and when? per week to do it and when? &gt;&gt; That's a good question. So yeah, reverse &gt;&gt; That's a good question. So yeah, reverse &gt;&gt; That's a good question. So yeah, reverse hypers are an amazing exercise. Um, I hypers are an amazing exercise. Um, I hypers are an amazing exercise. Um, I like doing them because they're very like doing them because they're very like doing them because they're very easy to do anywhere. You don't have to easy to do anywhere. You don't have to easy to do anywhere. You don't have to have resistance on them. They make a have resistance on them. They make a have resistance on them. They make a great machine that actually provides great machine that actually provides great machine that actually provides resistance. Straps over your legs that resistance. Straps over your legs that resistance. Straps over your legs that you can lift additional weight on. But you can lift additional weight on. But you can lift additional weight on. But the challenge for most people, remember, the challenge for most people, remember, the challenge for most people, remember, they're chronically weak in these areas. they're chronically weak in these areas. they're chronically weak in these areas. So, even just their body weight lifting So, even just their body weight lifting So, even just their body weight lifting of their own legs is going to be a of their own legs is going to be a of their own legs is going to be a significant enough challenge to get significant enough challenge to get significant enough challenge to get overload. But you can literally do it on overload. But you can literally do it on overload. But you can literally do it on like your bed in the morning. You can like your bed in the morning. You can like your bed in the morning. You can get up. You lay enough of your torso on get up. You lay enough of your torso on get up. You lay enough of your torso on top of the bed so that you're not top of the bed so that you're not top of the bed so that you're not falling off the bed, but you can just falling off the bed, but you can just falling off the bed, but you can just have your legs hanging off your bed and have your legs hanging off your bed and have your legs hanging off your bed and your body up on top of the bed and do a your body up on top of the bed and do a your body up on top of the bed and do a reverse hyper. reverse hyper. reverse hyper. &gt;&gt; So, raising the heels, &gt;&gt; So, raising the heels, &gt;&gt; So, raising the heels, &gt;&gt; raising the heels &gt;&gt; raising the heels &gt;&gt; raising the heels &gt;&gt; so that they're parallel with the floor &gt;&gt; so that they're parallel with the floor &gt;&gt; so that they're parallel with the floor &gt;&gt; as level as you can get them. You know, &gt;&gt; as level as you can get them. You know, &gt;&gt; as level as you can get them. You know, again, the bed's a little a little soft. again, the bed's a little a little soft. again, the bed's a little a little soft. So, sometimes you kind of dip down as So, sometimes you kind of dip down as So, sometimes you kind of dip down as you're lifting your legs up, but it's you're lifting your legs up, but it's you're lifting your legs up, but it's sturdy enough that you can get it's sturdy enough that you can get it's sturdy enough that you can get to almost a parallel position to the to almost a parallel position to the to almost a parallel position to the floor. I like to make sure we'll talk floor. I like to make sure we'll talk floor. I like to make sure we'll talk about this, but like you're moving the about this, but like you're moving the about this, but like you're moving the muscles are doing the work and not muscles are doing the work and not muscles are doing the work and not momentum, right? So, you want to hold momentum, right? So, you want to hold momentum, right? So, you want to hold that contraction briefly at the top to that contraction briefly at the top to that contraction briefly at the top to convince yourself that you actually were convince yourself that you actually were convince yourself that you actually were able to perform the movement. So, you able to perform the movement. So, you able to perform the movement. So, you get up, hold it for a second. And I get up, hold it for a second. And I get up, hold it for a second. And I think what's important on that, too, is think what's important on that, too, is think what's important on that, too, is people who don't have the strength in people who don't have the strength in people who don't have the strength in their glutes, cuz it really is a glute their glutes, cuz it really is a glute their glutes, cuz it really is a glute weakness issue, not necessarily a low weakness issue, not necessarily a low weakness issue, not necessarily a low back issue. it. A lot of times it's back issue. it. A lot of times it's back issue. it. A lot of times it's weakness in the glutes that's weakness in the glutes that's weakness in the glutes that's transferring the load to the low back transferring the load to the low back transferring the load to the low back that can't handle it. And people get the that can't handle it. And people get the that can't handle it. And people get the symptoms in the back, but it's the symptoms in the back, but it's the symptoms in the back, but it's the weakness somewhere else that's causing weakness somewhere else that's causing weakness somewhere else that's causing that. So, I like to focus first and that. So, I like to focus first and that. So, I like to focus first and foremost on the glutes, glute max, glute foremost on the glutes, glute max, glute foremost on the glutes, glute max, glute me, is to make sure that they're strong me, is to make sure that they're strong me, is to make sure that they're strong enough. And again, if you test even big- enough. And again, if you test even big- enough. And again, if you test even big- time athletes, we would test their time athletes, we would test their time athletes, we would test their rotational strength of their hips. Some rotational strength of their hips. Some rotational strength of their hips. Some of the strongest athletes, some of the of the strongest athletes, some of the of the strongest athletes, some of the biggest squatters, some of the best biggest squatters, some of the best biggest squatters, some of the best lungers, right? They're lunging over 200 lungers, right? They're lunging over 200 lungers, right? They're lunging over 200 pounds. they you put them in position, pounds. they you put them in position, pounds. they you put them in position, you try to bend their uh their hip you try to bend their uh their hip you try to bend their uh their hip into internal or external rotation of into internal or external rotation of into internal or external rotation of their of their bent knee, they can't their of their bent knee, they can't their of their bent knee, they can't resist it at all. So they it just goes resist it at all. So they it just goes resist it at all. So they it just goes to show you that all the squatting, all to show you that all the squatting, all to show you that all the squatting, all the big lifts aren't enough to the big lifts aren't enough to the big lifts aren't enough to counteract the smaller muscles, right? counteract the smaller muscles, right? counteract the smaller muscles, right? There are different functions. A There are different functions. A There are different functions. A rotational muscle of the hip is not a rotational muscle of the hip is not a rotational muscle of the hip is not a sagittal plane muscle of the hip. It has sagittal plane muscle of the hip. It has sagittal plane muscle of the hip. It has a different function. So they all have a different function. So they all have a different function. So they all have to be strengthened. So along that along to be strengthened. So along that along to be strengthened. So along that along that line, we will do the that line, we will do the that line, we will do the reverse hyper as a good sagittal plane reverse hyper as a good sagittal plane reverse hyper as a good sagittal plane exercise focusing on the glute. When exercise focusing on the glute. When exercise focusing on the glute. When they get to the top and I tell you to they get to the top and I tell you to they get to the top and I tell you to contract it, squeeze so you know that's contract it, squeeze so you know that's contract it, squeeze so you know that's the glute that's squeezing and doing the glute that's squeezing and doing the glute that's squeezing and doing the work, not that you're arching at the low work, not that you're arching at the low work, not that you're arching at the low back, that you're using the muscles that back, that you're using the muscles that back, that you're using the muscles that are already overworked in the first are already overworked in the first are already overworked in the first place. So get that up there. Squeeze. place. So get that up there. Squeeze. place. So get that up there. Squeeze. Reinforce that it's the glute that did Reinforce that it's the glute that did Reinforce that it's the glute that did the work. Great exercise. The glute the work. Great exercise. The glute the work. Great exercise. The glute medius, like I said, the hip bump. Super medius, like I said, the hip bump. Super medius, like I said, the hip bump. Super easy exercise. You could do it anywhere easy exercise. You could do it anywhere easy exercise. You could do it anywhere against the wall. You can do anywhere against the wall. You can do anywhere against the wall. You can do anywhere against the wall. Any anything you can against the wall. Any anything you can against the wall. Any anything you can do &gt;&gt; like a butt bump. You you basically &gt;&gt; like a butt bump. You you basically &gt;&gt; like a butt bump. You you basically raise the leg that's closer to the wall raise the leg that's closer to the wall raise the leg that's closer to the wall like 90° outer one you're standing. It's like 90° outer one you're standing. It's like 90° outer one you're standing. It's almost like you're trying to slide that almost like you're trying to slide that almost like you're trying to slide that hip that's along the that's closer to hip that's along the that's closer to hip that's along the that's closer to the wall up the wall. So it's like Yeah. the wall up the wall. So it's like Yeah. the wall up the wall. So it's like Yeah. It's like a kind of like side booty bump It's like a kind of like side booty bump It's like a kind of like side booty bump to the wall but sliding it up. And and to the wall but sliding it up. And and to the wall but sliding it up. And and this is sometimes where you have to this is sometimes where you have to this is sometimes where you have to invest and this is the small things but invest and this is the small things but invest and this is the small things but you know they're also small investments. you know they're also small investments. you know they're also small investments. &gt;&gt; A little mini hip band. You know the &gt;&gt; A little mini hip band. You know the &gt;&gt; A little mini hip band. You know the little elastic bands. They're just little elastic bands. They're just little elastic bands. They're just loops. The little fit loop they're loops. The little fit loop they're loops. The little fit loop they're called. Put it around your heels. called. Put it around your heels. called. Put it around your heels. &gt;&gt; Lay on your belly. Bend your knees to &gt;&gt; Lay on your belly. Bend your knees to &gt;&gt; Lay on your belly. Bend your knees to 90°. &gt;&gt; And then just try to open your feet &gt;&gt; And then just try to open your feet &gt;&gt; And then just try to open your feet apart, &gt;&gt; right? Spread your feet apart. So now &gt;&gt; right? Spread your feet apart. So now &gt;&gt; right? Spread your feet apart. So now you're strengthening rotation of the you're strengthening rotation of the you're strengthening rotation of the hip. Or hold one steady. Let one leg, hip. Or hold one steady. Let one leg, hip. Or hold one steady. Let one leg, it's a little hard to show here, but let it's a little hard to show here, but let it's a little hard to show here, but let one leg come a little bit in front of one leg come a little bit in front of one leg come a little bit in front of the other and then try to cross it over the other and then try to cross it over the other and then try to cross it over the other one. So now you're getting the other one. So now you're getting the other one. So now you're getting external rotation of that hip. So you're external rotation of that hip. So you're external rotation of that hip. So you're working external rotation against working external rotation against working external rotation against resistance, internal rotation against resistance, internal rotation against resistance, internal rotation against resistance. &gt;&gt; Super easy things to do. You can you can &gt;&gt; Super easy things to do. You can you can &gt;&gt; Super easy things to do. You can you can attach a band around your around your attach a band around your around your attach a band around your around your ankle and then you can do lateral hip ankle and then you can do lateral hip ankle and then you can do lateral hip swings but with a component of rotating swings but with a component of rotating swings but with a component of rotating against the resistance of the band too. against the resistance of the band too. against the resistance of the band too. So I'm moving my leg out and rotating So I'm moving my leg out and rotating So I'm moving my leg out and rotating out at the same time. How do you do out at the same time. How do you do out at the same time. How do you do that? Just focus on your toe. If your that? Just focus on your toe. If your that? Just focus on your toe. If your toe is turning out, your hip is turning toe is turning out, your hip is turning toe is turning out, your hip is turning out. If your toe is turning in and your out. If your toe is turning in and your out. If your toe is turning in and your hip is turning in. So you don't have to hip is turning in. So you don't have to hip is turning in. So you don't have to focus so much on how do I move that. focus so much on how do I move that. focus so much on how do I move that. Just focus on what the foot is doing and Just focus on what the foot is doing and Just focus on what the foot is doing and you're turning. As long as the knee is you're turning. As long as the knee is you're turning. As long as the knee is going with the foot, right? You're not going with the foot, right? You're not going with the foot, right? You're not just spinning the foot. the knee and the just spinning the foot. the knee and the just spinning the foot. the knee and the foot go together. So, there's foot go together. So, there's foot go together. So, there's simple things and again, you might need simple things and again, you might need simple things and again, you might need a band or a mini band or something to a band or a mini band or something to a band or a mini band or something to get these smaller muscles more get these smaller muscles more get these smaller muscles more specifically, but it's $10, $15 for a specifically, but it's $10, $15 for a specifically, but it's $10, $15 for a band. It's well worth the investment if band. It's well worth the investment if band. It's well worth the investment if you can get rid of these long-term you can get rid of these long-term you can get rid of these long-term recurrent issues that keep come, you recurrent issues that keep come, you recurrent issues that keep come, you know, back and causing agony every know, back and causing agony every know, back and causing agony every 2, three months as a reminder of what 2, three months as a reminder of what 2, three months as a reminder of what you're not doing. you're not doing. you're not doing. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, has 20 grams of protein, only 150 has 20 grams of protein, only 150 has 20 grams of protein, only 150 calories, and zero grams of sugar. I calories, and zero grams of sugar. I calories, and zero grams of sugar. I have to say, these are the best tasting have to say, these are the best tasting have to say, these are the best tasting protein bars I've ever had, and I've protein bars I've ever had, and I've protein bars I've ever had, and I've tried a lot of protein bars over the tried a lot of protein bars over the tried a lot of protein bars over the years. These new David bars have a years. These new David bars have a years. These new David bars have a marshmallow base and they're covered in marshmallow base and they're covered in marshmallow base and they're covered in chocolate coating and they're absolutely chocolate coating and they're absolutely chocolate coating and they're absolutely incredible. I of course eat regular incredible. I of course eat regular incredible. I of course eat regular whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I also make it a point to eat one or two also make it a point to eat one or two also make it a point to eat one or two David bars per day as a snack, which David bars per day as a snack, which David bars per day as a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goal of makes it easy to hit my protein goal of makes it easy to hit my protein goal of 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight. And that allows me to take in weight. And that allows me to take in weight. And that allows me to take in the protein I need without consuming the protein I need without consuming the protein I need without consuming excess calories. I love all the David excess calories. I love all the David excess calories. I love all the David Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie dough, caramel chocolate, double dough, caramel chocolate, double dough, caramel chocolate, double chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They all actually taste like candy bars. all actually taste like candy bars. all actually taste like candy bars. Again, they're amazing. But again, they Again, they're amazing. But again, they Again, they're amazing. But again, they have no sugar and they have 20 grams of have no sugar and they have 20 grams of have no sugar and they have 20 grams of protein with just 150 calories. If you'd protein with just 150 calories. If you'd protein with just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to like to try David, you can go to like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to davidproin.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Our Place. Our Place makes my favorite Our Place. Our Place makes my favorite Our Place. Our Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. pots, pans, and other cookware. pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are still PASES or forever chemicals are still PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well found in 80% of non-stick pans as well found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've other kitchen products. As I've discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these discussed before on this podcast, these PASES are forever chemicals like Teflon PASES are forever chemicals like Teflon PASES are forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's and many other health problems. So, it's very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is very important to avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of our place. Our why I'm a huge fan of our place. Our why I'm a huge fan of our place. Our Place products are made with the highest Place products are made with the highest Place products are made with the highest quality materials and are all PAS and quality materials and are all PAS and quality materials and are all PAS and toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their toxin-free. I particularly love their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. That means it has no harmful titanium. That means it has no harmful titanium. That means it has no harmful forever chemicals, and it does not forever chemicals, and it does not forever chemicals, and it does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect degrade or lose its non-stick effect degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. I cook my eggs in my titanium over time. I cook my eggs in my titanium over time. I cook my eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook design allows for the eggs to cook design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. perfectly without sticking to the pan. perfectly without sticking to the pan. Right now, HourPlace is having their Right now, HourPlace is having their Right now, HourPlace is having their biggest sale of the season. You can save biggest sale of the season. You can save biggest sale of the season. You can save up to 40% sitewide now through April up to 40% sitewide now through April up to 40% sitewide now through April 12th. Just head to 12th. Just head to 12th. Just head to fromourplace.com/huberman. Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman to save up to 40%. Once I realized that to save up to 40%. Once I realized that to save up to 40%. Once I realized that the glute medius was causing for me back the glute medius was causing for me back the glute medius was causing for me back spasm issues that were severe enough spasm issues that were severe enough spasm issues that were severe enough that it was immobilizing, that it was immobilizing, that it was immobilizing, but then it was resolved by the but then it was resolved by the but then it was resolved by the information you provide in your videos. information you provide in your videos. information you provide in your videos. I started doing the um the hip slide up I started doing the um the hip slide up I started doing the um the hip slide up the wall movement. I still do that. the wall movement. I still do that. the wall movement. I still do that. the reverse hyper and then the one that you reverse hyper and then the one that you reverse hyper and then the one that you put in a video and again we'll put links put in a video and again we'll put links put in a video and again we'll put links to these that I found uh a little bit to these that I found uh a little bit to these that I found uh a little bit more uh of a setup more uh of a setup more uh of a setup but seems really useful is where you but seems really useful is where you but seems really useful is where you take some sort of rope or dog leash take some sort of rope or dog leash take some sort of rope or dog leash &gt;&gt; and you put it around your waist and &gt;&gt; and you put it around your waist and &gt;&gt; and you put it around your waist and then you actually have a weight between then you actually have a weight between then you actually have a weight between your legs hanging a couple inches your legs hanging a couple inches your legs hanging a couple inches off the floor and then the goal is to off the floor and then the goal is to off the floor and then the goal is to walk and it makes you kind of have to walk and it makes you kind of have to walk and it makes you kind of have to kind of monster walk or kind of monster walk or kind of monster walk or &gt;&gt; and the idea is to not let the weight &gt;&gt; and the idea is to not let the weight &gt;&gt; and the idea is to not let the weight swing and hit your feet. Now, I swing and hit your feet. Now, I swing and hit your feet. Now, I know that sounds really awkward, but it know that sounds really awkward, but it know that sounds really awkward, but it really works and I know it works uh for really works and I know it works uh for really works and I know it works uh for a number of reasons. And by the way, all a number of reasons. And by the way, all a number of reasons. And by the way, all this strengthened other lifts for me this strengthened other lifts for me this strengthened other lifts for me dramatically. I was kind of at a dramatically. I was kind of at a dramatically. I was kind of at a sticking point with a number of lower sticking point with a number of lower sticking point with a number of lower body lifts and upper body lifts. And it body lifts and upper body lifts. And it body lifts and upper body lifts. And it really seems like it helped create a really seems like it helped create a really seems like it helped create a real stability in the lower back glute real stability in the lower back glute real stability in the lower back glute area. &gt;&gt; What is that dog leash thing doing? Uh &gt;&gt; What is that dog leash thing doing? Uh &gt;&gt; What is that dog leash thing doing? Uh it's very simple, right? Just tie a it's very simple, right? Just tie a it's very simple, right? Just tie a weight between your legs and then you're weight between your legs and then you're weight between your legs and then you're trying to walk but not let it swing. trying to walk but not let it swing. trying to walk but not let it swing. what why does that work? what why does that work? what why does that work? &gt;&gt; Anytime you can take these smaller &gt;&gt; Anytime you can take these smaller &gt;&gt; Anytime you can take these smaller exercises and bring them a little closer exercises and bring them a little closer exercises and bring them a little closer to actual function, I think it's better to actual function, I think it's better to actual function, I think it's better is better carryover. So, if you're is better carryover. So, if you're is better carryover. So, if you're talking about actually being on your talking about actually being on your talking about actually being on your feet and walking, that's a step towards feet and walking, that's a step towards feet and walking, that's a step towards function. That's that's you're going to function. That's that's you're going to function. That's that's you're going to be more useful, I think. Um, but what be more useful, I think. Um, but what be more useful, I think. Um, but what you're doing is, as I mentioned before, you're doing is, as I mentioned before, you're doing is, as I mentioned before, every time you pick up a foot off the every time you pick up a foot off the every time you pick up a foot off the ground, you're in single leg stance. So, ground, you're in single leg stance. So, ground, you're in single leg stance. So, when you're in single leg stance, if when you're in single leg stance, if when you're in single leg stance, if you're not contracting the glute medius you're not contracting the glute medius you're not contracting the glute medius on the side that you're standing on, on the side that you're standing on, on the side that you're standing on, your pelvis is going to drop. You drop your pelvis is going to drop. You drop your pelvis is going to drop. You drop in the side because you're not in the side because you're not in the side because you're not balanced anymore. You're going to drop balanced anymore. You're going to drop balanced anymore. You're going to drop towards the up leg. You may not drop if towards the up leg. You may not drop if towards the up leg. You may not drop if you're consciously trying to stay level you're consciously trying to stay level you're consciously trying to stay level because you're firing the glute medius. because you're firing the glute medius. because you're firing the glute medius. But for someone that has a weak glute, But for someone that has a weak glute, But for someone that has a weak glute, you just have them stand on that one leg you just have them stand on that one leg you just have them stand on that one leg and you're going to see that pelvis and you're going to see that pelvis and you're going to see that pelvis drop. So, when you're doing this test drop. So, when you're doing this test drop. So, when you're doing this test and you're adding the weight to the and you're adding the weight to the and you're adding the weight to the equation here, the weight is really to equation here, the weight is really to equation here, the weight is really to create a pendulum effect, right? Because create a pendulum effect, right? Because create a pendulum effect, right? Because when you start to move anything, that when you start to move anything, that when you start to move anything, that weight's going to want to go in an weight's going to want to go in an weight's going to want to go in an exaggerated way. So, what we're exaggerated way. So, what we're exaggerated way. So, what we're trying to reinforce is, okay, can you do trying to reinforce is, okay, can you do trying to reinforce is, okay, can you do this and take these slow steps in these this and take these slow steps in these this and take these slow steps in these single alternating single leg stance and single alternating single leg stance and single alternating single leg stance and prevent that weight from shifting prevent that weight from shifting prevent that weight from shifting so much, i.e. because you're dropping so much, i.e. because you're dropping so much, i.e. because you're dropping too much that it would hit or bang into too much that it would hit or bang into too much that it would hit or bang into the other leg. So, you have to be able the other leg. So, you have to be able the other leg. So, you have to be able to walk slowly through a single leg to walk slowly through a single leg to walk slowly through a single leg stance and not allow enough of a drop by stance and not allow enough of a drop by stance and not allow enough of a drop by having good contraction and control of having good contraction and control of having good contraction and control of the glute medius so that it would the glute medius so that it would the glute medius so that it would minimize the weight itself. It minimize the weight itself. It minimize the weight itself. It would quiet the motion of the weight would quiet the motion of the weight would quiet the motion of the weight itself. So, you're reinforcing how hard itself. So, you're reinforcing how hard itself. So, you're reinforcing how hard can I keep this thing engaged as I walk. can I keep this thing engaged as I walk. can I keep this thing engaged as I walk. And you know, if you could do this, the And you know, if you could do this, the And you know, if you could do this, the faster you could move yourself and still faster you could move yourself and still faster you could move yourself and still have minimal displacement of the weight have minimal displacement of the weight have minimal displacement of the weight would be a good indicator that, wow, would be a good indicator that, wow, would be a good indicator that, wow, you're really starting to get good you're really starting to get good you're really starting to get good control and strength in those in that control and strength in those in that control and strength in those in that glute medius. Another thing I like to do glute medius. Another thing I like to do glute medius. Another thing I like to do is um we call a suitcase lunge, right? is um we call a suitcase lunge, right? is um we call a suitcase lunge, right? So, you do a lunge where you offset So, you do a lunge where you offset So, you do a lunge where you offset the weight on one side. So, you carry it the weight on one side. So, you carry it the weight on one side. So, you carry it in the if I'm going to lunge forward, I in the if I'm going to lunge forward, I in the if I'm going to lunge forward, I put it on the opposite leg, right? Hold put it on the opposite leg, right? Hold put it on the opposite leg, right? Hold on the opposite side. What that's going on the opposite side. What that's going on the opposite side. What that's going to theoretically do is obviously when I to theoretically do is obviously when I to theoretically do is obviously when I lunge forward, I'm going to want to fall lunge forward, I'm going to want to fall lunge forward, I'm going to want to fall to the side of the weight. Picture to the side of the weight. Picture to the side of the weight. Picture having even like a 50 lb weight or a 60 having even like a 50 lb weight or a 60 having even like a 50 lb weight or a 60 lb weight in your hand. It's going to lb weight in your hand. It's going to lb weight in your hand. It's going to want to go that direction. In this lunge want to go that direction. In this lunge want to go that direction. In this lunge position, if I can straighten my self position, if I can straighten my self position, if I can straighten my self out and keep my torso rigidly in place out and keep my torso rigidly in place out and keep my torso rigidly in place the whole time, then I can really the whole time, then I can really the whole time, then I can really strengthen that glute medius on the strengthen that glute medius on the strengthen that glute medius on the opposite side. And what's cool about opposite side. And what's cool about opposite side. And what's cool about that is it's also done on a in that is it's also done on a in that is it's also done on a in conjunction with a sagittal plane lunge. conjunction with a sagittal plane lunge. conjunction with a sagittal plane lunge. So now I'm starting to plane in train in So now I'm starting to plane in train in So now I'm starting to plane in train in multiple dimensions and planes at one multiple dimensions and planes at one multiple dimensions and planes at one time. So a lunge in this direction time. So a lunge in this direction time. So a lunge in this direction suitcase carry offset only one dumbbell suitcase carry offset only one dumbbell suitcase carry offset only one dumbbell not in the other side. Obviously you're not in the other side. Obviously you're not in the other side. Obviously you're going to get that desire for the body to going to get that desire for the body to going to get that desire for the body to fall towards the side of the offset fall towards the side of the offset fall towards the side of the offset weight. And again that starts to shift weight. And again that starts to shift weight. And again that starts to shift the pelvis up. The only thing will keep the pelvis up. The only thing will keep the pelvis up. The only thing will keep it down is by keeping the hip in it down is by keeping the hip in it down is by keeping the hip in abducted and level. And that pelvis abducted and level. And that pelvis abducted and level. And that pelvis stays level. So we'll do that with a lot stays level. So we'll do that with a lot stays level. So we'll do that with a lot of our athletes and work up to some of our athletes and work up to some of our athletes and work up to some pretty heavy weights there too. And pretty heavy weights there too. And pretty heavy weights there too. And again, it is a kill two birds with one again, it is a kill two birds with one again, it is a kill two birds with one stone type exercise because you still stone type exercise because you still stone type exercise because you still get the benefits of the lunge, which I get the benefits of the lunge, which I get the benefits of the lunge, which I love as an exercise. love as an exercise. love as an exercise. &gt;&gt; So, let's say somebody is going to do &gt;&gt; So, let's say somebody is going to do &gt;&gt; So, let's say somebody is going to do some hip slide up the wall or andor some hip slide up the wall or andor some hip slide up the wall or andor reverse hypers if they're lucky enough reverse hypers if they're lucky enough reverse hypers if they're lucky enough to have a gym with a reverse hyper to have a gym with a reverse hyper to have a gym with a reverse hyper machine or even a just a high bench machine or even a just a high bench machine or even a just a high bench or hyperextension machine, right? or hyperextension machine, right? or hyperextension machine, right? Classic hyperextensions. Classic hyperextensions. Classic hyperextensions. &gt;&gt; You just go face inward the upper body &gt;&gt; You just go face inward the upper body &gt;&gt; You just go face inward the upper body moves and um for classic hyper uh heels, moves and um for classic hyper uh heels, moves and um for classic hyper uh heels, &gt;&gt; which I like too, by the way. That's &gt;&gt; which I like too, by the way. That's &gt;&gt; which I like too, by the way. That's more direct low back strengthening more direct low back strengthening more direct low back strengthening &gt;&gt; which is always good like we can always &gt;&gt; which is always good like we can always &gt;&gt; which is always good like we can always strengthen our low backs that those strengthen our low backs that those strengthen our low backs that those muscles need to be strengthened but muscles need to be strengthened but muscles need to be strengthened but again I would say more often the time again I would say more often the time again I would say more often the time times the source of the low back pain is times the source of the low back pain is times the source of the low back pain is coming from the muscles but beneath them coming from the muscles but beneath them coming from the muscles but beneath them that are weak chronically weak like the that are weak chronically weak like the that are weak chronically weak like the glutes. Okay. So, reverse hypers, the glutes. Okay. So, reverse hypers, the glutes. Okay. So, reverse hypers, the hip sliding up the wall approach, maybe hip sliding up the wall approach, maybe hip sliding up the wall approach, maybe the dog leash uh with weight between um the dog leash uh with weight between um the dog leash uh with weight between um legs. Doesn't have to be a dog leash, legs. Doesn't have to be a dog leash, legs. Doesn't have to be a dog leash, folks, but you get the idea. To try and folks, but you get the idea. To try and folks, but you get the idea. To try and minimize the hip sway. minimize the hip sway. minimize the hip sway. &gt;&gt; Should those be done at the end of a &gt;&gt; Should those be done at the end of a &gt;&gt; Should those be done at the end of a lower body workout when the lower back lower body workout when the lower back lower body workout when the lower back and glutes are partially fatigued or and glutes are partially fatigued or and glutes are partially fatigued or very fatigued or done separately at a very fatigued or done separately at a very fatigued or done separately at a time when they're really fresh? time when they're really fresh? time when they're really fresh? &gt;&gt; Two times. I think I think you could do &gt;&gt; Two times. I think I think you could do &gt;&gt; Two times. I think I think you could do them on a dedicated day at a dedicated them on a dedicated day at a dedicated them on a dedicated day at a dedicated time. So I approach my ab training as time. So I approach my ab training as time. So I approach my ab training as ab training and I always keep it ab training and I always keep it ab training and I always keep it separate. I just like to focus on I'm separate. I just like to focus on I'm separate. I just like to focus on I'm going to do 5 to 10 minutes of core going to do 5 to 10 minutes of core going to do 5 to 10 minutes of core strengthening right now here and now strengthening right now here and now strengthening right now here and now separate from my workout because I don't separate from my workout because I don't separate from my workout because I don't want it to be an afterthought. I think want it to be an afterthought. I think want it to be an afterthought. I think it should be it's a it's a key component it should be it's a it's a key component it should be it's a it's a key component of what I do to keep a strong core. So I of what I do to keep a strong core. So I of what I do to keep a strong core. So I want to focus it and I don't want to add want to focus it and I don't want to add want to focus it and I don't want to add it to the end of my workout when I'm it to the end of my workout when I'm it to the end of my workout when I'm already mentally checked out. Right? So already mentally checked out. Right? So already mentally checked out. Right? So I do that. I think when you start to I do that. I think when you start to I do that. I think when you start to have these issues that require special have these issues that require special have these issues that require special programming, right, then you should own programming, right, then you should own programming, right, then you should own that special programming because it's that special programming because it's that special programming because it's yours. It's what you need specifically. yours. It's what you need specifically. yours. It's what you need specifically. Others might need things for their Others might need things for their Others might need things for their shoulders or for the rotator cuff, but shoulders or for the rotator cuff, but shoulders or for the rotator cuff, but like whatever special programming is, do like whatever special programming is, do like whatever special programming is, do it as a small routine on its own day at it as a small routine on its own day at it as a small routine on its own day at its own time or even it could be on a its own time or even it could be on a its own time or even it could be on a workout day, but a separate time that workout day, but a separate time that workout day, but a separate time that you just go through as a routine. 5 you just go through as a routine. 5 you just go through as a routine. 5 minutes to 7 minutes three times a week minutes to 7 minutes three times a week minutes to 7 minutes three times a week or so. That's it. If you want to put it or so. That's it. If you want to put it or so. That's it. If you want to put it on a training day, it's actually not a on a training day, it's actually not a on a training day, it's actually not a bad idea to put these smaller muscle bad idea to put these smaller muscle bad idea to put these smaller muscle exercises or smaller focused exercises or smaller focused exercises or smaller focused exercises after your bigger training cuz a you're after your bigger training cuz a you're after your bigger training cuz a you're not going to compromise your big not going to compromise your big not going to compromise your big training and the goals that you have for training and the goals that you have for training and the goals that you have for that, but you also are pre- for that, but you also are pre- for that, but you also are pre- fatiguing some of those bigger muscles fatiguing some of those bigger muscles fatiguing some of those bigger muscles that are going to want to dominate these that are going to want to dominate these that are going to want to dominate these small movements anyway. The small movements anyway. The small movements anyway. The compensations that you're going to see compensations that you're going to see compensations that you're going to see on these small movements are always on these small movements are always on these small movements are always going to be the big muscles trying to going to be the big muscles trying to going to be the big muscles trying to kick in and do what they've always done, kick in and do what they've always done, kick in and do what they've always done, which is take over. And you're trying to which is take over. And you're trying to which is take over. And you're trying to get them to not. So, if you can pre- get them to not. So, if you can pre- get them to not. So, if you can pre- fatigue them a little bit prior to doing fatigue them a little bit prior to doing fatigue them a little bit prior to doing these small exercises, you're actually these small exercises, you're actually these small exercises, you're actually setting the smaller muscles up for more setting the smaller muscles up for more setting the smaller muscles up for more success. &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I could travel back to my teens &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I could travel back to my teens &gt;&gt; Yeah. If I could travel back to my teens and I started lifting when I was 16 and I started lifting when I was 16 and I started lifting when I was 16 and 20s and 30s, I would have started doing 20s and 30s, I would have started doing 20s and 30s, I would have started doing all of these things a couple times a all of these things a couple times a all of these things a couple times a week or even just once a week even week or even just once a week even week or even just once a week even before there were there was any pain before there were there was any pain before there were there was any pain because I had the same I don't know if because I had the same I don't know if because I had the same I don't know if it's arrogance or just ignorance that oh it's arrogance or just ignorance that oh it's arrogance or just ignorance that oh you know pain like that's what old guys you know pain like that's what old guys you know pain like that's what old guys talk about like I have no pain I feel talk about like I have no pain I feel talk about like I have no pain I feel fine like you know but I think by fine like you know but I think by fine like you know but I think by training a certain way without pain for training a certain way without pain for training a certain way without pain for a very long time it's almost like the a very long time it's almost like the a very long time it's almost like the spring is getting compressed ressed spring is getting compressed ressed spring is getting compressed ressed because it means that unless someone has because it means that unless someone has because it means that unless someone has perfect mechanics and they're covering perfect mechanics and they're covering perfect mechanics and they're covering all their bases through other sports and all their bases through other sports and all their bases through other sports and things of that sort, it's almost and things of that sort, it's almost and things of that sort, it's almost like the stronger you like the stronger you like the stronger you get, you're just setting yourself up for get, you're just setting yourself up for get, you're just setting yourself up for one of these things to go. And in my one of these things to go. And in my one of these things to go. And in my case, it was this lower back thing. And case, it was this lower back thing. And case, it was this lower back thing. And for some people, it's their shoulder. for some people, it's their shoulder. for some people, it's their shoulder. When you're young, those things that When you're young, those things that When you're young, those things that appear as post-workout soreness, that appear as post-workout soreness, that appear as post-workout soreness, even can be masquerading for long-term even can be masquerading for long-term even can be masquerading for long-term pain problems and dysfunction down the pain problems and dysfunction down the pain problems and dysfunction down the road, right? cuz you're again when we're road, right? cuz you're again when we're road, right? cuz you're again when we're young we just feel hey I'm sore I had a young we just feel hey I'm sore I had a young we just feel hey I'm sore I had a hard workout yesterday I'm a little hard workout yesterday I'm a little hard workout yesterday I'm a little stiff again we get through it we manage stiff again we get through it we manage stiff again we get through it we manage it it's not that uh interruptive of our it it's not that uh interruptive of our it it's not that uh interruptive of our life at that point so we move on but I life at that point so we move on but I life at that point so we move on but I believe that those are believe that those are believe that those are many examples of what is potentially many examples of what is potentially many examples of what is potentially happening beneath the surface that if happening beneath the surface that if happening beneath the surface that if you continue down that road that normal you continue down that road that normal you continue down that road that normal workout soreness becomes more chronic workout soreness becomes more chronic workout soreness becomes more chronic joint pain discomfort movement joint pain discomfort movement joint pain discomfort movement limitations and we also lose range limitations and we also lose range limitations and we also lose range of motion as we get older. So, if we're of motion as we get older. So, if we're of motion as we get older. So, if we're not focusing on actually trying to not focusing on actually trying to not focusing on actually trying to maintain that, it just starts to pile maintain that, it just starts to pile maintain that, it just starts to pile up. And it's one of those things where up. And it's one of those things where up. And it's one of those things where you look back, we look back years later you look back, we look back years later you look back, we look back years later and go, "Wow, I can't believe I've lost and go, "Wow, I can't believe I've lost and go, "Wow, I can't believe I've lost this much range of motion or I can't this much range of motion or I can't this much range of motion or I can't believe I've gotten to this state." When believe I've gotten to this state." When believe I've gotten to this state." When it really was just accumulation of many, it really was just accumulation of many, it really was just accumulation of many, many of those days of doing things where many of those days of doing things where many of those days of doing things where you weren't paying attention to all the you weren't paying attention to all the you weren't paying attention to all the little things. So, it doesn't really little things. So, it doesn't really little things. So, it doesn't really creep up on anybody. It's like it it's creep up on anybody. It's like it it's creep up on anybody. It's like it it's happening, you know, and it's happening, you know, and it's happening, you know, and it's happening every day. It's not like you happening every day. It's not like you happening every day. It's not like you can't intervene. You just have to be can't intervene. You just have to be can't intervene. You just have to be aware of what you need to do to aware of what you need to do to aware of what you need to do to intervene. &gt;&gt; You have a post that really humbled me &gt;&gt; You have a post that really humbled me &gt;&gt; You have a post that really humbled me and people are going to laugh. They're and people are going to laugh. They're and people are going to laugh. They're going to be like, "I can't believe you going to be like, "I can't believe you going to be like, "I can't believe you can't do that." Well, now I can do it. can't do that." Well, now I can do it. can't do that." Well, now I can do it. I'll explain what it is in a moment. But I'll explain what it is in a moment. But I'll explain what it is in a moment. But a longevity test. a longevity test. a longevity test. &gt;&gt; Oh boy. &gt;&gt; Oh boy. &gt;&gt; Oh boy. &gt;&gt; That includes test of balance, &gt;&gt; That includes test of balance, &gt;&gt; That includes test of balance, &gt;&gt; strength, &gt;&gt; strength, &gt;&gt; strength, &gt;&gt; and um inner fortitude. And that's the &gt;&gt; and um inner fortitude. And that's the &gt;&gt; and um inner fortitude. And that's the put your shoes and socks on standing on put your shoes and socks on standing on put your shoes and socks on standing on one foot obviously one foot then the one foot obviously one foot then the one foot obviously one foot then the other not sitting down but doing that in other not sitting down but doing that in other not sitting down but doing that in the morning every day. And I'll tell you the morning every day. And I'll tell you the morning every day. And I'll tell you if you're training hard that lower if you're training hard that lower if you're training hard that lower back's going to ache a little bit when back's going to ache a little bit when back's going to ache a little bit when you first, you know, first thing in the you first, you know, first thing in the you first, you know, first thing in the morning. This is a very cool test and I morning. This is a very cool test and I morning. This is a very cool test and I force myself to do it now. And I have to force myself to do it now. And I have to force myself to do it now. And I have to say a lot of mornings I'm like I just say a lot of mornings I'm like I just say a lot of mornings I'm like I just want to sit down and put my shoes on, want to sit down and put my shoes on, want to sit down and put my shoes on, you know, and I got this puppy now and you know, and I got this puppy now and you know, and I got this puppy now and he's grabbing my shoelaces which makes he's grabbing my shoelaces which makes he's grabbing my shoelaces which makes it even more dynamic. But in all it even more dynamic. But in all it even more dynamic. But in all seriousness, it's a very seriousness, it's a very seriousness, it's a very interesting, very simple test. If you interesting, very simple test. If you interesting, very simple test. If you could just explain what it is, folks, could just explain what it is, folks, could just explain what it is, folks, trust me, you want to do this every trust me, you want to do this every trust me, you want to do this every single day. So, they call it the old man single day. So, they call it the old man single day. So, they call it the old man test is gender neutral, though. It test is gender neutral, though. It test is gender neutral, though. It could be a woman test. Everybody is fair could be a woman test. Everybody is fair could be a woman test. Everybody is fair game. The goal here is to simply put game. The goal here is to simply put game. The goal here is to simply put your sock and your shoe on the floor on your sock and your shoe on the floor on your sock and your shoe on the floor on both sides. Lay them down in front of both sides. Lay them down in front of both sides. Lay them down in front of you. Um, untie your shoes, make them you. Um, untie your shoes, make them you. Um, untie your shoes, make them sure they're loose enough that sure they're loose enough that sure they're loose enough that you can get them on your foot. Stand on you can get them on your foot. Stand on you can get them on your foot. Stand on one foot to begin the test. lean over, one foot to begin the test. lean over, one foot to begin the test. lean over, pick up that shoe or pick up that pick up that shoe or pick up that pick up that shoe or pick up that sock, put the sock on, pick up that sock, put the sock on, pick up that sock, put the sock on, pick up that shoe, put it on, tie it, and then put shoe, put it on, tie it, and then put shoe, put it on, tie it, and then put the foot down. Only after you've tied the foot down. Only after you've tied the foot down. Only after you've tied the shoe can you put it down and then go the shoe can you put it down and then go the shoe can you put it down and then go and do the other side. And it is and do the other side. And it is and do the other side. And it is difficult. It is very, very difficult. It is very, very difficult. It is very, very difficult. It happens to be one of the tests that I It happens to be one of the tests that I It happens to be one of the tests that I do a little bit better than other tests, do a little bit better than other tests, do a little bit better than other tests, but um we were joking before. I told you but um we were joking before. I told you but um we were joking before. I told you that I about twice a year I still get that I about twice a year I still get that I about twice a year I still get back pain every now and then and mine back pain every now and then and mine back pain every now and then and mine came from leaning over to put my sock on came from leaning over to put my sock on came from leaning over to put my sock on the other day and my whole back felt the other day and my whole back felt the other day and my whole back felt like it was going to blow up on me like it was going to blow up on me like it was going to blow up on me like that. So there's a lot going on inside that. So there's a lot going on inside that. So there's a lot going on inside the body when you're doing this, right? the body when you're doing this, right? the body when you're doing this, right? Why would my back all of a sudden seize Why would my back all of a sudden seize Why would my back all of a sudden seize up on me when I'm going to pick put on up on me when I'm going to pick put on up on me when I'm going to pick put on my sock? because you don't realize the my sock? because you don't realize the my sock? because you don't realize the responsibility that those lumbar responsibility that those lumbar responsibility that those lumbar parispinal muscles have in trying to parispinal muscles have in trying to parispinal muscles have in trying to control even just leaning forward and control even just leaning forward and control even just leaning forward and they're trying to make sure that you're they're trying to make sure that you're they're trying to make sure that you're doing it at a pace that's safe for your doing it at a pace that's safe for your doing it at a pace that's safe for your spine. So doing this every day is a spine. So doing this every day is a spine. So doing this every day is a little mini workout for those muscles. little mini workout for those muscles. little mini workout for those muscles. And again, we I think we tend to And again, we I think we tend to And again, we I think we tend to get so lazy as we get older and get so lazy as we get older and get so lazy as we get older and complacent and so that once you start complacent and so that once you start complacent and so that once you start sitting down, you're just going to sit sitting down, you're just going to sit sitting down, you're just going to sit down when you put on your socks and down when you put on your socks and down when you put on your socks and shoes. What's the need to get up and do shoes. What's the need to get up and do shoes. What's the need to get up and do this every day if I'm comfortable this every day if I'm comfortable this every day if I'm comfortable putting it my, you know, doing this putting it my, you know, doing this putting it my, you know, doing this sitting down or, wow, this was easier sitting down or, wow, this was easier sitting down or, wow, this was easier because I sat down today. You can't be because I sat down today. You can't be because I sat down today. You can't be seeking easy. If you seek easy, you're seeking easy. If you seek easy, you're seeking easy. If you seek easy, you're going to get old a lot faster. So, this going to get old a lot faster. So, this going to get old a lot faster. So, this test is testing your balance. It is test is testing your balance. It is test is testing your balance. It is testing against some of the mini dynamic testing against some of the mini dynamic testing against some of the mini dynamic control from those muscles in the low control from those muscles in the low control from those muscles in the low back. It's is testing your ankle back. It's is testing your ankle back. It's is testing your ankle mobility in a way because you're going mobility in a way because you're going mobility in a way because you're going to get a lot of this going on the to get a lot of this going on the to get a lot of this going on the perturbation through your ankles and perturbation through your ankles and perturbation through your ankles and your knees and it's testing your hip your knees and it's testing your hip your knees and it's testing your hip strength because again once you go on strength because again once you go on strength because again once you go on one leg you're now talking about pelvic one leg you're now talking about pelvic one leg you're now talking about pelvic control the same way we did before. So control the same way we did before. So control the same way we did before. So you have to have good strength there. you have to have good strength there. you have to have good strength there. But it's not uncommon for people to not But it's not uncommon for people to not But it's not uncommon for people to not be able to pass this test. But with be able to pass this test. But with be able to pass this test. But with practice like anything else you're practice like anything else you're practice like anything else you're training these muscles to get stronger training these muscles to get stronger training these muscles to get stronger and you're training these your and you're training these your and you're training these your balance and you're these are all skills balance and you're these are all skills balance and you're these are all skills that can be learned and improved. that can be learned and improved. that can be learned and improved. They're all trainable. I actually put a They're all trainable. I actually put a They're all trainable. I actually put a video out not long ago about um a video out not long ago about um a video out not long ago about um different measures of longevity. And different measures of longevity. And different measures of longevity. And one of them was that test. Another one of them was that test. Another one of them was that test. Another one was pull-ups. Another one was the number was pull-ups. Another one was the number was pull-ups. Another one was the number of push-ups you could do. We we could of push-ups you could do. We we could of push-ups you could do. We we could talk about these after, but the number talk about these after, but the number talk about these after, but the number one was like going back to your glute one was like going back to your glute one was like going back to your glute media strengthening. Can you lay in a media strengthening. Can you lay in a media strengthening. Can you lay in a side lying plank position with the top side lying plank position with the top side lying plank position with the top leg up about 45°? You could keep it leg up about 45°? You could keep it leg up about 45°? You could keep it stacked. It's a lot easier to stay in a stacked. It's a lot easier to stay in a stacked. It's a lot easier to stay in a plank position. You raise that leg off plank position. You raise that leg off plank position. You raise that leg off of the other. Now it's all relying on of the other. Now it's all relying on of the other. Now it's all relying on that lateral pillar strength of the that lateral pillar strength of the that lateral pillar strength of the underside hip, the one closest to the underside hip, the one closest to the underside hip, the one closest to the floor. So one arm down or stack on the floor. So one arm down or stack on the floor. So one arm down or stack on the on the on the elbow. on the on the elbow. on the on the elbow. &gt;&gt; Okay. Heels stacked at first. Yeah. At &gt;&gt; Okay. Heels stacked at first. Yeah. At &gt;&gt; Okay. Heels stacked at first. Yeah. At first. &gt;&gt; Okay. On your side. So side plank, not &gt;&gt; Okay. On your side. So side plank, not &gt;&gt; Okay. On your side. So side plank, not just lying on your side. Side plank. just lying on your side. Side plank. just lying on your side. Side plank. &gt;&gt; It's not the uh the picnic date &gt;&gt; It's not the uh the picnic date &gt;&gt; It's not the uh the picnic date stance. It's uh um you lying on your so stance. It's uh um you lying on your so stance. It's uh um you lying on your so side plank and then you're going to side plank and then you're going to side plank and then you're going to raise the top leg up to make a 45° and raise the top leg up to make a 45° and raise the top leg up to make a 45° and see if you could hold that even for just see if you could hold that even for just see if you could hold that even for just 30 seconds 30 seconds 30 seconds &gt;&gt; and it's difficult. You'll feel a lot of &gt;&gt; and it's difficult. You'll feel a lot of &gt;&gt; and it's difficult. You'll feel a lot of shaking. You'll feel a lot of u shaking. You'll feel a lot of u shaking. You'll feel a lot of u sagging of that bottom hip because sagging of that bottom hip because sagging of that bottom hip because you're asking your glute medius you're asking your glute medius you're asking your glute medius on that underside leg to hold you up on that underside leg to hold you up on that underside leg to hold you up into that position. So the beauty about into that position. So the beauty about into that position. So the beauty about that series of tests though is that series of tests though is that series of tests though is that they're all trainable. So if it's they're all trainable. So if it's they're all trainable. So if it's trainable, it's fixable, you can improve trainable, it's fixable, you can improve trainable, it's fixable, you can improve as you have, right? You've you're now as you have, right? You've you're now as you have, right? You've you're now much better at the test. much better at the test. much better at the test. Oh yeah, old man test. Yeah, definitely. Oh yeah, old man test. Yeah, definitely. Oh yeah, old man test. Yeah, definitely. Um there are mornings when I want to Um there are mornings when I want to Um there are mornings when I want to cross one leg over the other kind of go cross one leg over the other kind of go cross one leg over the other kind of go into like what do they call it that like into like what do they call it that like into like what do they call it that like kind of pseudo crow pose they talk about kind of pseudo crow pose they talk about kind of pseudo crow pose they talk about in yoga like rest the ankle and the like in yoga like rest the ankle and the like in yoga like rest the ankle and the like and sometimes it people are probably and sometimes it people are probably and sometimes it people are probably laughing at this. Go try it folks. Some laughing at this. Go try it folks. Some laughing at this. Go try it folks. Some people might do it just right away is people might do it just right away is people might do it just right away is very easy. Many people will find this very easy. Many people will find this very easy. Many people will find this difficult like to the point where like I difficult like to the point where like I difficult like to the point where like I don't think I can do this but quickly don't think I can do this but quickly don't think I can do this but quickly get good at it. get good at it. get good at it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Strength is not even like a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Strength is not even like a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Strength is not even like a determining factor or predictor here determining factor or predictor here determining factor or predictor here either. You could be very strong either. You could be very strong either. You could be very strong and do incredibly poorly on this test and do incredibly poorly on this test and do incredibly poorly on this test &gt;&gt; because you're not strong in these areas &gt;&gt; because you're not strong in these areas &gt;&gt; because you're not strong in these areas or you could just have bad vestibular or you could just have bad vestibular or you could just have bad vestibular balance, right? You could it could be balance, right? You could it could be balance, right? You could it could be that alone. Once you start to lean that alone. Once you start to lean that alone. Once you start to lean forward or look down, you don't have forward or look down, you don't have forward or look down, you don't have good control. But there it is testing a good control. But there it is testing a good control. But there it is testing a variety of things. And if it if you do variety of things. And if it if you do variety of things. And if it if you do poorly on it, you can look a little poorly on it, you can look a little poorly on it, you can look a little deeper, investigate a little deeper deeper, investigate a little deeper deeper, investigate a little deeper through additional tests to try to find through additional tests to try to find through additional tests to try to find out exactly where your weakness is. But out exactly where your weakness is. But out exactly where your weakness is. But it but it's a good broadspectctrum test it but it's a good broadspectctrum test it but it's a good broadspectctrum test to see how good your functional to see how good your functional to see how good your functional balance is. balance is. balance is. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Some people might wonder &gt;&gt; Yeah. Some people might wonder &gt;&gt; Yeah. Some people might wonder how do you work up to it? There's how do you work up to it? There's how do you work up to it? There's something called Velcro shoes. No, I'm something called Velcro shoes. No, I'm something called Velcro shoes. No, I'm just kidding. The uh or slippers like just kidding. The uh or slippers like just kidding. The uh or slippers like there it's easier, right? It's going to there it's easier, right? It's going to there it's easier, right? It's going to be quicker. Right. be quicker. Right. be quicker. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think um it's definitely worth &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think um it's definitely worth &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think um it's definitely worth trying and uh I think identifying these trying and uh I think identifying these trying and uh I think identifying these weak points um I think is just so weak points um I think is just so weak points um I think is just so critical and I'm probably going to say critical and I'm probably going to say critical and I'm probably going to say this 20 times during today's um this 20 times during today's um this 20 times during today's um recording, but for the young guys and recording, but for the young guys and recording, but for the young guys and gals who are thinking, "Oh, like that gals who are thinking, "Oh, like that gals who are thinking, "Oh, like that thing is so easy." Trust me, with time, thing is so easy." Trust me, with time, thing is so easy." Trust me, with time, it's the gradual creep of little things it's the gradual creep of little things it's the gradual creep of little things that you stop doing. I'm going to add that you stop doing. I'm going to add that you stop doing. I'm going to add the side plank uh in because I'm I just the side plank uh in because I'm I just the side plank uh in because I'm I just haven't been doing much planking, not haven't been doing much planking, not haven't been doing much planking, not much isometric stuff. And I'm sure that much isometric stuff. And I'm sure that much isometric stuff. And I'm sure that I've got a weakness somewhere along the I've got a weakness somewhere along the I've got a weakness somewhere along the chain of muscles that's required to do chain of muscles that's required to do chain of muscles that's required to do that properly. Yeah. that properly. Yeah. that properly. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And what I love about these sorts of &gt;&gt; And what I love about these sorts of &gt;&gt; And what I love about these sorts of small things that support doing the big small things that support doing the big small things that support doing the big things for much longer, hopefully things for much longer, hopefully things for much longer, hopefully forever, is that they don't have to be forever, is that they don't have to be forever, is that they don't have to be done as part of the standard workout. done as part of the standard workout. done as part of the standard workout. and they can be incorporated into like and they can be incorporated into like and they can be incorporated into like you're watching something on Netflix and you're watching something on Netflix and you're watching something on Netflix and you just kind of move some furniture out you just kind of move some furniture out you just kind of move some furniture out of the way and you just do these at that of the way and you just do these at that of the way and you just do these at that time which is really cool and important time which is really cool and important time which is really cool and important because it's not just about like an because it's not just about like an because it's not just about like an additional workout because people are additional workout because people are additional workout because people are slammed. They've got so much to do and slammed. They've got so much to do and slammed. They've got so much to do and like how am I supposed to do all this like how am I supposed to do all this like how am I supposed to do all this stuff and be with sunlight and this and stuff and be with sunlight and this and stuff and be with sunlight and this and that but it's straightforward. that but it's straightforward. that but it's straightforward. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that it look I think the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that it look I think the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that it look I think the thing that you've done better than thing that you've done better than thing that you've done better than anybody is practical implementation of anybody is practical implementation of anybody is practical implementation of the things that are going to benefit the things that are going to benefit the things that are going to benefit people that are not time consuming or people that are not time consuming or people that are not time consuming or overly timeconuming. They're e easily overly timeconuming. They're e easily overly timeconuming. They're e easily implemented. A lot of what I focus on is implemented. A lot of what I focus on is implemented. A lot of what I focus on is when we're talking about these drills or when we're talking about these drills or when we're talking about these drills or exercises to do, a lot of them are body exercises to do, a lot of them are body exercises to do, a lot of them are body weight or a lot of them are done in weight or a lot of them are done in weight or a lot of them are done in minimal space because the more elaborate minimal space because the more elaborate minimal space because the more elaborate it becomes or the more timeconuming it becomes or the more timeconuming it becomes or the more timeconuming it is or whatever it is, there's just so is or whatever it is, there's just so is or whatever it is, there's just so many reasons for people not to do them many reasons for people not to do them many reasons for people not to do them and they are going to be viewed as the and they are going to be viewed as the and they are going to be viewed as the extra stuff until they become adopted extra stuff until they become adopted extra stuff until they become adopted and they realize how much they're and they realize how much they're and they realize how much they're helping them. It's always going to be helping them. It's always going to be helping them. It's always going to be viewed as the extra stuff originally. So viewed as the extra stuff originally. So viewed as the extra stuff originally. So to get someone to buy into the concept, to get someone to buy into the concept, to get someone to buy into the concept, open up the time frame where they can do open up the time frame where they can do open up the time frame where they can do them. Let them do it during watching them. Let them do it during watching them. Let them do it during watching Netflix. Let them do it while me while Netflix. Let them do it while me while Netflix. Let them do it while me while I'm on the floor doing some crunches I'm on the floor doing some crunches I'm on the floor doing some crunches after I've already done my workout. Like after I've already done my workout. Like after I've already done my workout. Like open up the restrictions so that you're open up the restrictions so that you're open up the restrictions so that you're still getting the effect, but you're still getting the effect, but you're still getting the effect, but you're minimizing the uh you're minimizing the uh you're minimizing the uh prescription of it. So it's so demanding prescription of it. So it's so demanding prescription of it. So it's so demanding people don't want to do it. So, one people don't want to do it. So, one people don't want to do it. So, one thing that we I don't think we've ever thing that we I don't think we've ever thing that we I don't think we've ever talked about on this podcast is that talked about on this podcast is that talked about on this podcast is that many people don't just work out, they many people don't just work out, they many people don't just work out, they also play a sport. Uh maybe they do golf also play a sport. Uh maybe they do golf also play a sport. Uh maybe they do golf or maybe baseball or softball, maybe or maybe baseball or softball, maybe or maybe baseball or softball, maybe they swim. In every sport, there they swim. In every sport, there they swim. In every sport, there obviously dominant patterns of obviously dominant patterns of obviously dominant patterns of movement. And there's a lot that's out movement. And there's a lot that's out movement. And there's a lot that's out there about how to train to improve there about how to train to improve there about how to train to improve those patterns of movement. I'd like to those patterns of movement. I'd like to those patterns of movement. I'd like to ask the opposite question. Let's say ask the opposite question. Let's say ask the opposite question. Let's say somebody played baseball or golfed or somebody played baseball or golfed or somebody played baseball or golfed or whatever their sport was and now they whatever their sport was and now they whatever their sport was and now they have imbalances that are the consequence have imbalances that are the consequence have imbalances that are the consequence of having done some activity like a golf of having done some activity like a golf of having done some activity like a golf swing over and over and over standing in swing over and over and over standing in swing over and over and over standing in a particular way and they have pain and a particular way and they have pain and a particular way and they have pain and they are thinking about longevity not they are thinking about longevity not they are thinking about longevity not just of their golf game but of just of their golf game but of just of their golf game but of everything else tennis whatever people everything else tennis whatever people everything else tennis whatever people just pick your sport. I think this is just pick your sport. I think this is just pick your sport. I think this is very common and not commonly discussed. very common and not commonly discussed. very common and not commonly discussed. What can people do to compensate for What can people do to compensate for What can people do to compensate for these unilateral movements or for these, these unilateral movements or for these, these unilateral movements or for these, you know, you know, always left foot you know, you know, always left foot you know, you know, always left foot forward type stance things that won't forward type stance things that won't forward type stance things that won't compromise their game but also compromise their game but also compromise their game but also overcome any pain and imbalances? I've overcome any pain and imbalances? I've overcome any pain and imbalances? I've always been curious about this. That always been curious about this. That always been curious about this. That brings up the point of like how sport brings up the point of like how sport brings up the point of like how sport specific training has evolved over the specific training has evolved over the specific training has evolved over the years. There was a time when sport years. There was a time when sport years. There was a time when sport specific training meant doing everything specific training meant doing everything specific training meant doing everything that you could to replicate the motions that you could to replicate the motions that you could to replicate the motions of the sport and trying to strengthen of the sport and trying to strengthen of the sport and trying to strengthen those movement patterns. I think gladly those movement patterns. I think gladly those movement patterns. I think gladly we've moved past that stage of we've moved past that stage of we've moved past that stage of training because you can get better at training because you can get better at training because you can get better at that movement pattern by simply doing that movement pattern by simply doing that movement pattern by simply doing that movement pattern. You can increase that movement pattern. You can increase that movement pattern. You can increase the strength of your entire body by the strength of your entire body by the strength of your entire body by increasing the strength of your entire increasing the strength of your entire increasing the strength of your entire body. So the focus of the weight room body. So the focus of the weight room body. So the focus of the weight room can be to do your general strengthening can be to do your general strengthening can be to do your general strengthening bilaterally, right? in regardless of bilaterally, right? in regardless of bilaterally, right? in regardless of what movement pattern direction your what movement pattern direction your what movement pattern direction your sport favors and improve the strength sport favors and improve the strength sport favors and improve the strength there and the function there because the there and the function there because the there and the function there because the carryover to your movement pattern is carryover to your movement pattern is carryover to your movement pattern is there. Like when you get stronger and there. Like when you get stronger and there. Like when you get stronger and then you go back to swing a bat, you're then you go back to swing a bat, you're then you go back to swing a bat, you're going to still have the increased going to still have the increased going to still have the increased strength that you built in the weight strength that you built in the weight strength that you built in the weight room in your swing of the baseball bat. room in your swing of the baseball bat. room in your swing of the baseball bat. And you can throw harder if you're a And you can throw harder if you're a And you can throw harder if you're a pitcher or you can throw further if pitcher or you can throw further if pitcher or you can throw further if you're a quarterback. if you improve you're a quarterback. if you improve you're a quarterback. if you improve your overall arm strength in your upper your overall arm strength in your upper your overall arm strength in your upper body strength. A lot of upper body strength. A lot of upper body strength. A lot of upper body throwing strength has nothing to do with throwing strength has nothing to do with throwing strength has nothing to do with your arm. It has to do with the your arm. It has to do with the your arm. It has to do with the stability of your core. So, if you're stability of your core. So, if you're stability of your core. So, if you're getting much stronger in your core, you getting much stronger in your core, you getting much stronger in your core, you can have more torque generation to throw can have more torque generation to throw can have more torque generation to throw the ball further without having to do the ball further without having to do the ball further without having to do anything to your arm. So, I think the anything to your arm. So, I think the anything to your arm. So, I think the strategy should be that when you're the strategy should be that when you're the strategy should be that when you're a playing a sport and devoting a lot of a playing a sport and devoting a lot of a playing a sport and devoting a lot of time to it, whether at the professional time to it, whether at the professional time to it, whether at the professional level or not, you still should be level or not, you still should be level or not, you still should be focusing the majority of your strength focusing the majority of your strength focusing the majority of your strength training and conditioning work towards training and conditioning work towards training and conditioning work towards your overall balanced physique, trying your overall balanced physique, trying your overall balanced physique, trying to get strong across your entire body. to get strong across your entire body. to get strong across your entire body. Let the skill work be the skill work. Let the skill work be the skill work. Let the skill work be the skill work. And if you want to focus, there are And if you want to focus, there are And if you want to focus, there are certainly few things. We mentioned a certainly few things. We mentioned a certainly few things. We mentioned a couple when we were at the gym couple when we were at the gym couple when we were at the gym yesterday, but a few things that yesterday, but a few things that yesterday, but a few things that specific athletes can do to improve specific athletes can do to improve specific athletes can do to improve their specific skill and that's fine their specific skill and that's fine their specific skill and that's fine from a strength training perspective. from a strength training perspective. from a strength training perspective. And that's fine. Like maybe more forearm And that's fine. Like maybe more forearm And that's fine. Like maybe more forearm work if you're having to swing a work if you're having to swing a work if you're having to swing a racket or a bat, right? That's fine. racket or a bat, right? That's fine. racket or a bat, right? That's fine. That can that can be done in addition to That can that can be done in addition to That can that can be done in addition to your basic core lifting. But to go back your basic core lifting. But to go back your basic core lifting. But to go back to the days where the strength training to the days where the strength training to the days where the strength training was basically replicating the was basically replicating the was basically replicating the motions of the sport, especially motions of the sport, especially motions of the sport, especially nowadays where you've got athletes who nowadays where you've got athletes who nowadays where you've got athletes who never stopped playing their sport. It's never stopped playing their sport. It's never stopped playing their sport. It's young athletes. They're they're playing young athletes. They're they're playing young athletes. They're they're playing baseball year round through all these baseball year round through all these baseball year round through all these fall leagues and winter leagues and like fall leagues and winter leagues and like fall leagues and winter leagues and like there's way too much repetition of the there's way too much repetition of the there's way too much repetition of the same movement pattern. And that doesn't same movement pattern. And that doesn't same movement pattern. And that doesn't end well because you can see what's end well because you can see what's end well because you can see what's happening these days with pitchers like happening these days with pitchers like happening these days with pitchers like it's almost a right of passage. when how it's almost a right of passage. when how it's almost a right of passage. when how many years are they going to be able to many years are they going to be able to many years are they going to be able to pitch before they have to have a Tommy pitch before they have to have a Tommy pitch before they have to have a Tommy John surgery? John surgery? John surgery? &gt;&gt; What is the Tommy John surgery? &gt;&gt; What is the Tommy John surgery? &gt;&gt; What is the Tommy John surgery? &gt;&gt; Their owner collateral ligament, you &gt;&gt; Their owner collateral ligament, you &gt;&gt; Their owner collateral ligament, you know, basically being replaced or it know, basically being replaced or it know, basically being replaced or it tears in their elbow. They're out for an tears in their elbow. They're out for an tears in their elbow. They're out for an entire season. But it's like some of entire season. But it's like some of entire season. But it's like some of these pitchers, it's like you want they these pitchers, it's like you want they these pitchers, it's like you want they want to get it done early so they can want to get it done early so they can want to get it done early so they can hopefully come back and then have a hopefully come back and then have a hopefully come back and then have a string of years where they can dominate. string of years where they can dominate. string of years where they can dominate. It's it's crazy. But I think a lot It's it's crazy. But I think a lot It's it's crazy. But I think a lot of it is coming from a lot of overuse, a of it is coming from a lot of overuse, a of it is coming from a lot of overuse, a lot of repetition, not enough moving lot of repetition, not enough moving lot of repetition, not enough moving into other sports and movement patterns into other sports and movement patterns into other sports and movement patterns to balance off the strains and stresses to balance off the strains and stresses to balance off the strains and stresses that they're going doing in that sport, that they're going doing in that sport, that they're going doing in that sport, their chosen sport. And it's and it's their chosen sport. And it's and it's their chosen sport. And it's and it's and it's causing a lot of uh avoidable and it's causing a lot of uh avoidable and it's causing a lot of uh avoidable stress that again just fixing avoidable stress that again just fixing avoidable stress that again just fixing it through a more managed well-balanced it through a more managed well-balanced it through a more managed well-balanced approach in the weight room is probably approach in the weight room is probably approach in the weight room is probably key number one. key number one. key number one. &gt;&gt; It's interesting. That's not the answer &gt;&gt; It's interesting. That's not the answer &gt;&gt; It's interesting. That's not the answer I expected, but um really cool to hear I expected, but um really cool to hear I expected, but um really cool to hear that. So, doing the uh classic that. So, doing the uh classic that. So, doing the uh classic all-around weight training, you know, all-around weight training, you know, all-around weight training, you know, squats, some deadlifts, squats, some deadlifts, squats, some deadlifts, &gt;&gt; the goal should be to strengthen to &gt;&gt; the goal should be to strengthen to &gt;&gt; the goal should be to strengthen to strengthen your body to improve your strengthen your body to improve your strengthen your body to improve your flexibility everywhere to, you know, if flexibility everywhere to, you know, if flexibility everywhere to, you know, if you're talking about, let's say, a you're talking about, let's say, a you're talking about, let's say, a situation with a pitcher where you have situation with a pitcher where you have situation with a pitcher where you have hyper mobility of your shoulder because hyper mobility of your shoulder because hyper mobility of your shoulder because you're your move your throwing you're your move your throwing you're your move your throwing requires a lot more range of motion than requires a lot more range of motion than requires a lot more range of motion than a non-throwing shoulder. than a non-throwing shoulder. than a non-throwing shoulder. You don't have to say, "Well, I'm You don't have to say, "Well, I'm You don't have to say, "Well, I'm mobilizing my shoulders now, so I mobilizing my shoulders now, so I mobilizing my shoulders now, so I have to do a lot of mobility work on my have to do a lot of mobility work on my have to do a lot of mobility work on my on my throwing shoulder." That might on my throwing shoulder." That might on my throwing shoulder." That might not be necessary. In some cases, you not be necessary. In some cases, you not be necessary. In some cases, you might want to not do that because it's might want to not do that because it's might want to not do that because it's already mobile enough because of the already mobile enough because of the already mobile enough because of the skill work. So, it's not like a broad skill work. So, it's not like a broad skill work. So, it's not like a broad you do everything you do here, you do you do everything you do here, you do you do everything you do here, you do there on each side. You you might want there on each side. You you might want there on each side. You you might want to actually steer away from some of the to actually steer away from some of the to actually steer away from some of the things that you're repetitively using in things that you're repetitively using in things that you're repetitively using in the in the in the sport itself. But from the in the in the sport itself. But from the in the in the sport itself. But from a strengthening standpoint, you'll never a strengthening standpoint, you'll never a strengthening standpoint, you'll never go wrong sticking to the core lifts, go wrong sticking to the core lifts, go wrong sticking to the core lifts, building up your strength in those core building up your strength in those core building up your strength in those core lifts and bilaterally strengthening lifts and bilaterally strengthening lifts and bilaterally strengthening your body and your balance and your body and your balance and your body and your balance and your coordination and your explosivity and coordination and your explosivity and coordination and your explosivity and your power. You're you're not going to your power. You're you're not going to your power. You're you're not going to go wrong. That does transfer back over go wrong. That does transfer back over go wrong. That does transfer back over to the sport itself. People think that to the sport itself. People think that to the sport itself. People think that it has to be in this sport specific it has to be in this sport specific it has to be in this sport specific motion to transfer back over there. motion to transfer back over there. motion to transfer back over there. That's not that's not true. One thing I That's not that's not true. One thing I That's not that's not true. One thing I noticed yesterday when we were training noticed yesterday when we were training noticed yesterday when we were training as well as in your videos is that as well as in your videos is that as well as in your videos is that whenever you have the opportunity to do whenever you have the opportunity to do whenever you have the opportunity to do a movement standing as opposed to a movement standing as opposed to a movement standing as opposed to seated, you'll do that. Whenever you seated, you'll do that. Whenever you seated, you'll do that. Whenever you have the opportunity to stagger your have the opportunity to stagger your have the opportunity to stagger your stance a bit, not fully lunging, but stance a bit, not fully lunging, but stance a bit, not fully lunging, but offset your stance a bit, you'll do offset your stance a bit, you'll do offset your stance a bit, you'll do that. And then you also talked about that. And then you also talked about that. And then you also talked about &gt;&gt; even on a on a dumbbell curl, leaning a &gt;&gt; even on a on a dumbbell curl, leaning a &gt;&gt; even on a on a dumbbell curl, leaning a bit toward the side that you're curling bit toward the side that you're curling bit toward the side that you're curling up, assuming you're doing alternating up, assuming you're doing alternating up, assuming you're doing alternating dumbbell curls, uh can be very useful. dumbbell curls, uh can be very useful. dumbbell curls, uh can be very useful. Would you sort of explain the general Would you sort of explain the general Would you sort of explain the general logic for that and then maybe we can logic for that and then maybe we can logic for that and then maybe we can touch into a few of the specific touch into a few of the specific touch into a few of the specific examples? I have a phrase if you want to examples? I have a phrase if you want to examples? I have a phrase if you want to look like an athlete you have to train look like an athlete you have to train look like an athlete you have to train like an athlete, right? And and the like an athlete, right? And and the like an athlete, right? And and the what that really means is like sure what that really means is like sure what that really means is like sure people might want to look athletic. They people might want to look athletic. They people might want to look athletic. They want to have an athletic physique. They want to have an athletic physique. They want to have an athletic physique. They might want to have the six-pack abs. might want to have the six-pack abs. might want to have the six-pack abs. They want to have what they think is an They want to have what they think is an They want to have what they think is an athletic looking physique. That's great athletic looking physique. That's great athletic looking physique. That's great because a lot of people want that. But because a lot of people want that. But because a lot of people want that. But you have to train for it. It comes at a you have to train for it. It comes at a you have to train for it. It comes at a price. You have there's a way to get price. You have there's a way to get price. You have there's a way to get there. And I believe that the way to get there. And I believe that the way to get there. And I believe that the way to get there is by training like an athlete. there is by training like an athlete. there is by training like an athlete. Doesn't mean you have to start going out Doesn't mean you have to start going out Doesn't mean you have to start going out and doing again the all these things and doing again the all these things and doing again the all these things that people thought is what athletes that people thought is what athletes that people thought is what athletes need to do to be athletic. You just have need to do to be athletic. You just have need to do to be athletic. You just have to start a caring a little bit more to start a caring a little bit more to start a caring a little bit more about what you do. So treat it like about what you do. So treat it like about what you do. So treat it like you're an athlete. And these little you're an athlete. And these little you're an athlete. And these little things matter. It goes back to the things matter. It goes back to the things matter. It goes back to the original point. The little things matter original point. The little things matter original point. The little things matter just like they would if you were if this just like they would if you were if this just like they would if you were if this was your contract on the line. Every was your contract on the line. Every was your contract on the line. Every little thing would matter. But more little thing would matter. But more little thing would matter. But more importantly, functionally, what do importantly, functionally, what do importantly, functionally, what do athletes do? Most athletes, not all, but athletes do? Most athletes, not all, but athletes do? Most athletes, not all, but most athletes are on their feet. Most most athletes are on their feet. Most most athletes are on their feet. Most athletes move around. You move around, athletes move around. You move around, athletes move around. You move around, you're not squared up with your feet you're not squared up with your feet you're not squared up with your feet right next to each other and unless right next to each other and unless right next to each other and unless you're, you know, I mean, in one phase you're, you know, I mean, in one phase you're, you know, I mean, in one phase of an offensive lineman's uh duty, they of an offensive lineman's uh duty, they of an offensive lineman's uh duty, they stand up and their feet are square, but stand up and their feet are square, but stand up and their feet are square, but they quickly stagger their feet for more they quickly stagger their feet for more they quickly stagger their feet for more stability. So, you need to be able to stability. So, you need to be able to stability. So, you need to be able to operate from that position, I think, as operate from that position, I think, as operate from that position, I think, as often as you can because often as you can because often as you can because it's not to produce professional it's not to produce professional it's not to produce professional athletes. is to produce a body that's athletes. is to produce a body that's athletes. is to produce a body that's functioning the way it prefers to functioning the way it prefers to functioning the way it prefers to function. Why do we default do that? If function. Why do we default do that? If function. Why do we default do that? If I told you, Andrew, I'm going to come I told you, Andrew, I'm going to come I told you, Andrew, I'm going to come over here. I'm going to try to push you over here. I'm going to try to push you over here. I'm going to try to push you over right now. Would you stand up like over right now. Would you stand up like over right now. Would you stand up like this or would you put one foot back? this or would you put one foot back? this or would you put one foot back? Like, by default, you would instantly go Like, by default, you would instantly go Like, by default, you would instantly go to one foot back and you try to lean to one foot back and you try to lean to one foot back and you try to lean into me and get more stable because into me and get more stable because into me and get more stable because your body instantly knows that's a more your body instantly knows that's a more your body instantly knows that's a more stable position. If I can train with stable position. If I can train with stable position. If I can train with more stability, I know I can decrease more stability, I know I can decrease more stability, I know I can decrease injury risk no matter what I'm doing. injury risk no matter what I'm doing. injury risk no matter what I'm doing. You talked about even something as You talked about even something as You talked about even something as simple as the curl. When I simple as the curl. When I simple as the curl. When I it's not just looking at the bicep, but it's not just looking at the bicep, but it's not just looking at the bicep, but when I turn towards the bicep and I kind when I turn towards the bicep and I kind when I turn towards the bicep and I kind of screw I call it screwing down. As I of screw I call it screwing down. As I of screw I call it screwing down. As I screw down on that weight, I'm able to screw down on that weight, I'm able to screw down on that weight, I'm able to stabilize the torso a little bit more stabilize the torso a little bit more stabilize the torso a little bit more over this shoulder. Or I can even dig over this shoulder. Or I can even dig over this shoulder. Or I can even dig the arm into my side a little bit, the arm into my side a little bit, the arm into my side a little bit, engaging the lats, stabilizing the engaging the lats, stabilizing the engaging the lats, stabilizing the shoulder girdle, so that when I lift the shoulder girdle, so that when I lift the shoulder girdle, so that when I lift the weight, I have more tension in the weight, I have more tension in the weight, I have more tension in the biceps, number one, but more stability biceps, number one, but more stability biceps, number one, but more stability that the biceps can work from by that the biceps can work from by that the biceps can work from by stabilizing the entire shoulder girdle. stabilizing the entire shoulder girdle. stabilizing the entire shoulder girdle. When I'm out in space like this, it's a When I'm out in space like this, it's a When I'm out in space like this, it's a little bit more of a freewheeling deal little bit more of a freewheeling deal little bit more of a freewheeling deal here where I don't have that stability. here where I don't have that stability. here where I don't have that stability. So, is something going to happen or go So, is something going to happen or go So, is something going to happen or go wrong from doing that? No. But that's wrong from doing that? No. But that's wrong from doing that? No. But that's not creating the most functionally not creating the most functionally not creating the most functionally stable body. So, by turning your body stable body. So, by turning your body stable body. So, by turning your body around that arm, keeping it stable in around that arm, keeping it stable in around that arm, keeping it stable in your side and curling, I'm able to your side and curling, I'm able to your side and curling, I'm able to create a little bit more stability create a little bit more stability create a little bit more stability there. I take it to the same the same there. I take it to the same the same there. I take it to the same the same way down to the ground with a lunge. way down to the ground with a lunge. way down to the ground with a lunge. When you lunge and do my favorite, a When you lunge and do my favorite, a When you lunge and do my favorite, a reverse lunge, which takes a little bit reverse lunge, which takes a little bit reverse lunge, which takes a little bit of the stress off the anterior knee, of the stress off the anterior knee, of the stress off the anterior knee, stepping backward, step backwards rather stepping backward, step backwards rather stepping backward, step backwards rather than forward. Just again, I'm sensitive than forward. Just again, I'm sensitive than forward. Just again, I'm sensitive to that cuz I have pretty bad knees from to that cuz I have pretty bad knees from to that cuz I have pretty bad knees from those early days in the 20s of doing those early days in the 20s of doing those early days in the 20s of doing things wrong with flat feet. things wrong with flat feet. things wrong with flat feet. You want to as you step back a take a You want to as you step back a take a You want to as you step back a take a little bit of a wider step on that back little bit of a wider step on that back little bit of a wider step on that back leg. So you're creating a wider base of leg. So you're creating a wider base of leg. So you're creating a wider base of support, more balance, right? Rather support, more balance, right? Rather support, more balance, right? Rather than being completely narrow cuz not than being completely narrow cuz not than being completely narrow cuz not just staggering my stance, but just staggering my stance, but just staggering my stance, but staggering and widening my base of staggering and widening my base of staggering and widening my base of support. &gt;&gt; This is key. It's funny. If you're &gt;&gt; This is key. It's funny. If you're &gt;&gt; This is key. It's funny. If you're in the gym with people, I I'm not you're in the gym with people, I I'm not you're in the gym with people, I I'm not a trainer, but occasionally I've shown a trainer, but occasionally I've shown a trainer, but occasionally I've shown some people how to do some things and some people how to do some things and some people how to do some things and you say widen your stance, they you say widen your stance, they you say widen your stance, they immediately put one foot further out in immediately put one foot further out in immediately put one foot further out in front of the other. But what you're front of the other. But what you're front of the other. But what you're talking about is getting them the space talking about is getting them the space talking about is getting them the space between the between the between the &gt;&gt; um the insides of your feet further &gt;&gt; um the insides of your feet further &gt;&gt; um the insides of your feet further apart. So w literally widening outside apart. So w literally widening outside apart. So w literally widening outside shoulder &gt;&gt; lengthening your stance. &gt;&gt; lengthening your stance. &gt;&gt; lengthening your stance. &gt;&gt; Right. And and especially as you &gt;&gt; Right. And and especially as you &gt;&gt; Right. And and especially as you lengthen your stance, widening them in lengthen your stance, widening them in lengthen your stance, widening them in conjunction is going to create a in conjunction is going to create a in conjunction is going to create a wider base of support, more stability. wider base of support, more stability. wider base of support, more stability. So when we do that, you step back, you So when we do that, you step back, you So when we do that, you step back, you create a little bit of that width and create a little bit of that width and create a little bit of that width and balance. But as I go down into the balance. But as I go down into the balance. But as I go down into the lunge, you'll find lunge, you'll find lunge, you'll find if you don't lean your torso or turn if you don't lean your torso or turn if you don't lean your torso or turn your torso a little bit in the direction your torso a little bit in the direction your torso a little bit in the direction of that forward leg and kind of do that of that forward leg and kind of do that of that forward leg and kind of do that same screwing down effect that I talk same screwing down effect that I talk same screwing down effect that I talk about, that front leg will wobble a about, that front leg will wobble a about, that front leg will wobble a little bit. You'll feel that the hip is little bit. You'll feel that the hip is little bit. You'll feel that the hip is a little bit more unstable. Back to a little bit more unstable. Back to a little bit more unstable. Back to again that single leg suitcase lunge we again that single leg suitcase lunge we again that single leg suitcase lunge we talked about where that hip drops and talked about where that hip drops and talked about where that hip drops and you get a lot of that instability. I you get a lot of that instability. I you get a lot of that instability. I want to be able to turn and sort of want to be able to turn and sort of want to be able to turn and sort of screw down on that hip. And what I'm screw down on that hip. And what I'm screw down on that hip. And what I'm doing is basically kind of tying the doing is basically kind of tying the doing is basically kind of tying the muscles of the pelvis together, muscles of the pelvis together, muscles of the pelvis together, muscles of the hip, co-contracting and creating of the hip, co-contracting and creating of the hip, co-contracting and creating more stability so that now when I ask more stability so that now when I ask more stability so that now when I ask that quad and glute and that quad and glute and that quad and glute and hamstring to work and push me back to hamstring to work and push me back to hamstring to work and push me back to a standing position, it's working more a standing position, it's working more a standing position, it's working more efficiently because it's on a stable efficiently because it's on a stable efficiently because it's on a stable base. I I've mentioned before if we were base. I I've mentioned before if we were base. I I've mentioned before if we were gonna jump and try to get a the highest gonna jump and try to get a the highest gonna jump and try to get a the highest vertical jump we could, would you vertical jump we could, would you vertical jump we could, would you jump off this ground, this floor, or jump off this ground, this floor, or jump off this ground, this floor, or this table, or would you jump off of this table, or would you jump off of this table, or would you jump off of sand? &gt;&gt; Jump off a firm firm. &gt;&gt; Jump off a firm firm. &gt;&gt; Jump off a firm firm. &gt;&gt; You jump off of sand. As soon as you try &gt;&gt; You jump off of sand. As soon as you try &gt;&gt; You jump off of sand. As soon as you try to place force down into the ground, to place force down into the ground, to place force down into the ground, it's going to dissipate because the it's going to dissipate because the it's going to dissipate because the ground itself is moving. Well, we want ground itself is moving. Well, we want ground itself is moving. Well, we want to create as much force and efficient to create as much force and efficient to create as much force and efficient force as possible. Want to have a stable force as possible. Want to have a stable force as possible. Want to have a stable base. So all that co- contraction of the base. So all that co- contraction of the base. So all that co- contraction of the hip when you screw down into it or even hip when you screw down into it or even hip when you screw down into it or even in the shoulder girdle when you're going in the shoulder girdle when you're going in the shoulder girdle when you're going to then operate this elbow flexion to then operate this elbow flexion to then operate this elbow flexion shoulder flexion movement of a curl then shoulder flexion movement of a curl then shoulder flexion movement of a curl then you basically get a more efficient you basically get a more efficient you basically get a more efficient movement. So stability is a key for more movement. So stability is a key for more movement. So stability is a key for more efficient movement and also I think efficient movement and also I think efficient movement and also I think long-term safer movement. As many of you long-term safer movement. As many of you long-term safer movement. As many of you know I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 know I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 know I've been taking AG1 for nearly 15 years now. I discovered it way back in years now. I discovered it way back in years now. I discovered it way back in 2012, long before I had a podcast, and 2012, long before I had a podcast, and 2012, long before I had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. AG1 I've been taking it every day since. AG1 I've been taking it every day since. AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality is, to my knowledge, the highest quality is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the and most comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on foundational nutritional supplements on the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, the market. It combines vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, and adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's adaptogens into a single scoop that's easy to drink and tastes great. It's easy to drink and tastes great. It's easy to drink and tastes great. It's designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut designed to support things like gut health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall health, immune health, and overall energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to energy. And it does so by helping to fill any gaps that you might have in fill any gaps that you might have in fill any gaps that you might have in your daily nutrition. And of course, we your daily nutrition. And of course, we your daily nutrition. And of course, we should all eat highquality whole foods, should all eat highquality whole foods, should all eat highquality whole foods, but most of us are probably not getting but most of us are probably not getting but most of us are probably not getting enough prebiotics, vitamins, and enough prebiotics, vitamins, and enough prebiotics, vitamins, and minerals, and AG1 ensures that those minerals, and AG1 ensures that those minerals, and AG1 ensures that those gaps are filled. I get asked all the gaps are filled. I get asked all the gaps are filled. I get asked all the time by people if they were to take just time by people if they were to take just time by people if they were to take just one supplement, what would my one supplement, what would my one supplement, what would my recommendation for that supplement be? recommendation for that supplement be? recommendation for that supplement be? And my answer is always AG1 because it's And my answer is always AG1 because it's And my answer is always AG1 because it's just been so critical for supporting all just been so critical for supporting all just been so critical for supporting all aspects of my physical health, mental aspects of my physical health, mental aspects of my physical health, mental health, and performance by covering health, and performance by covering health, and performance by covering those nutritional, what we call those nutritional, what we call those nutritional, what we call foundational bases. And I know from my foundational bases. And I know from my foundational bases. And I know from my own experience and from everyone I've own experience and from everyone I've own experience and from everyone I've heard that I recommended it to that they heard that I recommended it to that they heard that I recommended it to that they simply feel much better in a number of simply feel much better in a number of simply feel much better in a number of different ways when they take it different ways when they take it different ways when they take it regularly. If you'd like to try AG1, you regularly. If you'd like to try AG1, you regularly. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited to get a special offer. For a limited time, AG1 is giving away a week supply time, AG1 is giving away a week supply time, AG1 is giving away a week supply of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, of AGZ, which is their sleep supplement, and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2 with and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2 with and a free bottle of vitamin D3K2 with your subscription. AGZ is something that your subscription. AGZ is something that your subscription. AGZ is something that I help design. It tastes great, and it's I help design. It tastes great, and it's I help design. It tastes great, and it's the only sleep supplement I take. It has the only sleep supplement I take. It has the only sleep supplement I take. It has a collection of different things in it a collection of different things in it a collection of different things in it that has dramatically improved my sleep. that has dramatically improved my sleep. that has dramatically improved my sleep. Both my slowwave deep sleep and my rapid Both my slowwave deep sleep and my rapid Both my slowwave deep sleep and my rapid eye movement sleep and I absolutely love eye movement sleep and I absolutely love eye movement sleep and I absolutely love it. Again, that's drink a1.com/huberman it. Again, that's drink a1.com/huberman it. Again, that's drink a1.com/huberman to get a week supply of AGZ and a bottle to get a week supply of AGZ and a bottle to get a week supply of AGZ and a bottle of D3K2 with your subscription. Jumping of D3K2 with your subscription. Jumping of D3K2 with your subscription. Jumping around a little bit here, but I I'm around a little bit here, but I I'm around a little bit here, but I I'm recalling the many things that have uh recalling the many things that have uh recalling the many things that have uh reversed or eliminated pain that is very reversed or eliminated pain that is very reversed or eliminated pain that is very common in anyone that works out. And one common in anyone that works out. And one common in anyone that works out. And one of those, you mentioned it, is pain at of those, you mentioned it, is pain at of those, you mentioned it, is pain at the kind of inner elbow point, kind of the kind of inner elbow point, kind of the kind of inner elbow point, kind of forearm, inner elbow. And I figured I forearm, inner elbow. And I figured I forearm, inner elbow. And I figured I had an elbow problem. I had something had an elbow problem. I had something had an elbow problem. I had something going on with tendonitis of the elbow. going on with tendonitis of the elbow. going on with tendonitis of the elbow. And you know, it And you know, it And you know, it &gt;&gt; turns out it was further away from that. &gt;&gt; turns out it was further away from that. &gt;&gt; turns out it was further away from that. It was all happening at the level of the It was all happening at the level of the It was all happening at the level of the grip. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And you said, and I listened fortunately &gt;&gt; And you said, and I listened fortunately &gt;&gt; And you said, and I listened fortunately on pull-ups on pull-ups on pull-ups &gt;&gt; to not let the bar be at my fingertips, &gt;&gt; to not let the bar be at my fingertips, &gt;&gt; to not let the bar be at my fingertips, to try and get my knuckles over the bar. to try and get my knuckles over the bar. to try and get my knuckles over the bar. Yeah. Right. And you have a beautiful Yeah. Right. And you have a beautiful Yeah. Right. And you have a beautiful demonstration of this. It almost sounds demonstration of this. It almost sounds demonstration of this. It almost sounds like that trick that kids do where they like that trick that kids do where they like that trick that kids do where they go, "Hey, pull my finger." You know, um go, "Hey, pull my finger." You know, um go, "Hey, pull my finger." You know, um it's not that trick, folks, but where it's not that trick, folks, but where it's not that trick, folks, but where you um got to put some resistance to you um got to put some resistance to you um got to put some resistance to each of your own fingers, like your each of your own fingers, like your each of your own fingers, like your index finger, your middle finger, your index finger, your middle finger, your index finger, your middle finger, your ring finger, and then your pinky finger. ring finger, and then your pinky finger. ring finger, and then your pinky finger. And when you do put the pressure on that And when you do put the pressure on that And when you do put the pressure on that pinky finger, you can feel it right at pinky finger, you can feel it right at pinky finger, you can feel it right at that elbow. that elbow. that elbow. &gt;&gt; And so, sure enough, I was causing this &gt;&gt; And so, sure enough, I was causing this &gt;&gt; And so, sure enough, I was causing this elbow pain by doing, you know, uh elbow pain by doing, you know, uh elbow pain by doing, you know, uh pull-ups and slipping off the bar a pull-ups and slipping off the bar a pull-ups and slipping off the bar a bit, and I'm at my fingertips. As soon bit, and I'm at my fingertips. As soon bit, and I'm at my fingertips. As soon as I took your advice and got my as I took your advice and got my as I took your advice and got my knuckles over the bar, even though it knuckles over the bar, even though it knuckles over the bar, even though it puts requires a little bit of a wrist puts requires a little bit of a wrist puts requires a little bit of a wrist bend, sure enough, I haven't had elbow bend, sure enough, I haven't had elbow bend, sure enough, I haven't had elbow pain in a decade. It is uh one of those pain in a decade. It is uh one of those pain in a decade. It is uh one of those things that can happen so quickly, too. things that can happen so quickly, too. things that can happen so quickly, too. Like, you could go from having no elbow Like, you could go from having no elbow Like, you could go from having no elbow pain to the very next day having elbow pain to the very next day having elbow pain to the very next day having elbow pain or even right after the workout pain or even right after the workout pain or even right after the workout doing elbow pain if you're doing a lot doing elbow pain if you're doing a lot doing elbow pain if you're doing a lot of chin-ups with this issue where the of chin-ups with this issue where the of chin-ups with this issue where the where the bar is too far away and it's where the bar is too far away and it's where the bar is too far away and it's just an overload issue. essentially the just an overload issue. essentially the just an overload issue. essentially the muscles, the flexors, the deep the muscles, the flexors, the deep the muscles, the flexors, the deep flexors of the forearm that run down flexors of the forearm that run down flexors of the forearm that run down into the fingers. It's it's actually the into the fingers. It's it's actually the into the fingers. It's it's actually the ring and fifth fingers, so the ring and fifth fingers, so the ring and fifth fingers, so the fourth and fifth finger that tend to be fourth and fifth finger that tend to be fourth and fifth finger that tend to be the weakest and least resilient to the weakest and least resilient to the weakest and least resilient to that kind of stress. If you're gripping that kind of stress. If you're gripping that kind of stress. If you're gripping through there and that bar gets deep through there and that bar gets deep through there and that bar gets deep into the into the fingers into the into the fingers into the into the fingers &gt;&gt; or if you do it where you're doing a &gt;&gt; or if you do it where you're doing a &gt;&gt; or if you do it where you're doing a curl, even the bar sits too deep into curl, even the bar sits too deep into curl, even the bar sits too deep into your hand there and you try to curl your hand there and you try to curl your hand there and you try to curl heavy &gt;&gt; toward the ends of your fingers. &gt;&gt; toward the ends of your fingers. &gt;&gt; toward the ends of your fingers. &gt;&gt; To the ends of your fingers. Yeah. &gt;&gt; To the ends of your fingers. Yeah. &gt;&gt; To the ends of your fingers. Yeah. and not into the into the actual meat of and not into the into the actual meat of and not into the into the actual meat of your hand. It's just a lot of strain your hand. It's just a lot of strain your hand. It's just a lot of strain more than that muscle is really more than that muscle is really more than that muscle is really built for to handle and those tendons built for to handle and those tendons built for to handle and those tendons get a little bit strained and it can get a little bit strained and it can get a little bit strained and it can immediately feel like a knife in the in immediately feel like a knife in the in immediately feel like a knife in the in the elbow feel and it takes a long time the elbow feel and it takes a long time the elbow feel and it takes a long time to go away because how many other to go away because how many other to go away because how many other exercises do you do where you're exercises do you do where you're exercises do you do where you're gripping and requiring the grip to gripping and requiring the grip to gripping and requiring the grip to be in place to do that. Now, if you want be in place to do that. Now, if you want be in place to do that. Now, if you want to intentionally do this, you can do it to intentionally do this, you can do it to intentionally do this, you can do it intentionally. let's say a an underhand intentionally. let's say a an underhand intentionally. let's say a an underhand lat pull down like they call it a hook lat pull down like they call it a hook lat pull down like they call it a hook grip because what people want to dis grip because what people want to dis grip because what people want to dis discourage people from doing is pulling discourage people from doing is pulling discourage people from doing is pulling down too much with the bar, right? down too much with the bar, right? down too much with the bar, right? Causing too much forearm involvement in Causing too much forearm involvement in Causing too much forearm involvement in whatever back exercise I'm trying to do. whatever back exercise I'm trying to do. whatever back exercise I'm trying to do. But in that case, you're really trying But in that case, you're really trying But in that case, you're really trying to hook through the stronger fingers of to hook through the stronger fingers of to hook through the stronger fingers of the index finger, middle finger, right? the index finger, middle finger, right? the index finger, middle finger, right? And and even the just, you know, you're And and even the just, you know, you're And and even the just, you know, you're getting a little bit of assistance on getting a little bit of assistance on getting a little bit of assistance on the ring finger, but you're really the ring finger, but you're really the ring finger, but you're really trying to hook through there. All four trying to hook through there. All four trying to hook through there. All four fingers might be on the bar, but most of fingers might be on the bar, but most of fingers might be on the bar, but most of the force is being held through there. the force is being held through there. the force is being held through there. And you're still pulling down a And you're still pulling down a And you're still pulling down a lot through your lats to build to pull lot through your lats to build to pull lot through your lats to build to pull that bar down. So, it's not like you're that bar down. So, it's not like you're that bar down. So, it's not like you're just letting it hold all the weight. But just letting it hold all the weight. But just letting it hold all the weight. But that little hook grip is meant to that little hook grip is meant to that little hook grip is meant to discourage any meaningful wrist flexion discourage any meaningful wrist flexion discourage any meaningful wrist flexion that would take over and take away some that would take over and take away some that would take over and take away some of the work of the lats. But if you got of the work of the lats. But if you got of the work of the lats. But if you got a history of elbow issues, you don't a history of elbow issues, you don't a history of elbow issues, you don't need to use that grip. Like, that's just need to use that grip. Like, that's just need to use that grip. Like, that's just it's just not worth it. the extra it's just not worth it. the extra it's just not worth it. the extra benefit of a little extra forearm benefit of a little extra forearm benefit of a little extra forearm involvement may not be worth it for you. involvement may not be worth it for you. involvement may not be worth it for you. But for people who find that they don't But for people who find that they don't But for people who find that they don't have elbow issues and they want to get a have elbow issues and they want to get a have elbow issues and they want to get a little bit of that, you can do it in an little bit of that, you can do it in an little bit of that, you can do it in an intentional way, but you really have to intentional way, but you really have to intentional way, but you really have to kind of steer away from making these kind of steer away from making these kind of steer away from making these fingers do the bulk of the work. How did fingers do the bulk of the work. How did fingers do the bulk of the work. How did you figure that out by having that issue you figure that out by having that issue you figure that out by having that issue multiple times? multiple times? multiple times? &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I was just again, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I was just again, you &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I was just again, you know, just blown away. I was like, okay, know, just blown away. I was like, okay, know, just blown away. I was like, okay, I've got this inner elbow pain and I'm I've got this inner elbow pain and I'm I've got this inner elbow pain and I'm like curling and I'm doing my tricep like curling and I'm doing my tricep like curling and I'm doing my tricep work and my back work and I'm wondering, work and my back work and I'm wondering, work and my back work and I'm wondering, okay, what's wrong with my elbows? And okay, what's wrong with my elbows? And okay, what's wrong with my elbows? And you know, I'm at that time, you know, I'm at that time, you know, I'm at that time, you know, young guy. I'm like, what's going know, young guy. I'm like, what's going know, young guy. I'm like, what's going on? And then on? And then on? And then &gt;&gt; and then it makes perfect sense as you &gt;&gt; and then it makes perfect sense as you &gt;&gt; and then it makes perfect sense as you pointed out, you know, ring finger, pointed out, you know, ring finger, pointed out, you know, ring finger, pinky finger are taking too much pinky finger are taking too much pinky finger are taking too much of the at the load at the near the tips of the at the load at the near the tips of the at the load at the near the tips of the fingers, force myself to put the of the fingers, force myself to put the of the fingers, force myself to put the bar or the or the dumbbell in the meat bar or the or the dumbbell in the meat bar or the or the dumbbell in the meat of my hand. Yeah. Now, we take a more of my hand. Yeah. Now, we take a more of my hand. Yeah. Now, we take a more traditional grip, right? You're not like traditional grip, right? You're not like traditional grip, right? You're not like relying on that those distal tendons to relying on that those distal tendons to relying on that those distal tendons to have to do all that work and manage that have to do all that work and manage that have to do all that work and manage that load. Now, now the hand the hand can load. Now, now the hand the hand can load. Now, now the hand the hand can hold on to hundreds and hundreds of hold on to hundreds and hundreds of hold on to hundreds and hundreds of pounds, right? So, if we can just get it pounds, right? So, if we can just get it pounds, right? So, if we can just get it into the meat of the hand, now I'm into the meat of the hand, now I'm into the meat of the hand, now I'm getting all the assistance of the getting all the assistance of the getting all the assistance of the intrinsic hand muscles on top of it. So, intrinsic hand muscles on top of it. So, intrinsic hand muscles on top of it. So, now it's no longer a strain or a stress now it's no longer a strain or a stress now it's no longer a strain or a stress to those particular tendons. But believe to those particular tendons. But believe to those particular tendons. But believe me, uh, two things contribute to me me, uh, two things contribute to me me, uh, two things contribute to me figuring these things out. Number one, figuring these things out. Number one, figuring these things out. Number one, being a physical therapist changed being a physical therapist changed being a physical therapist changed everything for me because I had to think everything for me because I had to think everything for me because I had to think of things differently. Number two, when of things differently. Number two, when of things differently. Number two, when you're treating patients, not everyone you're treating patients, not everyone you're treating patients, not everyone presents the same. So, you have everyone presents the same. So, you have everyone presents the same. So, you have to come up with alternative ways to get to come up with alternative ways to get to come up with alternative ways to get to the same end result. I might be able to the same end result. I might be able to the same end result. I might be able to tell nine out of 10 people to do a to tell nine out of 10 people to do a to tell nine out of 10 people to do a Bulgarian split squat to alleviate knee Bulgarian split squat to alleviate knee Bulgarian split squat to alleviate knee pain. But for that 10th person, it just pain. But for that 10th person, it just pain. But for that 10th person, it just lights them up and you and they can't do lights them up and you and they can't do lights them up and you and they can't do it. You have to be able to figure out it. You have to be able to figure out it. You have to be able to figure out how to how to work around that. And the how to how to work around that. And the how to how to work around that. And the second thing is that I had the second thing is that I had the second thing is that I had the unfortunate but fortunate experience of unfortunate but fortunate experience of unfortunate but fortunate experience of having to deal with a lot of these having to deal with a lot of these having to deal with a lot of these things through my life in the early things through my life in the early things through my life in the early years and even still now. I still do years and even still now. I still do years and even still now. I still do things that cause inflammation and things that cause inflammation and things that cause inflammation and uh a need to reassess and look at what uh a need to reassess and look at what uh a need to reassess and look at what I'm doing and maybe why. And like you, I I'm doing and maybe why. And like you, I I'm doing and maybe why. And like you, I didn't I knew I when I first started didn't I knew I when I first started didn't I knew I when I first started experiencing that pain also in my 20s, experiencing that pain also in my 20s, experiencing that pain also in my 20s, like that wasn't I didn't have an elbow like that wasn't I didn't have an elbow like that wasn't I didn't have an elbow issue. Like there's nothing structurally issue. Like there's nothing structurally issue. Like there's nothing structurally wrong with my elbow. So I had to look wrong with my elbow. So I had to look wrong with my elbow. So I had to look somewhere else. I didn't look then, but somewhere else. I didn't look then, but somewhere else. I didn't look then, but I looked when I got older and had way I looked when I got older and had way I looked when I got older and had way too many of those incidents happen. So too many of those incidents happen. So too many of those incidents happen. So it forces you to look and it forces me it forces you to look and it forces me it forces you to look and it forces me to look. I have to look cuz this is what to look. I have to look cuz this is what to look. I have to look cuz this is what I do for a living. But it forces me to I do for a living. But it forces me to I do for a living. But it forces me to look and figure out what's causing this look and figure out what's causing this look and figure out what's causing this and more importantly, what can you do to and more importantly, what can you do to and more importantly, what can you do to stop it? stop it? stop it? &gt;&gt; Well, I and many others are eternally &gt;&gt; Well, I and many others are eternally &gt;&gt; Well, I and many others are eternally grateful cuz that inner elbow pain, the grateful cuz that inner elbow pain, the grateful cuz that inner elbow pain, the lower back pain. Yeah. They're brutal. lower back pain. Yeah. They're brutal. lower back pain. Yeah. They're brutal. Like they can really take the they Like they can really take the they Like they can really take the they can really take the pleasure out of a can really take the pleasure out of a can really take the pleasure out of a lot of things cuz it's not just during lot of things cuz it's not just during lot of things cuz it's not just during training. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; The shoulders. Um I'm going to knock on &gt;&gt; The shoulders. Um I'm going to knock on &gt;&gt; The shoulders. Um I'm going to knock on wood in a second because I I've been wood in a second because I I've been wood in a second because I I've been fortunate that my shoulders haven't fortunate that my shoulders haven't fortunate that my shoulders haven't given me issues, but that means it's given me issues, but that means it's given me issues, but that means it's probably just next. But perhaps that's probably just next. But perhaps that's probably just next. But perhaps that's also the consequence of having once also the consequence of having once also the consequence of having once again listen to your content and again listen to your content and again listen to your content and whenever possible I've tried to get into whenever possible I've tried to get into whenever possible I've tried to get into external rotation which is uh if I external rotation which is uh if I external rotation which is uh if I reference the fawns will anyone know reference the fawns will anyone know reference the fawns will anyone know what I'm talking about. So thumbs out what I'm talking about. So thumbs out what I'm talking about. So thumbs out and uh you know giving the thumbs up but and uh you know giving the thumbs up but and uh you know giving the thumbs up but thumbs rotated away from the belly thumbs rotated away from the belly thumbs rotated away from the belly button away from the midline. Could you button away from the midline. Could you button away from the midline. Could you explain where the shoulder tends to be explain where the shoulder tends to be explain where the shoulder tends to be most vulnerable and this business of most vulnerable and this business of most vulnerable and this business of internal thumbs pointing toward the internal thumbs pointing toward the internal thumbs pointing toward the belly button versus external rotation belly button versus external rotation belly button versus external rotation during all sorts of movements and also during all sorts of movements and also during all sorts of movements and also just daily life? Good point here too is just daily life? Good point here too is just daily life? Good point here too is on top of the thumbs is, you know, not on top of the thumbs is, you know, not on top of the thumbs is, you know, not just the flipping of the hand itself just the flipping of the hand itself just the flipping of the hand itself through supernation and pronation of the through supernation and pronation of the through supernation and pronation of the forearm, but literally letting the elbow forearm, but literally letting the elbow forearm, but literally letting the elbow kind of travel with that, right? So, kind of travel with that, right? So, kind of travel with that, right? So, you're letting everything move together you're letting everything move together you're letting everything move together cuz it's the it's the rotation that's cuz it's the it's the rotation that's cuz it's the it's the rotation that's happening in this joint, this ball and happening in this joint, this ball and happening in this joint, this ball and socket up top. socket up top. socket up top. &gt;&gt; Shoulders got to rotate out, right? &gt;&gt; Shoulders got to rotate out, right? &gt;&gt; Shoulders got to rotate out, right? We're not just talking about moving your We're not just talking about moving your We're not just talking about moving your thumbs away from your belly button out thumbs away from your belly button out thumbs away from your belly button out for those just listening. We're talking for those just listening. We're talking for those just listening. We're talking about getting the elbows in a bit about getting the elbows in a bit about getting the elbows in a bit more. As those thumbs go out, the more. As those thumbs go out, the more. As those thumbs go out, the shoulders externally rotating as well. shoulders externally rotating as well. shoulders externally rotating as well. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which is key. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which is key. And and &gt;&gt; Yeah. Which is key. And and the issue with internal rotation, the issue with internal rotation, the issue with internal rotation, external rotation is that it's in external rotation is that it's in external rotation is that it's in they're both motions of the shoulder, they're both motions of the shoulder, they're both motions of the shoulder, right? We're needing we need both of right? We're needing we need both of right? We're needing we need both of them. We need to be able if you go back them. We need to be able if you go back them. We need to be able if you go back to the pitcher, he needs to be able to the pitcher, he needs to be able to the pitcher, he needs to be able to externally rotate and then of course externally rotate and then of course externally rotate and then of course internally rotate to throw the ball. I'm internally rotate to throw the ball. I'm internally rotate to throw the ball. I'm not saying that internal rotation is not saying that internal rotation is not saying that internal rotation is the devil. What we need though is the is the devil. What we need though is the is the devil. What we need though is the ability to control internal rotation. We ability to control internal rotation. We ability to control internal rotation. We need to be able the ability to have need to be able the ability to have need to be able the ability to have enough external rotation strength to enough external rotation strength to enough external rotation strength to hold that position for longer or to or hold that position for longer or to or hold that position for longer or to or to be able to control right the ex the to be able to control right the ex the to be able to control right the ex the eentric control from the external eentric control from the external eentric control from the external rotators is what actually controls the rotators is what actually controls the rotators is what actually controls the internal rotation. the eccentric control internal rotation. the eccentric control internal rotation. the eccentric control from the internal rotator external from the internal rotator external from the internal rotator external rotators &gt;&gt; from the external rotators which &gt;&gt; from the external rotators which &gt;&gt; from the external rotators which controls internal rotation because as controls internal rotation because as controls internal rotation because as we're lengthening the external rotators we're lengthening the external rotators we're lengthening the external rotators we're controlling if we have good we're controlling if we have good we're controlling if we have good control the eentric control of that then control the eentric control of that then control the eentric control of that then we're slowing down the internal rotation we're slowing down the internal rotation we're slowing down the internal rotation or at least controlling it at a certain or at least controlling it at a certain or at least controlling it at a certain pace that's extremely important when it pace that's extremely important when it pace that's extremely important when it comes to pitching. we have this rapid comes to pitching. we have this rapid comes to pitching. we have this rapid internal rotation going on, right? Which internal rotation going on, right? Which internal rotation going on, right? Which is that essentially the thumb is moving is that essentially the thumb is moving is that essentially the thumb is moving toward the midline to throw, toward the midline to throw, toward the midline to throw, &gt;&gt; right? And so is the so is the elbow, so &gt;&gt; right? And so is the so is the elbow, so &gt;&gt; right? And so is the so is the elbow, so is your shoulder. is your shoulder. is your shoulder. &gt;&gt; So if the external rotators are &gt;&gt; So if the external rotators are &gt;&gt; So if the external rotators are eccentrically strong, they can control eccentrically strong, they can control eccentrically strong, they can control that and control the pace of that and control the pace of that and control the pace of that and make sure that it's not outpacing and make sure that it's not outpacing and make sure that it's not outpacing what your shoulder itself can what your shoulder itself can what your shoulder itself can structurally protect. So it's important structurally protect. So it's important structurally protect. So it's important to have that, too. But internal rotation to have that, too. But internal rotation to have that, too. But internal rotation in the world of the of the in the world of the of the in the world of the of the non-athlete is particularly problematic non-athlete is particularly problematic non-athlete is particularly problematic if a you're posturally holding that if a you're posturally holding that if a you're posturally holding that position for way too long throughout the position for way too long throughout the position for way too long throughout the day and which is what we all chronically day and which is what we all chronically day and which is what we all chronically are suffering from whether we're are suffering from whether we're are suffering from whether we're texting, typing, not focusing ever on texting, typing, not focusing ever on texting, typing, not focusing ever on the external rotators of our, you know, the external rotators of our, you know, the external rotators of our, you know, in our training. You're just getting in our training. You're just getting in our training. You're just getting chronically tight and internally chronically tight and internally chronically tight and internally rotated. And then when you go to do even rotated. And then when you go to do even rotated. And then when you go to do even basic things like lift your arm up over basic things like lift your arm up over basic things like lift your arm up over your head, you're creating an internal your head, you're creating an internal your head, you're creating an internal shoulder environment that's more prone shoulder environment that's more prone shoulder environment that's more prone &gt;&gt; to &gt;&gt; to &gt;&gt; to creating less space in inflaming tissues creating less space in inflaming tissues creating less space in inflaming tissues that wind up getting pinched in that wind up getting pinched in that wind up getting pinched in that position. That basically when you're position. That basically when you're position. That basically when you're tight internally, you get changes to the tight internally, you get changes to the tight internally, you get changes to the shoulder capsule itself, which is all shoulder capsule itself, which is all shoulder capsule itself, which is all the ligamentous structures that surround the ligamentous structures that surround the ligamentous structures that surround it that make you more internally rotated it that make you more internally rotated it that make you more internally rotated and tight. You can't get out of that and tight. You can't get out of that and tight. You can't get out of that position. So now when I go to raise my position. So now when I go to raise my position. So now when I go to raise my arm up, there's just less room in here. arm up, there's just less room in here. arm up, there's just less room in here. For instance, I think I we might have For instance, I think I we might have For instance, I think I we might have done this before you and I, but if I done this before you and I, but if I done this before you and I, but if I were to have you just lean forward like were to have you just lean forward like were to have you just lean forward like this or slump your shoulder and then this or slump your shoulder and then this or slump your shoulder and then raise your arm as high as you could in raise your arm as high as you could in raise your arm as high as you could in front you, you're going to that's as far front you, you're going to that's as far front you, you're going to that's as far as you get, right? And you're limited as you get, right? And you're limited as you get, right? And you're limited not because of anything that's not because of anything that's not because of anything that's necessarily tight right there, but necessarily tight right there, but necessarily tight right there, but structurally there's a little bony bump structurally there's a little bony bump structurally there's a little bony bump on the top of your humorous that's on the top of your humorous that's on the top of your humorous that's actually getting stuck on the upper actually getting stuck on the upper actually getting stuck on the upper portion of your shoulder joint there. So portion of your shoulder joint there. So portion of your shoulder joint there. So now bring your arm down. Open up your now bring your arm down. Open up your now bring your arm down. Open up your chest as much as you can. Turn your arm chest as much as you can. Turn your arm chest as much as you can. Turn your arm out a little bit. Now raise it up out a little bit. Now raise it up out a little bit. Now raise it up overhead and it goes higher. Why? overhead and it goes higher. Why? overhead and it goes higher. Why? Because you just created external Because you just created external Because you just created external rotation inside the joint that allows it rotation inside the joint that allows it rotation inside the joint that allows it now to go up in a higher position. Well, now to go up in a higher position. Well, now to go up in a higher position. Well, what happens if you're chronically in what happens if you're chronically in what happens if you're chronically in this position of internal rotation and this position of internal rotation and this position of internal rotation and you go to raise your arm, you go to wash you go to raise your arm, you go to wash you go to raise your arm, you go to wash your hair, you go to get stuff out of your hair, you go to get stuff out of your hair, you go to get stuff out of the cabinet, you go to do all the things the cabinet, you go to do all the things the cabinet, you go to do all the things you do every day. Every time with there you do every day. Every time with there you do every day. Every time with there being less space in there, there's more being less space in there, there's more being less space in there, there's more likelihood to pinch on a super spinous likelihood to pinch on a super spinous likelihood to pinch on a super spinous tendon. There's more likelihood to be tendon. There's more likelihood to be tendon. There's more likelihood to be pinched on a bersa. There's more any and pinched on a bersa. There's more any and pinched on a bersa. There's more any and every time we pinch, we potentially every time we pinch, we potentially every time we pinch, we potentially inflame and cause more swelling inside inflame and cause more swelling inside inflame and cause more swelling inside that joint, which causes less joint that joint, which causes less joint that joint, which causes less joint space, right? So, you're inflaming those space, right? So, you're inflaming those space, right? So, you're inflaming those tissues, more uh compression in tissues, more uh compression in tissues, more uh compression in that joint, and then more pain that joint, and then more pain that joint, and then more pain ultimately. And then that winds up ultimately. And then that winds up ultimately. And then that winds up causing down the road things like causing down the road things like causing down the road things like partial thickness tears and tears of the partial thickness tears and tears of the partial thickness tears and tears of the of the rotator cuff that we don't want. of the rotator cuff that we don't want. of the rotator cuff that we don't want. So internal rotation in this elevated So internal rotation in this elevated So internal rotation in this elevated position is not good. having external position is not good. having external position is not good. having external rotation abilities or strength that can rotation abilities or strength that can rotation abilities or strength that can help to centralize what it what it help to centralize what it what it help to centralize what it what it really does when people talk about really does when people talk about really does when people talk about rotator cuff training is yes you're rotator cuff training is yes you're rotator cuff training is yes you're working the external rotators but really working the external rotators but really working the external rotators but really what its main job is to actually keep what its main job is to actually keep what its main job is to actually keep that ball centered in the middle of the that ball centered in the middle of the that ball centered in the middle of the socket. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; I see. &gt;&gt; So as you go and you raise your arm up &gt;&gt; So as you go and you raise your arm up &gt;&gt; So as you go and you raise your arm up in an internally rotated dominated in an internally rotated dominated in an internally rotated dominated dominant shoulder it will migrate up. dominant shoulder it will migrate up. dominant shoulder it will migrate up. Why? because the deltoid pulls up. So as Why? because the deltoid pulls up. So as Why? because the deltoid pulls up. So as you're raising your shoulder up, the you're raising your shoulder up, the you're raising your shoulder up, the deltoid is pulling that humorris up and deltoid is pulling that humorris up and deltoid is pulling that humorris up and the internal rotation of the other the internal rotation of the other the internal rotation of the other muscles are already too tight, muscles are already too tight, muscles are already too tight, chronically tight or just keeping it in chronically tight or just keeping it in chronically tight or just keeping it in the front side anyway. So you're lifting the front side anyway. So you're lifting the front side anyway. So you're lifting your arm up and you're getting very your arm up and you're getting very your arm up and you're getting very little space. What the external rotators little space. What the external rotators little space. What the external rotators will do is they'll keep it centered so will do is they'll keep it centered so will do is they'll keep it centered so that as you raise instead of it that as you raise instead of it that as you raise instead of it migrating up, it's countering the force migrating up, it's countering the force migrating up, it's countering the force of the deltoid. So staying in the middle of the deltoid. So staying in the middle of the deltoid. So staying in the middle and it basically can rotate and stay and it basically can rotate and stay and it basically can rotate and stay right in the middle where it has to be. right in the middle where it has to be. right in the middle where it has to be. You're not getting this migration or You're not getting this migration or You're not getting this migration or pinching going on. So that's the real pinching going on. So that's the real pinching going on. So that's the real function of the rotator cuff is to function of the rotator cuff is to function of the rotator cuff is to maintain a more centralized position maintain a more centralized position maintain a more centralized position with less of this pinching. So you with less of this pinching. So you with less of this pinching. So you really have to focus on when we're really have to focus on when we're really have to focus on when we're talking about avoiding shoulder issues. talking about avoiding shoulder issues. talking about avoiding shoulder issues. The biggest thing you can do is start The biggest thing you can do is start The biggest thing you can do is start training the rotator cuff, training the rotator cuff, training the rotator cuff, not stop training the rotator cuff. And not stop training the rotator cuff. And not stop training the rotator cuff. And if you're doing a lot of heavy pressing if you're doing a lot of heavy pressing if you're doing a lot of heavy pressing or a lot of work with exercises that or a lot of work with exercises that or a lot of work with exercises that tend to internally rotate your shoulders tend to internally rotate your shoulders tend to internally rotate your shoulders now, then you have to do even more work now, then you have to do even more work now, then you have to do even more work for the rotator cuff to try to maintain for the rotator cuff to try to maintain for the rotator cuff to try to maintain that balance. If you're doing all kinds that balance. If you're doing all kinds that balance. If you're doing all kinds of delt work, you're never doing it of delt work, you're never doing it of delt work, you're never doing it rotator cuff work, you're just creating rotator cuff work, you're just creating rotator cuff work, you're just creating more and more of that imbalance. So I more and more of that imbalance. So I more and more of that imbalance. So I think the biggest thing you can do is think the biggest thing you can do is think the biggest thing you can do is maintain mobility of the shoulder, maintain mobility of the shoulder, maintain mobility of the shoulder, mobility of the shoulder girdle itself. mobility of the shoulder girdle itself. mobility of the shoulder girdle itself. So the scapula being able to So the scapula being able to So the scapula being able to rotate and then having strength of the rotate and then having strength of the rotate and then having strength of the muscles of that shoulder girdle which muscles of that shoulder girdle which muscles of that shoulder girdle which are the rotator cuff. Those are the are the rotator cuff. Those are the are the rotator cuff. Those are the three main things you can do to keep three main things you can do to keep three main things you can do to keep that shoulder functioning well and that shoulder functioning well and that shoulder functioning well and staying out of this domination of staying out of this domination of staying out of this domination of internal rotation with elevation. What's internal rotation with elevation. What's internal rotation with elevation. What's your favorite uh external rotator your favorite uh external rotator your favorite uh external rotator exercise? &gt;&gt; My favorite is just simply attaching a &gt;&gt; My favorite is just simply attaching a &gt;&gt; My favorite is just simply attaching a band to a stable. could be a stair uh band to a stable. could be a stair uh band to a stable. could be a stair uh like a stair post or it could be in a like a stair post or it could be in a like a stair post or it could be in a gym just a rack, right? And you step gym just a rack, right? And you step gym just a rack, right? And you step away. You you put the band in your hand away. You you put the band in your hand away. You you put the band in your hand from the anchor point. You're going to from the anchor point. You're going to from the anchor point. You're going to step out until there's good tension on step out until there's good tension on step out until there's good tension on the band. If you were to let it relax, the band. If you were to let it relax, the band. If you were to let it relax, you will pull your hand towards you will pull your hand towards you will pull your hand towards your chest, towards your belly. You your chest, towards your belly. You your chest, towards your belly. You externally rotate to about back to externally rotate to about back to externally rotate to about back to neutral or a little bit beyond if you neutral or a little bit beyond if you neutral or a little bit beyond if you can. &gt;&gt; A little bit beyond your torso. &gt;&gt; A little bit beyond your torso. &gt;&gt; A little bit beyond your torso. &gt;&gt; Yep. Yeah. A little beyond your torso if &gt;&gt; Yep. Yeah. A little beyond your torso if &gt;&gt; Yep. Yeah. A little beyond your torso if you can. That's even better if you have you can. That's even better if you have you can. That's even better if you have that range of motion. Sometimes people that range of motion. Sometimes people that range of motion. Sometimes people don't. And when you get it there, you don't. And when you get it there, you don't. And when you get it there, you again hold it, right? You hold it for a again hold it, right? You hold it for a again hold it, right? You hold it for a second just so you know that you second just so you know that you second just so you know that you actually muscled it out there. You actually muscled it out there. You actually muscled it out there. You didn't just swing it out there. The didn't just swing it out there. The didn't just swing it out there. The number one thing people do here to cheat number one thing people do here to cheat number one thing people do here to cheat and we talk about this, we talked about and we talk about this, we talked about and we talk about this, we talked about it in the gym quite a bit. Your body it in the gym quite a bit. Your body it in the gym quite a bit. Your body knows how to compensate. Like if you knows how to compensate. Like if you knows how to compensate. Like if you ever want to know what you're doing ever want to know what you're doing ever want to know what you're doing wrong, just look at yourself in the wrong, just look at yourself in the wrong, just look at yourself in the mirror and then look and see what your mirror and then look and see what your mirror and then look and see what your body's trying to do. You'll realize the body's trying to do. You'll realize the body's trying to do. You'll realize the compensation is the direct opposite of compensation is the direct opposite of compensation is the direct opposite of what it's not doing, what the job is what it's not doing, what the job is what it's not doing, what the job is avoiding. So when the ro rotator cuff is avoiding. So when the ro rotator cuff is avoiding. So when the ro rotator cuff is trying to externally rotate the is trying to externally rotate the is trying to externally rotate the shoulder, &gt;&gt; the way I can avoid that is just lift my &gt;&gt; the way I can avoid that is just lift my &gt;&gt; the way I can avoid that is just lift my elbow away from my side. I can get my elbow away from my side. I can get my elbow away from my side. I can get my hand from here to here if I raise my arm hand from here to here if I raise my arm hand from here to here if I raise my arm out to the side. But now I'm using my out to the side. But now I'm using my out to the side. But now I'm using my delt to do it and not the rotator cuff. delt to do it and not the rotator cuff. delt to do it and not the rotator cuff. &gt;&gt; Keep that elbow pin. &gt;&gt; Keep that elbow pin. &gt;&gt; Keep that elbow pin. &gt;&gt; You got to keep the elbow pin to the &gt;&gt; You got to keep the elbow pin to the &gt;&gt; You got to keep the elbow pin to the torso. So the easiest thing you can do torso. So the easiest thing you can do torso. So the easiest thing you can do is just put something underneath your is just put something underneath your is just put something underneath your arm, a little towel. Fold the towel, put arm, a little towel. Fold the towel, put arm, a little towel. Fold the towel, put it underneath there, and then do the it underneath there, and then do the it underneath there, and then do the exercise. And if you find that your exercise. And if you find that your exercise. And if you find that your towel is dropping to the floor, it's towel is dropping to the floor, it's towel is dropping to the floor, it's obviously that because you're lifting obviously that because you're lifting obviously that because you're lifting your shoulder, your elbow away from your shoulder, your elbow away from your shoulder, your elbow away from your body and you're using the wrong muscle. body and you're using the wrong muscle. body and you're using the wrong muscle. Do this as a warm-up. Do it at the end Do this as a warm-up. Do it at the end Do this as a warm-up. Do it at the end of the workout. How many sets, how many of the workout. How many sets, how many of the workout. How many sets, how many reps, how many times a week? reps, how many times a week? reps, how many times a week? &gt;&gt; There's different applications of it. &gt;&gt; There's different applications of it. &gt;&gt; There's different applications of it. You can do it before a workout. So, if You can do it before a workout. So, if You can do it before a workout. So, if I'm going to press, like, let's say I'm going to press, like, let's say I'm going to press, like, let's say bench press, I could use this as a good bench press, I could use this as a good bench press, I could use this as a good warm-up before I go press almost as a warm-up before I go press almost as a warm-up before I go press almost as a neuroactivation technique to make sure neuroactivation technique to make sure neuroactivation technique to make sure those muscles are alert and firing. So, those muscles are alert and firing. So, those muscles are alert and firing. So, I can make sure that they're working I can make sure that they're working I can make sure that they're working when I go to press to keep my shoulders when I go to press to keep my shoulders when I go to press to keep my shoulders back in a better position. And back in a better position. And back in a better position. And especially as I raise my arms up in an especially as I raise my arms up in an especially as I raise my arms up in an overhead press, I can make sure that overhead press, I can make sure that overhead press, I can make sure that they're alert, they're fired up, they're alert, they're fired up, they're alert, they're fired up, they're willing to contribute to keep they're willing to contribute to keep they're willing to contribute to keep that head centered when the arm's going that head centered when the arm's going that head centered when the arm's going up overhead. So, I like to do them on up overhead. So, I like to do them on up overhead. So, I like to do them on pressing days as a neuroactivator before pressing days as a neuroactivator before pressing days as a neuroactivator before I train. And it's serving as a warm-up, I train. And it's serving as a warm-up, I train. And it's serving as a warm-up, too, or on other days. Again, treating too, or on other days. Again, treating too, or on other days. Again, treating it as my special program, which is what it as my special program, which is what it as my special program, which is what I have to do because of all the issues I have to do because of all the issues I have to do because of all the issues that I've had with my shoulders. Again, that I've had with my shoulders. Again, that I've had with my shoulders. Again, not from this one didn't come not from this one didn't come not from this one didn't come necessarily from bad training, but just necessarily from bad training, but just necessarily from bad training, but just dumb decisions trying to throw a dumb decisions trying to throw a dumb decisions trying to throw a baseball back with the Mets. Um, I lost baseball back with the Mets. Um, I lost baseball back with the Mets. Um, I lost a bet. It's kind of famous at this at a bet. It's kind of famous at this at a bet. It's kind of famous at this at this point, but like a player bet me this point, but like a player bet me this point, but like a player bet me that I couldn't throw the ball from, that I couldn't throw the ball from, that I couldn't throw the ball from, well, let's rephrase that. I bet that I well, let's rephrase that. I bet that I well, let's rephrase that. I bet that I could throw the ball from right field to could throw the ball from right field to could throw the ball from right field to third base on the fly cuz it just looked third base on the fly cuz it just looked third base on the fly cuz it just looked rather short from where I was, but it's rather short from where I was, but it's rather short from where I was, but it's actually a lot longer and only the actually a lot longer and only the actually a lot longer and only the better arms in baseball can actually do better arms in baseball can actually do better arms in baseball can actually do that really easily. So, I have no idea that really easily. So, I have no idea that really easily. So, I have no idea why I thought I could, but I did. And why I thought I could, but I did. And why I thought I could, but I did. And literally the moment I let that ball literally the moment I let that ball literally the moment I let that ball go, I feel like my lab went with it and go, I feel like my lab went with it and go, I feel like my lab went with it and maybe landed somewhere near second base maybe landed somewhere near second base maybe landed somewhere near second base because it just felt like a burning because it just felt like a burning because it just felt like a burning zipper pain in my shoulder and I've had zipper pain in my shoulder and I've had zipper pain in my shoulder and I've had to deal with it ever since. Did the ball to deal with it ever since. Did the ball to deal with it ever since. Did the ball get to the third base? get to the third base? get to the third base? &gt;&gt; Oh, no. No way. No. I think it landed &gt;&gt; Oh, no. No way. No. I think it landed &gt;&gt; Oh, no. No way. No. I think it landed with the labor bat at like second base, with the labor bat at like second base, with the labor bat at like second base, you know, like no way. So, you know, like no way. So, you know, like no way. So, &gt;&gt; you know, I learned my lesson, but the &gt;&gt; you know, I learned my lesson, but the &gt;&gt; you know, I learned my lesson, but the fact is it's something that you can fact is it's something that you can fact is it's something that you can you can adopt pretty easily as a special you can adopt pretty easily as a special you can adopt pretty easily as a special programming type thing. Um, there's programming type thing. Um, there's programming type thing. Um, there's things you could do too to make it a things you could do too to make it a things you could do too to make it a little bit more interesting. Like once little bit more interesting. Like once little bit more interesting. Like once you get into position where you could do you get into position where you could do you get into position where you could do the actual repetition, you could then the actual repetition, you could then the actual repetition, you could then hold it in a neutral position. Neutral hold it in a neutral position. Neutral hold it in a neutral position. Neutral for this exercise would be not in, not for this exercise would be not in, not for this exercise would be not in, not out. So where your fist is pointing out. So where your fist is pointing out. So where your fist is pointing straight ahead and then take a big straight ahead and then take a big straight ahead and then take a big giant step away from the band. giant step away from the band. giant step away from the band. &gt;&gt; So you're increasing the resistance of &gt;&gt; So you're increasing the resistance of &gt;&gt; So you're increasing the resistance of the band dynamically but still having to the band dynamically but still having to the band dynamically but still having to keep yourself in that same position. keep yourself in that same position. keep yourself in that same position. &gt;&gt; So elbow still locked to the side, fist &gt;&gt; So elbow still locked to the side, fist &gt;&gt; So elbow still locked to the side, fist out in front of you. You're holding the out in front of you. You're holding the out in front of you. You're holding the band, there's tension. Step away from band, there's tension. Step away from band, there's tension. Step away from the bar that the band is fixed to, so the bar that the band is fixed to, so the bar that the band is fixed to, so there's additional tension. there's additional tension. there's additional tension. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's going to want to pull &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's going to want to pull &gt;&gt; Yeah. And it's going to want to pull your hand back, but you keep it right your hand back, but you keep it right your hand back, but you keep it right where it is. And then the fun part of it where it is. And then the fun part of it where it is. And then the fun part of it is that I could then take it even is that I could then take it even is that I could then take it even further. I could jump out there. So now further. I could jump out there. So now further. I could jump out there. So now it becomes a little bit more ballistic it becomes a little bit more ballistic it becomes a little bit more ballistic and dynamic. So I can be in this and dynamic. So I can be in this and dynamic. So I can be in this position and then jump. And if I jump position and then jump. And if I jump position and then jump. And if I jump quickly, now it really wants to pull me quickly, now it really wants to pull me quickly, now it really wants to pull me in, but I have to still keep that same in, but I have to still keep that same in, but I have to still keep that same position here. So it's mimicking a position here. So it's mimicking a position here. So it's mimicking a little bit more of a of a ballistically little bit more of a of a ballistically little bit more of a of a ballistically dynamic force. So I could do that. I dynamic force. So I could do that. I dynamic force. So I could do that. I could start to change the angle. I could start to change the angle. I could start to change the angle. I could be here in this position now facing be here in this position now facing be here in this position now facing the anchor point and it facing the anchor point and it facing the anchor point and it still wants to pull me into internal still wants to pull me into internal still wants to pull me into internal rotation. &gt;&gt; The band in front of you, not to the &gt;&gt; The band in front of you, not to the &gt;&gt; The band in front of you, not to the side. Okay. side. Okay. side. Okay. &gt;&gt; And I could jump back and see if it &gt;&gt; And I could jump back and see if it &gt;&gt; And I could jump back and see if it pulls me down this direction. Interal pulls me down this direction. Interal pulls me down this direction. Interal external rotation is external rotation is external rotation is &gt;&gt; is done so many different ways. Again, I &gt;&gt; is done so many different ways. Again, I &gt;&gt; is done so many different ways. Again, I could be in this position here. I'm just could be in this position here. I'm just could be in this position here. I'm just reaching my arm out in front of me and reaching my arm out in front of me and reaching my arm out in front of me and turning my arm all the way. Thumbs turning my arm all the way. Thumbs turning my arm all the way. Thumbs down to the floor, all the way back past down to the floor, all the way back past down to the floor, all the way back past the sky, and then thumbs out towards my the sky, and then thumbs out towards my the sky, and then thumbs out towards my side. Right? That's internal external side. Right? That's internal external side. Right? That's internal external rotation. I don't even have a bent rotation. I don't even have a bent rotation. I don't even have a bent elbow, right? Because we're talking elbow, right? Because we're talking elbow, right? Because we're talking about a shoulder movement, not an elbow about a shoulder movement, not an elbow about a shoulder movement, not an elbow movement. But when we when we do it, we movement. But when we when we do it, we movement. But when we when we do it, we could do it down low is going to be could do it down low is going to be could do it down low is going to be easier for people to start. And the more easier for people to start. And the more easier for people to start. And the more things you start to do with external things you start to do with external things you start to do with external rotation, internal rotation with the arm rotation, internal rotation with the arm rotation, internal rotation with the arm elevated, the more challenging it starts elevated, the more challenging it starts elevated, the more challenging it starts to become. So you progressively move to become. So you progressively move to become. So you progressively move towards movements where you're internal towards movements where you're internal towards movements where you're internal or externally rotating against or externally rotating against or externally rotating against resistance in a higher and higher arm resistance in a higher and higher arm resistance in a higher and higher arm position. Love it. I want to take care position. Love it. I want to take care position. Love it. I want to take care of my shoulders. Uh for me, neck of my shoulders. Uh for me, neck of my shoulders. Uh for me, neck training has been u fundamentally training has been u fundamentally training has been u fundamentally important for avoiding injury outside of important for avoiding injury outside of important for avoiding injury outside of the gym. got rear ended in a car. I had the gym. got rear ended in a car. I had the gym. got rear ended in a car. I had just bought my first car. This was many just bought my first car. This was many just bought my first car. This was many years ago. 2005 CRV. I'm like driving my years ago. 2005 CRV. I'm like driving my years ago. 2005 CRV. I'm like driving my first new car. I' driven, you know, used first new car. I' driven, you know, used first new car. I' driven, you know, used cars before. cars before. cars before. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Parked at the light or stopped at the &gt;&gt; Parked at the light or stopped at the &gt;&gt; Parked at the light or stopped at the light rather. And all of a sudden just light rather. And all of a sudden just light rather. And all of a sudden just someone just ran into me. Person next to someone just ran into me. Person next to someone just ran into me. Person next to me ended up with some pretty bad whip me ended up with some pretty bad whip me ended up with some pretty bad whip whiplash and back pain. I was a little whiplash and back pain. I was a little whiplash and back pain. I was a little sore but um nothing really. And uh you sore but um nothing really. And uh you sore but um nothing really. And uh you know it's not a controlled experiment know it's not a controlled experiment know it's not a controlled experiment but I credit that. uh been training my but I credit that. uh been training my but I credit that. uh been training my neck um even back then. Now I learned neck um even back then. Now I learned neck um even back then. Now I learned how to do it properly from you in your how to do it properly from you in your how to do it properly from you in your video and we will definitely provide a video and we will definitely provide a video and we will definitely provide a link to it. I talk about this non-stop. link to it. I talk about this non-stop. link to it. I talk about this non-stop. This video is so valuable. You don't This video is so valuable. You don't This video is so valuable. You don't need any special equipment, some uh need any special equipment, some uh need any special equipment, some uh standard plates and a towel. But this standard plates and a towel. But this standard plates and a towel. But this neck thing, it's not just for fighters. neck thing, it's not just for fighters. neck thing, it's not just for fighters. It's your upper spine. Posturally, I It's your upper spine. Posturally, I It's your upper spine. Posturally, I feel like people don't like nowadays feel like people don't like nowadays feel like people don't like nowadays everyone's posture is so terrible. everyone's posture is so terrible. everyone's posture is so terrible. Posturally, it just makes your default Posturally, it just makes your default Posturally, it just makes your default posture better. It's something we're posture better. It's something we're posture better. It's something we're always all working on. But neck training always all working on. But neck training always all working on. But neck training for men and women, I think men probably for men and women, I think men probably for men and women, I think men probably would be okay with having a most of them would be okay with having a most of them would be okay with having a most of them would be like, "Oh, cool. I get a would be like, "Oh, cool. I get a would be like, "Oh, cool. I get a slightly bigger neck." Women probably slightly bigger neck." Women probably slightly bigger neck." Women probably want to avoid that. Is there is there a want to avoid that. Is there is there a want to avoid that. Is there is there a way that women or men, but tends to be way that women or men, but tends to be way that women or men, but tends to be women who want to have a, you know, women who want to have a, you know, women who want to have a, you know, great posture, a strong neck, but they great posture, a strong neck, but they great posture, a strong neck, but they want to maintain that kind of, you know, want to maintain that kind of, you know, want to maintain that kind of, you know, like elegant neck. They they don't want like elegant neck. They they don't want like elegant neck. They they don't want a thicker neck. Is there a way that they a thicker neck. Is there a way that they a thicker neck. Is there a way that they can strengthen the neck muscles and can strengthen the neck muscles and can strengthen the neck muscles and achieve that without thickening the achieve that without thickening the achieve that without thickening the neck? Yeah, I think that women would neck? Yeah, I think that women would neck? Yeah, I think that women would be less resistant to the idea of having be less resistant to the idea of having be less resistant to the idea of having a stronger neck. I think as long as we a stronger neck. I think as long as we a stronger neck. I think as long as we weren't talking about building massive weren't talking about building massive weren't talking about building massive traps along with it, right? And I think traps along with it, right? And I think traps along with it, right? And I think that they think neck and traps cuz they that they think neck and traps cuz they that they think neck and traps cuz they do feed into each other. The reason why do feed into each other. The reason why do feed into each other. The reason why men who train their neck tend to have a men who train their neck tend to have a men who train their neck tend to have a better or much thicker look to their a better or much thicker look to their a better or much thicker look to their neck better for men is that they're also neck better for men is that they're also neck better for men is that they're also in conjunction likely training their in conjunction likely training their in conjunction likely training their traps either directly or indirectly traps either directly or indirectly traps either directly or indirectly through some of the other movements that through some of the other movements that through some of the other movements that do in a heavy way. Women who tend to do in a heavy way. Women who tend to do in a heavy way. Women who tend to train their neck directly and not train their neck directly and not train their neck directly and not focused on building their traps at the focused on building their traps at the focused on building their traps at the same time, they're just going to have a same time, they're just going to have a same time, they're just going to have a stronger neck because they're not stronger neck because they're not stronger neck because they're not necessarily the biggest muscles in here necessarily the biggest muscles in here necessarily the biggest muscles in here that grow substantially. And again, that grow substantially. And again, that grow substantially. And again, when you look at the proportional growth when you look at the proportional growth when you look at the proportional growth in muscles from men and women, there's in muscles from men and women, there's in muscles from men and women, there's already a difference in how big these already a difference in how big these already a difference in how big these muscles will grow, male versus female. muscles will grow, male versus female. muscles will grow, male versus female. But now, in an area where the where the But now, in an area where the where the But now, in an area where the where the muscles themselves don't grow to the muscles themselves don't grow to the muscles themselves don't grow to astronomically large proportions, you astronomically large proportions, you astronomically large proportions, you really aren't going to get that much really aren't going to get that much really aren't going to get that much size in the neck. And I think women are size in the neck. And I think women are size in the neck. And I think women are chronically undertrained when it comes chronically undertrained when it comes chronically undertrained when it comes to the neck. I can't tell you how to the neck. I can't tell you how to the neck. I can't tell you how often that you'll prescribe some kind of often that you'll prescribe some kind of often that you'll prescribe some kind of an ab routine. And I'm not even thinking an ab routine. And I'm not even thinking an ab routine. And I'm not even thinking about the repercussions on the neck cuz about the repercussions on the neck cuz about the repercussions on the neck cuz for me it's like it's no strain at for me it's like it's no strain at for me it's like it's no strain at all. But a lot of people will complain all. But a lot of people will complain all. But a lot of people will complain and most often it's women that just and most often it's women that just and most often it's women that just doing the crunch cuz you I don't want doing the crunch cuz you I don't want doing the crunch cuz you I don't want them holding on to their neck and them holding on to their neck and them holding on to their neck and cranking on their neck during a crunch. cranking on their neck during a crunch. cranking on their neck during a crunch. &gt;&gt; They'll say my neck is hurting. I &gt;&gt; They'll say my neck is hurting. I &gt;&gt; They'll say my neck is hurting. I can't do that. I can't do that routine. can't do that. I can't do that routine. can't do that. I can't do that routine. It's it's only hurting because of It's it's only hurting because of It's it's only hurting because of fatigue, not because there's their fatigue, not because there's their fatigue, not because there's their neck is being held in one position and neck is being held in one position and neck is being held in one position and their fingers are just basically their fingers are just basically their fingers are just basically touching back there to just keep them touching back there to just keep them touching back there to just keep them away from cranking. And it's also away from cranking. And it's also away from cranking. And it's also &gt;&gt; that's how you want them people doing &gt;&gt; that's how you want them people doing &gt;&gt; that's how you want them people doing crunches. Not cranking, not pushing the crunches. Not cranking, not pushing the crunches. Not cranking, not pushing the Yeah. So just touching the back of their Yeah. So just touching the back of their Yeah. So just touching the back of their head very head very head very &gt;&gt; touching the back of your head lightly. &gt;&gt; touching the back of your head lightly. &gt;&gt; touching the back of your head lightly. And you know what you're getting there And you know what you're getting there And you know what you're getting there also is a little extra weight. The also is a little extra weight. The also is a little extra weight. The weight of your arms back there is going weight of your arms back there is going weight of your arms back there is going to provide a little bit of extra to provide a little bit of extra to provide a little bit of extra resistance on a basic crunch, resistance on a basic crunch, resistance on a basic crunch, &gt;&gt; but it's also leaving the neck &gt;&gt; but it's also leaving the neck &gt;&gt; but it's also leaving the neck unsupported because so often people are unsupported because so often people are unsupported because so often people are used to holding the entire weight of used to holding the entire weight of used to holding the entire weight of their head and then what happens is they their head and then what happens is they their head and then what happens is they start to fatigue and their ab here we go start to fatigue and their ab here we go start to fatigue and their ab here we go again. What is the body's natural again. What is the body's natural again. What is the body's natural compensation? They know that the eyes compensation? They know that the eyes compensation? They know that the eyes have to get up when they're doing a have to get up when they're doing a have to get up when they're doing a crunch. The eyes have to raise up. So crunch. The eyes have to raise up. So crunch. The eyes have to raise up. So what do they do? they just pull on the what do they do? they just pull on the what do they do? they just pull on the head and the eyes come up and they're head and the eyes come up and they're head and the eyes come up and they're not doing any more work for their abs, not doing any more work for their abs, not doing any more work for their abs, but they've gotten to where they thought but they've gotten to where they thought but they've gotten to where they thought they were supposed to be. Natural they were supposed to be. Natural they were supposed to be. Natural compensation gone wrong. That's not what compensation gone wrong. That's not what compensation gone wrong. That's not what we want to do. So, when women are we want to do. So, when women are we want to do. So, when women are encouraged to do it quote unquote right encouraged to do it quote unquote right encouraged to do it quote unquote right and don't pull on your neck, they don't and don't pull on your neck, they don't and don't pull on your neck, they don't have the strength in their anterior neck have the strength in their anterior neck have the strength in their anterior neck to do that. So, doing this neck series to do that. So, doing this neck series to do that. So, doing this neck series that you were referring to is a is a that you were referring to is a is a that you were referring to is a is a great way to strengthen the neck. And great way to strengthen the neck. And great way to strengthen the neck. And again, depending on how much weight you again, depending on how much weight you again, depending on how much weight you use, you could just use a five or a 10 use, you could just use a five or a 10 use, you could just use a five or a 10 pound plate and have plenty of pound plate and have plenty of pound plate and have plenty of overload there to create a stronger neck overload there to create a stronger neck overload there to create a stronger neck without a lot of hypertrophy. And and without a lot of hypertrophy. And and without a lot of hypertrophy. And and for those that aren't aware, the for those that aren't aware, the for those that aren't aware, the series is simply taking a plate. Let's series is simply taking a plate. Let's series is simply taking a plate. Let's just say we start really light. We take just say we start really light. We take just say we start really light. We take a 5 lb plate. We wrap it in a towel, a 5 lb plate. We wrap it in a towel, a 5 lb plate. We wrap it in a towel, nice cushy towel, so it's not nice cushy towel, so it's not nice cushy towel, so it's not uncomfortable at all. You lay on a uncomfortable at all. You lay on a uncomfortable at all. You lay on a bench, and you're going to go basically bench, and you're going to go basically bench, and you're going to go basically in four different directions. You're in four different directions. You're in four different directions. You're going to rotate your body's position on going to rotate your body's position on going to rotate your body's position on that bench in four different ways. to that bench in four different ways. to that bench in four different ways. to work the extensors, the flexors, and work the extensors, the flexors, and work the extensors, the flexors, and then the lateral neck muscles on both then the lateral neck muscles on both then the lateral neck muscles on both left and right sides. So, all you have left and right sides. So, all you have left and right sides. So, all you have to do is, let's say you're starting on to do is, let's say you're starting on to do is, let's say you're starting on your back, you lay on your back, head is your back, you lay on your back, head is your back, you lay on your back, head is off the edge of the bench, that nice off the edge of the bench, that nice off the edge of the bench, that nice cushy towel with the plate inside of it cushy towel with the plate inside of it cushy towel with the plate inside of it is put up on top of your forehead. You is put up on top of your forehead. You is put up on top of your forehead. You allow yourself to lean your head allow yourself to lean your head allow yourself to lean your head back, but as you come up, you want to back, but as you come up, you want to back, but as you come up, you want to also pull your chin down, right? Because also pull your chin down, right? Because also pull your chin down, right? Because you're not just trying to like you're not just trying to like you're not just trying to like overextend or hyper extend your overextend or hyper extend your overextend or hyper extend your neck at any point. You want to you the neck at any point. You want to you the neck at any point. You want to you the stability we talked about before, stability we talked about before, stability we talked about before, whether it be the hip screwing in or the whether it be the hip screwing in or the whether it be the hip screwing in or the shoulder screw, the stability you get shoulder screw, the stability you get shoulder screw, the stability you get here is the retraction of the chin that here is the retraction of the chin that here is the retraction of the chin that provides the stability to the neck. So provides the stability to the neck. So provides the stability to the neck. So you have the retraction of the chin, you have the retraction of the chin, you have the retraction of the chin, which is just pulling it straight back. which is just pulling it straight back. which is just pulling it straight back. It's going to feel like it moves only It's going to feel like it moves only It's going to feel like it moves only about a half an inch or so. That's the about a half an inch or so. That's the about a half an inch or so. That's the position there. And then you pull position there. And then you pull position there. And then you pull your head back up to neutral again. You your head back up to neutral again. You your head back up to neutral again. You you flex your neck until you're back to you flex your neck until you're back to you flex your neck until you're back to neutral again. You do that 12 neutral again. You do that 12 neutral again. You do that 12 repetitions, however many, you know, sub repetitions, however many, you know, sub repetitions, however many, you know, sub fatigue here, but just enough to fatigue here, but just enough to fatigue here, but just enough to cause some fatigue. Turn on to your cause some fatigue. Turn on to your cause some fatigue. Turn on to your stomach at that point if you like. Put stomach at that point if you like. Put stomach at that point if you like. Put the weight on the back of your head and the weight on the back of your head and the weight on the back of your head and then do the same thing. Retract first. then do the same thing. Retract first. then do the same thing. Retract first. Make sure you got the stable neck. Make sure you got the stable neck. Make sure you got the stable neck. &gt;&gt; Chin closer to your &gt;&gt; Chin closer to your &gt;&gt; Chin closer to your &gt;&gt; elbow. Good way to talk about it. And &gt;&gt; elbow. Good way to talk about it. And &gt;&gt; elbow. Good way to talk about it. And then you basically allow your head then you basically allow your head then you basically allow your head to sink down forward off the edge of to sink down forward off the edge of to sink down forward off the edge of the bench. And then you're going to the bench. And then you're going to the bench. And then you're going to extend your neck back up again to extend your neck back up again to extend your neck back up again to neutral or in this case a little bit neutral or in this case a little bit neutral or in this case a little bit beyond into a little bit of extension. beyond into a little bit of extension. beyond into a little bit of extension. And then you go to your side and the And then you go to your side and the And then you go to your side and the same deal. You allow your head to just same deal. You allow your head to just same deal. You allow your head to just bend a little bit to the laterally like bend a little bit to the laterally like bend a little bit to the laterally like ear towards the shoulder ear towards the shoulder ear towards the shoulder &gt;&gt; but you're laying on the bench. You do &gt;&gt; but you're laying on the bench. You do &gt;&gt; but you're laying on the bench. You do the same thing. Place the weight on top the same thing. Place the weight on top the same thing. Place the weight on top of the opposite side of your of your of the opposite side of your of your of the opposite side of your of your head. And then you're going to lift up head. And then you're going to lift up head. And then you're going to lift up against that weight. These are just against that weight. These are just against that weight. These are just supposed to be done very slow, very supposed to be done very slow, very supposed to be done very slow, very controlled. There's nothing crazy controlled. There's nothing crazy controlled. There's nothing crazy explosive about these. You're just explosive about these. You're just explosive about these. You're just supposed to feel those muscles. And supposed to feel those muscles. And supposed to feel those muscles. And trust me, like if you have not done trust me, like if you have not done trust me, like if you have not done these, you do one, you start with one these, you do one, you start with one these, you do one, you start with one round of this and then wait until round of this and then wait until round of this and then wait until tomorrow cuz like you don't want to do tomorrow cuz like you don't want to do tomorrow cuz like you don't want to do too much cuz I guarantee you're going to too much cuz I guarantee you're going to too much cuz I guarantee you're going to be sore. Back in the day when I played be sore. Back in the day when I played be sore. Back in the day when I played football, you didn't realize how weak your neck you didn't realize how weak your neck you didn't realize how weak your neck could get in an offseason until you put could get in an offseason until you put could get in an offseason until you put the helmet on for the first time and the helmet on for the first time and the helmet on for the first time and just one practice with the helmet on and just one practice with the helmet on and just one practice with the helmet on and you know you're controlling all that you know you're controlling all that you know you're controlling all that extra weight of the helmet dynamically extra weight of the helmet dynamically extra weight of the helmet dynamically and the neck would be sore for two and the neck would be sore for two and the neck would be sore for two three days. we had to accommodate even three days. we had to accommodate even three days. we had to accommodate even to the to the weight of the helmet. So to the to the weight of the helmet. So to the to the weight of the helmet. So with neck training, it's a it's a long with neck training, it's a it's a long with neck training, it's a it's a long slow process. You just start very light. slow process. You just start very light. slow process. You just start very light. You start submaximal and you start You start submaximal and you start You start submaximal and you start building up your strength. And then when building up your strength. And then when building up your strength. And then when you talk about a crunch, that's a you talk about a crunch, that's a you talk about a crunch, that's a nothing exercise for maintaining nothing exercise for maintaining nothing exercise for maintaining stability and control. When you get into stability and control. When you get into stability and control. When you get into situations like you where you have situations like you where you have situations like you where you have accidents and car accidents, you become accidents and car accidents, you become accidents and car accidents, you become not only just resilient, but potentially not only just resilient, but potentially not only just resilient, but potentially life-saving, you know, by having a life-saving, you know, by having a life-saving, you know, by having a stronger neck. Gosh, if I, you know, stronger neck. Gosh, if I, you know, stronger neck. Gosh, if I, you know, could highlight bold and, you know, and could highlight bold and, you know, and could highlight bold and, you know, and uh underline this and send it out as and uh underline this and send it out as and uh underline this and send it out as far as I can that the next stuff, men far as I can that the next stuff, men far as I can that the next stuff, men and women, it's, you will be positively and women, it's, you will be positively and women, it's, you will be positively amazed at the transformations. Your amazed at the transformations. Your amazed at the transformations. Your pressing lifts will get stronger. Your pressing lifts will get stronger. Your pressing lifts will get stronger. Your pulling lifts will get stronger. You get pulling lifts will get stronger. You get pulling lifts will get stronger. You get stronger. Aesthetically for guys, you stronger. Aesthetically for guys, you stronger. Aesthetically for guys, you know, I mentioned this in the video know, I mentioned this in the video know, I mentioned this in the video yesterday, but I'll say it again that a yesterday, but I'll say it again that a yesterday, but I'll say it again that a lot of guys who work to widen their lot of guys who work to widen their lot of guys who work to widen their shoulders, if their neck strength is shoulders, if their neck strength is shoulders, if their neck strength is isn't coming up um proportionally, it isn't coming up um proportionally, it isn't coming up um proportionally, it looks like they got the wrong head on looks like they got the wrong head on looks like they got the wrong head on that body. It looks crazy, guys. You that body. It looks crazy, guys. You that body. It looks crazy, guys. You look you look ridiculous, especially in look you look ridiculous, especially in look you look ridiculous, especially in street clothes. Like, I'm not saying you street clothes. Like, I'm not saying you street clothes. Like, I'm not saying you need a giant neck, but there's a need a giant neck, but there's a need a giant neck, but there's a proportion thing there that's proportion thing there that's proportion thing there that's important. If you care about that sort important. If you care about that sort important. If you care about that sort of thing, of thing, of thing, &gt;&gt; as I say this, I know that most people &gt;&gt; as I say this, I know that most people &gt;&gt; as I say this, I know that most people won't take the time to do it because it won't take the time to do it because it won't take the time to do it because it looks awkward. Mhm. looks awkward. Mhm. looks awkward. Mhm. &gt;&gt; It's a tiny play. &gt;&gt; It's a tiny play. &gt;&gt; It's a tiny play. &gt;&gt; It's a weird thing to do in a gym, too. &gt;&gt; It's a weird thing to do in a gym, too. &gt;&gt; It's a weird thing to do in a gym, too. You know, it just seems a little weird, You know, it just seems a little weird, You know, it just seems a little weird, but look, it people do a lot of weird but look, it people do a lot of weird but look, it people do a lot of weird stuff in gyms and uh this is one of stuff in gyms and uh this is one of stuff in gyms and uh this is one of the weirder things that the better weird the weirder things that the better weird the weirder things that the better weird things you can do if you're going to things you can do if you're going to things you can do if you're going to invest sometime. Again, it doesn't take invest sometime. Again, it doesn't take invest sometime. Again, it doesn't take a lot. It really doesn't take a lot to a lot. It really doesn't take a lot to a lot. It really doesn't take a lot to pay big dividends here because it is to pay big dividends here because it is to pay big dividends here because it is an area that's pretty much untrained. an area that's pretty much untrained. an area that's pretty much untrained. Again, we're not talking traps. Traps Again, we're not talking traps. Traps Again, we're not talking traps. Traps get a lot of work, but those deep get a lot of work, but those deep get a lot of work, but those deep muscles of the neck don't get trained muscles of the neck don't get trained muscles of the neck don't get trained very often at all. very often at all. very often at all. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So much of what you teach is about &gt;&gt; Yeah. So much of what you teach is about &gt;&gt; Yeah. So much of what you teach is about winning the short game and the long winning the short game and the long winning the short game and the long game. And to me, winning the long game game. And to me, winning the long game game. And to me, winning the long game is about being able to come in and do is about being able to come in and do is about being able to come in and do the big stuff year after year, decade the big stuff year after year, decade the big stuff year after year, decade after decade. So that, you know, when after decade. So that, you know, when after decade. So that, you know, when you're 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, why not, you're 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, why not, you're 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, why not, right? I mean, the experiment of right? I mean, the experiment of right? I mean, the experiment of whether people can have great strength whether people can have great strength whether people can have great strength and mobility, etc., into their 80s and mobility, etc., into their 80s and mobility, etc., into their 80s and 90s, &gt;&gt; with rare exceptions has never actually &gt;&gt; with rare exceptions has never actually &gt;&gt; with rare exceptions has never actually been done. And that experiment is been done. And that experiment is been done. And that experiment is happening now because resistance happening now because resistance happening now because resistance training, you know, especially for training, you know, especially for training, you know, especially for women, you know, a few years back, like women, you know, a few years back, like women, you know, a few years back, like if it wasn't bodybuilders, nobody did if it wasn't bodybuilders, nobody did if it wasn't bodybuilders, nobody did it. Now, everyone knows this as part of it. Now, everyone knows this as part of it. Now, everyone knows this as part of the longevity game. So, I'm so excited the longevity game. So, I'm so excited the longevity game. So, I'm so excited that these again, what sound like small that these again, what sound like small that these again, what sound like small things are getting out there thanks to things are getting out there thanks to things are getting out there thanks to you because they really do make a you because they really do make a you because they really do make a difference. And I believe that in our difference. And I believe that in our difference. And I believe that in our 80s and 90s and maybe even beyond, 80s and 90s and maybe even beyond, 80s and 90s and maybe even beyond, people can move right and feel right and people can move right and feel right and people can move right and feel right and be posturally right. There's a cool be posturally right. There's a cool be posturally right. There's a cool video, forgive me for going long, um, video, forgive me for going long, um, video, forgive me for going long, um, but we'll put a link to it that I saw. but we'll put a link to it that I saw. but we'll put a link to it that I saw. No, it's not AI. Of a woman escaping No, it's not AI. Of a woman escaping No, it's not AI. Of a woman escaping from a um Chinese uh resting home. from a um Chinese uh resting home. from a um Chinese uh resting home. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; So, she's in her 90s. She's 92 and she's &gt;&gt; So, she's in her 90s. She's 92 and she's &gt;&gt; So, she's in her 90s. She's 92 and she's climbing over the front gate. She was climbing over the front gate. She was climbing over the front gate. She was caught on surveillance camera and it's caught on surveillance camera and it's caught on surveillance camera and it's so cool. so cool. so cool. &gt;&gt; Surprised it hasn't come on my feed for &gt;&gt; Surprised it hasn't come on my feed for &gt;&gt; Surprised it hasn't come on my feed for &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, she's crawling over the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, she's crawling over the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, she's crawling over the surveillance gate and then she gets out surveillance gate and then she gets out surveillance gate and then she gets out and then she walks away. Now, she's and then she walks away. Now, she's and then she walks away. Now, she's got some a little bit of frailty she's got some a little bit of frailty she's got some a little bit of frailty to her, but there was a drop down to the to her, but there was a drop down to the to her, but there was a drop down to the ground of this a big iron gate and she's ground of this a big iron gate and she's ground of this a big iron gate and she's just like, I'm out of here. just like, I'm out of here. just like, I'm out of here. But it doesn't that's not to say that But it doesn't that's not to say that But it doesn't that's not to say that when you do the things I'm saying you do when you do the things I'm saying you do when you do the things I'm saying you do the small things that you're not going the small things that you're not going the small things that you're not going to still have aches and pains and things to still have aches and pains and things to still have aches and pains and things that you have to be able to also that you have to be able to also that you have to be able to also manage that like how can you show up manage that like how can you show up manage that like how can you show up each day and still manage the fact that each day and still manage the fact that each day and still manage the fact that yeah this shoulder is still a little bit yeah this shoulder is still a little bit yeah this shoulder is still a little bit sore this shoulder is still or this sore this shoulder is still or this sore this shoulder is still or this knee is a little cranky. knee is a little cranky. knee is a little cranky. you have to continue to show up if you have to continue to show up if you have to continue to show up if you're going to um play this longevity you're going to um play this longevity you're going to um play this longevity game, right? Because stopping game, right? Because stopping game, right? Because stopping is the fastest way to slow your body, is the fastest way to slow your body, is the fastest way to slow your body, right? So, I think to slow your body right? So, I think to slow your body right? So, I think to slow your body down to a point of really poor down to a point of really poor down to a point of really poor quality of life, you have to figure out quality of life, you have to figure out quality of life, you have to figure out how to manage through these injuries and how to manage through these injuries and how to manage through these injuries and train around and through these injuries. train around and through these injuries. train around and through these injuries. And and in a simple example of that, And and in a simple example of that, And and in a simple example of that, I always like to use an analogy of like I always like to use an analogy of like I always like to use an analogy of like a construction zone. If there's one a construction zone. If there's one a construction zone. If there's one street that's shut down, you're not street that's shut down, you're not street that's shut down, you're not going to you're not going to shut the going to you're not going to shut the going to you're not going to shut the whole city down, right? You need to find whole city down, right? You need to find whole city down, right? You need to find a way to redirect traffic around there a way to redirect traffic around there a way to redirect traffic around there so the city can operate. So, if it was, so the city can operate. So, if it was, so the city can operate. So, if it was, let's say, that shoulder and you were let's say, that shoulder and you were let's say, that shoulder and you were doing a I don't know, a dumbbell or a doing a I don't know, a dumbbell or a doing a I don't know, a dumbbell or a barbell overhead press, you can't do it. barbell overhead press, you can't do it. barbell overhead press, you can't do it. It hurts. You have to have a way to It hurts. You have to have a way to It hurts. You have to have a way to reroute that. So, let's say it's a reroute that. So, let's say it's a reroute that. So, let's say it's a machine press. Is that my first choice machine press. Is that my first choice machine press. Is that my first choice based on the things we talked about? based on the things we talked about? based on the things we talked about? You're sitting down, you're on a You're sitting down, you're on a You're sitting down, you're on a machine, you're in a fixed pattern. No. machine, you're in a fixed pattern. No. machine, you're in a fixed pattern. No. But if it allows you to still train, But if it allows you to still train, But if it allows you to still train, you're getting a lot of other benefits. you're getting a lot of other benefits. you're getting a lot of other benefits. Number number one, you're getting some Number number one, you're getting some Number number one, you're getting some additional strengthening of the additional strengthening of the additional strengthening of the inactivation of the deltoid. You're inactivation of the deltoid. You're inactivation of the deltoid. You're getting some movement through the joint getting some movement through the joint getting some movement through the joint itself, which we know bathes the joint itself, which we know bathes the joint itself, which we know bathes the joint surfaces and helps to provide nutri surfaces and helps to provide nutri surfaces and helps to provide nutri nutrition to the joint. You're moving nutrition to the joint. You're moving nutrition to the joint. You're moving that capsule so it doesn't get stiff and that capsule so it doesn't get stiff and that capsule so it doesn't get stiff and tight. You're doing a lot of things, and tight. You're doing a lot of things, and tight. You're doing a lot of things, right? Even though it might be choice B right? Even though it might be choice B right? Even though it might be choice B for the exercise. Let's say you can't do for the exercise. Let's say you can't do for the exercise. Let's say you can't do any pressing at all. Again, you don't any pressing at all. Again, you don't any pressing at all. Again, you don't shut the city down. You just take a back shut the city down. You just take a back shut the city down. You just take a back road, right? You just take another back road, right? You just take another back road, right? You just take another back road. The back row might be rowing. road. The back row might be rowing. road. The back row might be rowing. &gt;&gt; Rowing is going to still work the &gt;&gt; Rowing is going to still work the &gt;&gt; Rowing is going to still work the shoulder joint through extension. It's shoulder joint through extension. It's shoulder joint through extension. It's still going to provide some of those still going to provide some of those still going to provide some of those joint benefits. It's still going to joint benefits. It's still going to joint benefits. It's still going to provide the capsule benefits. It might provide the capsule benefits. It might provide the capsule benefits. It might not be stimulating the delts that way, not be stimulating the delts that way, not be stimulating the delts that way, but there's other exercises you can do but there's other exercises you can do but there's other exercises you can do for the delts that won't do that. So, for the delts that won't do that. So, for the delts that won't do that. So, our job is to figure out how we can our job is to figure out how we can our job is to figure out how we can always have something we can do so that always have something we can do so that always have something we can do so that the option is not or the alternative is the option is not or the alternative is the option is not or the alternative is not nothing. Cuz that's when things not nothing. Cuz that's when things not nothing. Cuz that's when things really start to go wrong when you really start to go wrong when you really start to go wrong when you when you opt for nothing. And that's when you opt for nothing. And that's when you opt for nothing. And that's when the aging process starts to when the aging process starts to when the aging process starts to really accelerate to the point of even really accelerate to the point of even really accelerate to the point of even just the functional aging, how you feel just the functional aging, how you feel just the functional aging, how you feel and the quality of your life and the quality of your life and the quality of your life will sink if you don't will sink if you don't will sink if you don't continue to figure out ways to do that. continue to figure out ways to do that. continue to figure out ways to do that. So I always felt my mission or my So I always felt my mission or my So I always felt my mission or my goal was to empower people with these goal was to empower people with these goal was to empower people with these options and these alternatives of how do options and these alternatives of how do options and these alternatives of how do you do these things? Because again, if you do these things? Because again, if you do these things? Because again, if someone came to me as a as a PT and then someone came to me as a as a PT and then someone came to me as a as a PT and then and my bag of tricks contained one, and my bag of tricks contained one, and my bag of tricks contained one, two, and three and they couldn't do any two, and three and they couldn't do any two, and three and they couldn't do any of them, then what do I do? I have to of them, then what do I do? I have to of them, then what do I do? I have to have options four and five there, too. have options four and five there, too. have options four and five there, too. And I think that's always been my And I think that's always been my And I think that's always been my strength is to figure out not just to strength is to figure out not just to strength is to figure out not just to have option four and five on reserve, have option four and five on reserve, have option four and five on reserve, but then also have 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 in but then also have 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 in but then also have 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 in case I needed those, too. And if I could case I needed those, too. And if I could case I needed those, too. And if I could provide people with that information, provide people with that information, provide people with that information, then they know how to dip into those at then they know how to dip into those at then they know how to dip into those at the right time to keep going, keep the right time to keep going, keep the right time to keep going, keep training. I would like to take a quick training. I would like to take a quick training. I would like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, JWVE. JWVE makes medical grade sponsors, JWVE. JWVE makes medical grade sponsors, JWVE. JWVE makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if red light therapy devices. Now, if red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have there's one thing that I have there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, consistently emphasized on this podcast, is the incredible impact that light can is the incredible impact that light can is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology and our health. Now, have on our biology and our health. Now, have on our biology and our health. Now, in addition to sunlight, which I've in addition to sunlight, which I've in addition to sunlight, which I've talked about a lot on this podcast, red talked about a lot on this podcast, red talked about a lot on this podcast, red light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light light, near infrared, and infrared light have been specifically shown to have been specifically shown to have been specifically shown to have positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellular and organ health. aspects of cellular and organ health. aspects of cellular and organ health. These include faster muscle recovery, These include faster muscle recovery, These include faster muscle recovery, improved skin health, wound healing, improved skin health, wound healing, improved skin health, wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, improved mitochondrial inflammation, improved mitochondrial inflammation, improved mitochondrial function, and even improvements in function, and even improvements in function, and even improvements in vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red vision. Nowadays, there are a lot of red light devices out there, but what sets light devices out there, but what sets light devices out there, but what sets Juv lights apart and why they're my Juv lights apart and why they're my Juv lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is preferred red light therapy device is preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven that they use clinically proven wavelengths. Meaning, they use the wavelengths. Meaning, they use the wavelengths. Meaning, they use the specific wavelengths of red light, near specific wavelengths of red light, near specific wavelengths of red light, near infrared, and infrared light in infrared, and infrared light in infrared, and infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal combination to trigger the optimal combination to trigger the optimal cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use cellular adaptations. Personally, I use the Juv whole body panel about three to the Juv whole body panel about three to the Juv whole body panel about three to four times a week, usually for about 10 four times a week, usually for about 10 four times a week, usually for about 10 to 20 minutes per session, and I use the to 20 minutes per session, and I use the to 20 minutes per session, and I use the Juv handheld light both at home and when Juv handheld light both at home and when Juv handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you would like to try JWV, I travel. If you would like to try JWV, I travel. If you would like to try JWV, they're offering up to $400 off select they're offering up to $400 off select they're offering up to $400 off select products for listeners of this podcast. products for listeners of this podcast. products for listeners of this podcast. To learn more, visit JW, spelled To learn more, visit JW, spelled To learn more, visit JW, spelled JV.com/huberman. Again, that's jovv.com/huberman. &gt;&gt; Do you do cardio? I mean, you're &gt;&gt; Do you do cardio? I mean, you're &gt;&gt; Do you do cardio? I mean, you're naturally pretty lean. I know you eat naturally pretty lean. I know you eat naturally pretty lean. I know you eat extremely well. Yeah. extremely well. Yeah. extremely well. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And we can talk about nutrition a bit as &gt;&gt; And we can talk about nutrition a bit as &gt;&gt; And we can talk about nutrition a bit as well, but um what are your thoughts on well, but um what are your thoughts on well, but um what are your thoughts on cardio? &gt;&gt; Cardio is like the right foot to the &gt;&gt; Cardio is like the right foot to the &gt;&gt; Cardio is like the right foot to the left foot. Like it's very left foot. Like it's very left foot. Like it's very important for the overall um picture of important for the overall um picture of important for the overall um picture of health. If you're if you're avoiding health. If you're if you're avoiding health. If you're if you're avoiding cardio and conditioning entirely, you're cardio and conditioning entirely, you're cardio and conditioning entirely, you're not as healthy as you think you are. Um not as healthy as you think you are. Um not as healthy as you think you are. Um I don't do as much cardio as I should. I don't do as much cardio as I should. I don't do as much cardio as I should. It's always my big confession that I It's always my big confession that I It's always my big confession that I don't. And the reason why is simply don't. And the reason why is simply don't. And the reason why is simply because I have to choose based on time because I have to choose based on time because I have to choose based on time limitation. And for me, with priorities limitation. And for me, with priorities limitation. And for me, with priorities being to spend some time with my family being to spend some time with my family being to spend some time with my family and my boys and how much can I and my boys and how much can I and my boys and how much can I actually get done with work and my actually get done with work and my actually get done with work and my workout time, I always will take a step workout time, I always will take a step workout time, I always will take a step in the direction of strength training in the direction of strength training in the direction of strength training and weight training, but I try not to and weight training, but I try not to and weight training, but I try not to ignore it entirely. when I do I jump on ignore it entirely. when I do I jump on ignore it entirely. when I do I jump on a bike and I do stationary bike riding a bike and I do stationary bike riding a bike and I do stationary bike riding because I can I like the fact that I can because I can I like the fact that I can because I can I like the fact that I can increase resistance on the pedals increase resistance on the pedals increase resistance on the pedals and kind of turn it into almost a and kind of turn it into almost a and kind of turn it into almost a pseudo, you know, again, the meat side pseudo, you know, again, the meat side pseudo, you know, again, the meat side of me wants to turn into some sort of a of me wants to turn into some sort of a of me wants to turn into some sort of a of a resistance activity, but of course of a resistance activity, but of course of a resistance activity, but of course doing it for the duration to improve my doing it for the duration to improve my doing it for the duration to improve my uh my cardiorespiratory health. Um, uh my cardiorespiratory health. Um, uh my cardiorespiratory health. Um, but it's also good for my knees. My but it's also good for my knees. My but it's also good for my knees. My knees are quite beat up. Again, that's knees are quite beat up. Again, that's knees are quite beat up. Again, that's something that I'll never be able that's something that I'll never be able that's something that I'll never be able to reverse, at least not without modern to reverse, at least not without modern to reverse, at least not without modern medicine, but I uh I have to manage medicine, but I uh I have to manage medicine, but I uh I have to manage that. And anytime I try to do anything that. And anytime I try to do anything that. And anytime I try to do anything where I'm running or jumping, um it where I'm running or jumping, um it where I'm running or jumping, um it tends to hurt a little bit. I do still tends to hurt a little bit. I do still tends to hurt a little bit. I do still love to jump rope. We talked about jump love to jump rope. We talked about jump love to jump rope. We talked about jump rope before. Jump rope happens to be a rope before. Jump rope happens to be a rope before. Jump rope happens to be a lot lower impact for me as long as you lot lower impact for me as long as you lot lower impact for me as long as you can do it properly on the balls of your can do it properly on the balls of your can do it properly on the balls of your foot and absorb the shock of jump foot and absorb the shock of jump foot and absorb the shock of jump roping. But I would say between jump roping. But I would say between jump roping. But I would say between jump roping and stationary bike at a roping and stationary bike at a roping and stationary bike at a higher resistance level and done an higher resistance level and done an higher resistance level and done an interval fashion, those are my two interval fashion, those are my two interval fashion, those are my two favorite ways to do it. favorite ways to do it. favorite ways to do it. &gt;&gt; Yeah, jump rope's great. I haven't been &gt;&gt; Yeah, jump rope's great. I haven't been &gt;&gt; Yeah, jump rope's great. I haven't been doing it as much as I used to. And uh doing it as much as I used to. And uh doing it as much as I used to. And uh now that I got this new pup, I've got now that I got this new pup, I've got now that I got this new pup, I've got him in his little penned area sometimes him in his little penned area sometimes him in his little penned area sometimes and I'll and I'll skip rope. I don't and I'll and I'll skip rope. I don't and I'll and I'll skip rope. I don't let him run around while I do it cuz I'm let him run around while I do it cuz I'm let him run around while I do it cuz I'm afraid I'm going to I'm going to whip afraid I'm going to I'm going to whip afraid I'm going to I'm going to whip him, you know, on accident. I don't want him, you know, on accident. I don't want him, you know, on accident. I don't want to do that. But um I'd forgotten how to do that. But um I'd forgotten how to do that. But um I'd forgotten how effective it is at getting heart rate effective it is at getting heart rate effective it is at getting heart rate up, especially if you're doing some up, especially if you're doing some up, especially if you're doing some double unders or speed it up or high double unders or speed it up or high double unders or speed it up or high knees and things like that. The knees and things like that. The knees and things like that. The coordination piece is awesome. You know, coordination piece is awesome. You know, coordination piece is awesome. You know, it's one of these things like back to it's one of these things like back to it's one of these things like back to the basics feels good. the basics feels good. the basics feels good. &gt;&gt; It's also there's a gamification aspect &gt;&gt; It's also there's a gamification aspect &gt;&gt; It's also there's a gamification aspect like you want to Yeah. You want to learn like you want to Yeah. You want to learn like you want to Yeah. You want to learn a new skill. Can I do it single leg? Can a new skill. Can I do it single leg? Can a new skill. Can I do it single leg? Can I do it side to side? Can I do it double I do it side to side? Can I do it double I do it side to side? Can I do it double under? as you said, like there's under? as you said, like there's under? as you said, like there's little built-in challenges that there's little built-in challenges that there's little built-in challenges that I think we inherently always try to like I think we inherently always try to like I think we inherently always try to like up the up the level of what we're doing up the up the level of what we're doing up the up the level of what we're doing to see what we can do or what we can't. to see what we can do or what we can't. to see what we can do or what we can't. But, um, that's built in that's not But, um, that's built in that's not But, um, that's built in that's not really built in on a lot of the other really built in on a lot of the other really built in on a lot of the other modes of conditioning, which is why modes of conditioning, which is why modes of conditioning, which is why people who do skip it skip it cuz it people who do skip it skip it cuz it people who do skip it skip it cuz it tends to be unapologetically kind of the tends to be unapologetically kind of the tends to be unapologetically kind of the most boring part of training. If the most boring part of training. If the most boring part of training. If you're used to doing lots of different you're used to doing lots of different you're used to doing lots of different exercises and feeling the weight in exercises and feeling the weight in exercises and feeling the weight in your hands, it could be a little bit your hands, it could be a little bit your hands, it could be a little bit boring, but there's ways to make that boring, but there's ways to make that boring, but there's ways to make that more fun. more fun. more fun. &gt;&gt; Do you like running? &gt;&gt; Do you like running? &gt;&gt; Do you like running? &gt;&gt; I actually like running, but again, I &gt;&gt; I actually like running, but again, I &gt;&gt; I actually like running, but again, I can't tolerate it. My knees are just can't tolerate it. My knees are just can't tolerate it. My knees are just they feel like they want to they feel like they want to they feel like they want to detonate when I take about after about a detonate when I take about after about a detonate when I take about after about a quarter mile. Now, I could do it on my I quarter mile. Now, I could do it on my I quarter mile. Now, I could do it on my I have a Woodway treadmill, have a Woodway treadmill, have a Woodway treadmill, &gt;&gt; which are incredibly forgiving. It's &gt;&gt; which are incredibly forgiving. It's &gt;&gt; which are incredibly forgiving. It's like &gt;&gt; Which one is it? &gt;&gt; Which one is it? &gt;&gt; Which one is it? &gt;&gt; Woodway. &gt;&gt; Woodway. &gt;&gt; Woodway. &gt;&gt; Woodway. &gt;&gt; Woodway. &gt;&gt; Woodway. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have we used to have them in &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have we used to have them in &gt;&gt; Yeah, we have we used to have them in all the um MLB weight rooms. They're all the um MLB weight rooms. They're all the um MLB weight rooms. They're they're basically there's no deck they're basically there's no deck they're basically there's no deck underneath them. So they're it's like underneath them. So they're it's like underneath them. So they're it's like running on air and best treadmill. Also running on air and best treadmill. Also running on air and best treadmill. Also pretty super expensive, but they're pretty super expensive, but they're pretty super expensive, but they're worth the money if people have they're worth the money if people have they're worth the money if people have the ability to invest in one. They want the ability to invest in one. They want the ability to invest in one. They want to run indoors. to run indoors. to run indoors. &gt;&gt; Are they arked ones or are they &gt;&gt; Are they arked ones or are they &gt;&gt; Are they arked ones or are they straight? &gt;&gt; They make an arked one, but they're &gt;&gt; They make an arked one, but they're &gt;&gt; They make an arked one, but they're straight and they're just there's just straight and they're just there's just straight and they're just there's just no deck in there. So it feels a lot no deck in there. So it feels a lot no deck in there. So it feels a lot lighter and more forgiving on your on lighter and more forgiving on your on lighter and more forgiving on your on your feet. They actually have some your feet. They actually have some your feet. They actually have some amazing um versions of the woodway amazing um versions of the woodway amazing um versions of the woodway that they um called the Alter G where that they um called the Alter G where that they um called the Alter G where they actually take the gravity away so they actually take the gravity away so they actually take the gravity away so you can run in a gravity free you can run in a gravity free you can run in a gravity free environment. Yeah. You can like which is environment. Yeah. You can like which is environment. Yeah. You can like which is crazy because if you think about crazy because if you think about crazy because if you think about &gt;&gt; injury rehab, &gt;&gt; injury rehab, &gt;&gt; injury rehab, &gt;&gt; we've taken players with lower body &gt;&gt; we've taken players with lower body &gt;&gt; we've taken players with lower body injuries, put them on the alter G injuries, put them on the alter G injuries, put them on the alter G and have them run with only five% or 10% and have them run with only five% or 10% and have them run with only five% or 10% of their weight. So you can unweight of their weight. So you can unweight of their weight. So you can unweight their body. Get them into the mechanics their body. Get them into the mechanics their body. Get them into the mechanics of foot on the ground and running and of foot on the ground and running and of foot on the ground and running and &gt;&gt; transmitting the force through the &gt;&gt; transmitting the force through the &gt;&gt; transmitting the force through the whole body, but do it in a in a in an whole body, but do it in a in a in an whole body, but do it in a in a in an environment that takes all of their body environment that takes all of their body environment that takes all of their body weight away and then progress up to now weight away and then progress up to now weight away and then progress up to now you got 10% of your body weight that you got 10% of your body weight that you got 10% of your body weight that you're running on and 20% of your body you're running on and 20% of your body you're running on and 20% of your body weight that you're running on. So you weight that you're running on. So you weight that you're running on. So you can actually progress them to not have can actually progress them to not have can actually progress them to not have to go from nonweightbearing to fully to go from nonweightbearing to fully to go from nonweightbearing to fully weight bearing in a in a cool athletic weight bearing in a in a cool athletic weight bearing in a in a cool athletic way. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz swimming is great, but you &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz swimming is great, but you &gt;&gt; Yeah. Cuz swimming is great, but you have to have access to a pool and I miss have to have access to a pool and I miss have to have access to a pool and I miss swimming. I need to get back to that. swimming. I need to get back to that. swimming. I need to get back to that. swim as a kid all the time. swim as a kid all the time. swim as a kid all the time. &gt;&gt; Yeah, likewise. Yeah, every kid in my &gt;&gt; Yeah, likewise. Yeah, every kid in my &gt;&gt; Yeah, likewise. Yeah, every kid in my town did soccer and swim team. Those are town did soccer and swim team. Those are town did soccer and swim team. Those are kind of the big sports. I'm comfy in the kind of the big sports. I'm comfy in the kind of the big sports. I'm comfy in the water. I live near the ocean now, but water. I live near the ocean now, but water. I live near the ocean now, but unfortunately the um ocean hasn't been unfortunately the um ocean hasn't been unfortunately the um ocean hasn't been that clean since the fires. that clean since the fires. that clean since the fires. &gt;&gt; There's a bunch of hazards to ocean &gt;&gt; There's a bunch of hazards to ocean &gt;&gt; There's a bunch of hazards to ocean swimming that I've seen. One person swimming that I've seen. One person swimming that I've seen. One person swim got hypothermia once, so I'm like, swim got hypothermia once, so I'm like, swim got hypothermia once, so I'm like, I don't know. Um, yeah, I think that the I don't know. Um, yeah, I think that the I don't know. Um, yeah, I think that the cardio piece, the big debate seems to be cardio piece, the big debate seems to be cardio piece, the big debate seems to be whether or not if people have a limited whether or not if people have a limited whether or not if people have a limited amount of time, which most people have a amount of time, which most people have a amount of time, which most people have a limited amount of time, whether they'd limited amount of time, whether they'd limited amount of time, whether they'd be better off investing in some be better off investing in some be better off investing in some highintensity training, high-intensity highintensity training, high-intensity highintensity training, high-intensity interval training or some, you know, interval training or some, you know, interval training or some, you know, so-called zone 2, zone 3 kind of steady so-called zone 2, zone 3 kind of steady so-called zone 2, zone 3 kind of steady state stuff for we know that caloric state stuff for we know that caloric state stuff for we know that caloric deficit is required for fat loss. But deficit is required for fat loss. But deficit is required for fat loss. But assuming caloric deficit, is there a assuming caloric deficit, is there a assuming caloric deficit, is there a best cardio for fat loss? the one that best cardio for fat loss? the one that best cardio for fat loss? the one that you're going to do is going to be the you're going to do is going to be the you're going to do is going to be the best one for sure. Um, best one for sure. Um, best one for sure. Um, &gt;&gt; good answer. &gt;&gt; good answer. &gt;&gt; good answer. &gt;&gt; And I think, um, &gt;&gt; And I think, um, &gt;&gt; And I think, um, &gt;&gt; it's hard to it's hard to &gt;&gt; it's hard to it's hard to &gt;&gt; it's hard to it's hard to sustain some of the higher zone 5 sustain some of the higher zone 5 sustain some of the higher zone 5 cardios for long enough to have a cardios for long enough to have a cardios for long enough to have a significant cardio um or calorie burn significant cardio um or calorie burn significant cardio um or calorie burn effect. Uh, I did a famous video with effect. Uh, I did a famous video with effect. Uh, I did a famous video with Jesse where I had him do um burpees, Jesse where I had him do um burpees, Jesse where I had him do um burpees, which is one of the is one of the most which is one of the is one of the most which is one of the is one of the most calorically demanding exercises you can calorically demanding exercises you can calorically demanding exercises you can do, which is for anybody that doesn't do, which is for anybody that doesn't do, which is for anybody that doesn't know the burpee. You basically quickly know the burpee. You basically quickly know the burpee. You basically quickly lower yourself down to the ground. You lower yourself down to the ground. You lower yourself down to the ground. You do a full push-up. You push yourself do a full push-up. You push yourself do a full push-up. You push yourself explosively out of that push-up back to explosively out of that push-up back to explosively out of that push-up back to it. You jump up to your feet again and it. You jump up to your feet again and it. You jump up to your feet again and back to a standing position. That can back to a standing position. That can back to a standing position. That can burn around um I believe it was 13 to 15 burn around um I believe it was 13 to 15 burn around um I believe it was 13 to 15 calories per minute if you did them calories per minute if you did them calories per minute if you did them non-stop for a minute. Well, if you're non-stop for a minute. Well, if you're non-stop for a minute. Well, if you're doing burpees non-stop for a minute, doing burpees non-stop for a minute, doing burpees non-stop for a minute, you're likely not doing them non-stop you're likely not doing them non-stop you're likely not doing them non-stop for many more minutes than the first for many more minutes than the first for many more minutes than the first minute cuz it's a very demanding minute cuz it's a very demanding minute cuz it's a very demanding exercise. So, while your heart rate will exercise. So, while your heart rate will exercise. So, while your heart rate will go soaring right through the roof very go soaring right through the roof very go soaring right through the roof very quickly, you're going to have um uh you quickly, you're going to have um uh you quickly, you're going to have um uh you can apply even intervals to do this, can apply even intervals to do this, can apply even intervals to do this, right? You're still going to start to right? You're still going to start to right? You're still going to start to fatigue because of the anorobic part fatigue because of the anorobic part fatigue because of the anorobic part of it too through the muscles of the of it too through the muscles of the of it too through the muscles of the chest and the arms getting fatigued. You chest and the arms getting fatigued. You chest and the arms getting fatigued. You just can't really do it for more than just can't really do it for more than just can't really do it for more than let's say 10 minutes even interval let's say 10 minutes even interval let's say 10 minutes even interval format. So what are you really burning format. So what are you really burning format. So what are you really burning there? If you did it even straight there? If you did it even straight there? If you did it even straight through forif for 10 minutes 15 calories through forif for 10 minutes 15 calories through forif for 10 minutes 15 calories a minute you're talking about 150 a minute you're talking about 150 a minute you're talking about 150 calories. So people who use their cardio calories. So people who use their cardio calories. So people who use their cardio for weight loss or caloric deficit are for weight loss or caloric deficit are for weight loss or caloric deficit are going to do better doing longer distance going to do better doing longer distance going to do better doing longer distance cardio at lower intensity levels. So cardio at lower intensity levels. So cardio at lower intensity levels. So getting on a bike and riding or getting on a bike and riding or getting on a bike and riding or getting uh jogging or running or even doing laps uh jogging or running or even doing laps uh jogging or running or even doing laps in interval fashion where it's a jog and in interval fashion where it's a jog and in interval fashion where it's a jog and a run and a jog and a run. There's a lot a run and a jog and a run. There's a lot a run and a jog and a run. There's a lot of different ways to do that, but to of different ways to do that, but to of different ways to do that, but to sustain them for a lot longer periods, sustain them for a lot longer periods, sustain them for a lot longer periods, 45 minutes to an hour. But there again, 45 minutes to an hour. But there again, 45 minutes to an hour. But there again, I and I I'm you know, I'm just I'm a big I and I I'm you know, I'm just I'm a big I and I I'm you know, I'm just I'm a big believer that when you're trying to believer that when you're trying to believer that when you're trying to create the deficit, relying on the create the deficit, relying on the create the deficit, relying on the conditioning, we're not talking about conditioning, we're not talking about conditioning, we're not talking about cardiovascular here. We're talking about cardiovascular here. We're talking about cardiovascular here. We're talking about just creating the deficit, relying on just creating the deficit, relying on just creating the deficit, relying on the conditioning is a much more the conditioning is a much more the conditioning is a much more inefficient way to go about this than inefficient way to go about this than inefficient way to go about this than what's actually should be done, which is what's actually should be done, which is what's actually should be done, which is just to focus on your nutrition. just to focus on your nutrition. just to focus on your nutrition. &gt;&gt; Cuz it's just so much more &gt;&gt; Cuz it's just so much more &gt;&gt; Cuz it's just so much more effective to create large deficits or effective to create large deficits or effective to create large deficits or large swaths of deficits from cutting large swaths of deficits from cutting large swaths of deficits from cutting back the crap you're eating right now back the crap you're eating right now back the crap you're eating right now than it is to try to get it through zone than it is to try to get it through zone than it is to try to get it through zone 2 cardio done for very long periods of 2 cardio done for very long periods of 2 cardio done for very long periods of time. Again, not to say that that's not time. Again, not to say that that's not time. Again, not to say that that's not beneficial for your cardio and your and beneficial for your cardio and your and beneficial for your cardio and your and your cardiac conditioning. It's separate your cardiac conditioning. It's separate your cardiac conditioning. It's separate issue. But when you're trying to create issue. But when you're trying to create issue. But when you're trying to create caloric deficits there, I always tell caloric deficits there, I always tell caloric deficits there, I always tell people first, you got to work on what people first, you got to work on what people first, you got to work on what you're putting in your mouth cuz the old you're putting in your mouth cuz the old you're putting in your mouth cuz the old saying goes, you can't outrun a bad saying goes, you can't outrun a bad saying goes, you can't outrun a bad diet. And there's just there's just no diet. And there's just there's just no diet. And there's just there's just no way to really do that effectively over way to really do that effectively over way to really do that effectively over time. So, of the two forms, I'd say the time. So, of the two forms, I'd say the time. So, of the two forms, I'd say the zone 2 steady state longer form is the zone 2 steady state longer form is the zone 2 steady state longer form is going to do more absolute levels of going to do more absolute levels of going to do more absolute levels of caloric burn. I don't know if you've caloric burn. I don't know if you've caloric burn. I don't know if you've ever done this, but I know you're you ever done this, but I know you're you ever done this, but I know you're you and everybody has to, you know, pay and everybody has to, you know, pay and everybody has to, you know, pay attention to their caloric needs and attention to their caloric needs and attention to their caloric needs and nutrition needs, but what does nutrition needs, but what does nutrition needs, but what does nutrition look like for you in a given nutrition look like for you in a given nutrition look like for you in a given day? &gt;&gt; So, I don't know how many calories I &gt;&gt; So, I don't know how many calories I &gt;&gt; So, I don't know how many calories I take in a given day. Um, I've never take in a given day. Um, I've never take in a given day. Um, I've never really counted past when I really first really counted past when I really first really counted past when I really first started out. And I think it's an started out. And I think it's an started out. And I think it's an important part of the process is people important part of the process is people important part of the process is people should count because it does two things should count because it does two things should count because it does two things early on. They should count because it early on. They should count because it early on. They should count because it gives you awareness. You may have no gives you awareness. You may have no gives you awareness. You may have no idea how many calories you're actually idea how many calories you're actually idea how many calories you're actually having until you actually count them. having until you actually count them. having until you actually count them. You also become aware of many of the You also become aware of many of the You also become aware of many of the things that you are taking for granted things that you are taking for granted things that you are taking for granted that you're just doing almost second that you're just doing almost second that you're just doing almost second nature that are just not healthy. You're nature that are just not healthy. You're nature that are just not healthy. You're eating things that repetitively that are eating things that repetitively that are eating things that repetitively that are just not healthy or drinking things that just not healthy or drinking things that just not healthy or drinking things that are just not healthy. And when someone are just not healthy. And when someone are just not healthy. And when someone asks you to log what you're eating, you asks you to log what you're eating, you asks you to log what you're eating, you become very aware of every calorie you become very aware of every calorie you become very aware of every calorie you put in your body. So that's part of it. put in your body. So that's part of it. put in your body. So that's part of it. The second thing is there's an education The second thing is there's an education The second thing is there's an education that goes into learning how many that goes into learning how many that goes into learning how many calories each food has. I can't tell you calories each food has. I can't tell you calories each food has. I can't tell you how many people they they'll think that how many people they they'll think that how many people they they'll think that chicken parmesan is the same as grilled chicken parmesan is the same as grilled chicken parmesan is the same as grilled chicken just because it's chicken and chicken just because it's chicken and chicken just because it's chicken and they're very different in terms of their they're very different in terms of their they're very different in terms of their caloric impact. So educating yourself on caloric impact. So educating yourself on caloric impact. So educating yourself on to about what those um macronutrient to about what those um macronutrient to about what those um macronutrient profiles look like for whatever food profiles look like for whatever food profiles look like for whatever food you're having is part of the process too you're having is part of the process too you're having is part of the process too because ultimately where you want to be because ultimately where you want to be because ultimately where you want to be able to get to is can you make able to get to is can you make able to get to is can you make equivalent swaps in your head on the fly equivalent swaps in your head on the fly equivalent swaps in your head on the fly wherever you are. Right? That would be wherever you are. Right? That would be wherever you are. Right? That would be nutritional freedom. nutritional freedom. nutritional freedom. &gt;&gt; As far as what that day would look like, &gt;&gt; As far as what that day would look like, &gt;&gt; As far as what that day would look like, what I try to do is I try to build my what I try to do is I try to build my what I try to do is I try to build my base around protein. I always have. The base around protein. I always have. The base around protein. I always have. The reason for that is I it's one of those reason for that is I it's one of those reason for that is I it's one of those macronutrients that I know I need to macronutrients that I know I need to macronutrients that I know I need to build lean muscle. It's one that I know build lean muscle. It's one that I know build lean muscle. It's one that I know can provide satiety. Um it's one that I can provide satiety. Um it's one that I can provide satiety. Um it's one that I know is know is know is important to everything I'm trying to important to everything I'm trying to important to everything I'm trying to pursue and what everyone really should pursue and what everyone really should pursue and what everyone really should be trying to pursue. They are trying to be trying to pursue. They are trying to be trying to pursue. They are trying to be healthy. So they should base their be healthy. So they should base their be healthy. So they should base their meal around that first. Start with your meal around that first. Start with your meal around that first. Start with your protein. And I usually use a visual protein. And I usually use a visual protein. And I usually use a visual way of doing that where I just say, way of doing that where I just say, way of doing that where I just say, "Hey, take your plate and divide "Hey, take your plate and divide "Hey, take your plate and divide onethird of that plate or that meal if onethird of that plate or that meal if onethird of that plate or that meal if you're having it in separate plates or you're having it in separate plates or you're having it in separate plates or separate dishes. One third of that meal separate dishes. One third of that meal separate dishes. One third of that meal should come from a lean source of should come from a lean source of should come from a lean source of protein." And that could be chicken, protein." And that could be chicken, protein." And that could be chicken, fish, beef, whatever it is that you fish, beef, whatever it is that you fish, beef, whatever it is that you prefer. But have that be the prefer. But have that be the prefer. But have that be the one/3. And then divide the rest of your one/3. And then divide the rest of your one/3. And then divide the rest of your plate with carbohydrates, plate with carbohydrates, plate with carbohydrates, preferably in a 2:1 ratio with fibrous preferably in a 2:1 ratio with fibrous preferably in a 2:1 ratio with fibrous carbohydrates to starchy carbohydrates. carbohydrates to starchy carbohydrates. carbohydrates to starchy carbohydrates. So the fibers being the green, the So the fibers being the green, the So the fibers being the green, the vegetables, asparagus, the broccoli, and vegetables, asparagus, the broccoli, and vegetables, asparagus, the broccoli, and then the starchy carbohydrates, the then the starchy carbohydrates, the then the starchy carbohydrates, the rice, potatoes, pasta. I don't believe rice, potatoes, pasta. I don't believe rice, potatoes, pasta. I don't believe me personally, I don't believe that I me personally, I don't believe that I me personally, I don't believe that I should eliminate my starchy should eliminate my starchy should eliminate my starchy carbohydrates. Again, inherently I'm an carbohydrates. Again, inherently I'm an carbohydrates. Again, inherently I'm an athlete and I know that that's, you athlete and I know that that's, you athlete and I know that that's, you know, served a very important purpose know, served a very important purpose know, served a very important purpose for me for energy, for fuel resources, for me for energy, for fuel resources, for me for energy, for fuel resources, for glycogen, for my muscles that I for glycogen, for my muscles that I for glycogen, for my muscles that I don't I don't avoid that. Plus, I know don't I don't avoid that. Plus, I know don't I don't avoid that. Plus, I know that I could never long-term restrict that I could never long-term restrict that I could never long-term restrict myself from carbohydrates. So, when I myself from carbohydrates. So, when I myself from carbohydrates. So, when I started out, I said, I have to adopt a started out, I said, I have to adopt a started out, I said, I have to adopt a plan here that I know I can stick to. If plan here that I know I can stick to. If plan here that I know I can stick to. If it was taking away pasta and taking away it was taking away pasta and taking away it was taking away pasta and taking away oatmeal and taking away the things, oatmeal and taking away the things, oatmeal and taking away the things, there's no way that I could sustain there's no way that I could sustain there's no way that I could sustain that. So, I don't think that people that. So, I don't think that people that. So, I don't think that people should try to start out on some change should try to start out on some change should try to start out on some change to their diet where they're restricting to their diet where they're restricting to their diet where they're restricting foods they know they're never going to foods they know they're never going to foods they know they're never going to be able to maintain long term or keep be able to maintain long term or keep be able to maintain long term or keep away long term. So, that if you can away long term. So, that if you can away long term. So, that if you can learn to manage them and eat them in learn to manage them and eat them in learn to manage them and eat them in a way that's more controlled because the a way that's more controlled because the a way that's more controlled because the rest of the stuff on your plate is rest of the stuff on your plate is rest of the stuff on your plate is actually helping to minimize your actually helping to minimize your actually helping to minimize your cravings for that or controlling your cravings for that or controlling your cravings for that or controlling your portion sizes there. That's the portion sizes there. That's the portion sizes there. That's the long-term goal, I think. And then long-term goal, I think. And then long-term goal, I think. And then overarching overall that overarching overall that overarching overall that calorically just because it's a calorically just because it's a calorically just because it's a fact of nature, fats are more fact of nature, fats are more fact of nature, fats are more calorically dense than carbohydrates and calorically dense than carbohydrates and calorically dense than carbohydrates and proteins. So just be aware of your fats. proteins. So just be aware of your fats. proteins. So just be aware of your fats. I know a lot of people who go down the I know a lot of people who go down the I know a lot of people who go down the path of healthy eating and they're path of healthy eating and they're path of healthy eating and they're putting olive oil on everything and putting olive oil on everything and putting olive oil on everything and avocado on everything because they're avocado on everything because they're avocado on everything because they're healthy foods, but they're putting so healthy foods, but they're putting so healthy foods, but they're putting so much of it because they want to feel much of it because they want to feel much of it because they want to feel like they're doing they're doing the like they're doing they're doing the like they're doing they're doing the healthy thing. But you're also healthy thing. But you're also healthy thing. But you're also skyrocketing your calories. So, you have skyrocketing your calories. So, you have skyrocketing your calories. So, you have to at least be aware where and how to at least be aware where and how to at least be aware where and how you're applying your fats because you're applying your fats because you're applying your fats because calorically they will add up. I have calorically they will add up. I have calorically they will add up. I have nothing against fat. I think everybody nothing against fat. I think everybody nothing against fat. I think everybody should have it. I think it should be should have it. I think it should be should have it. I think it should be part of every meal. I'm just saying it part of every meal. I'm just saying it part of every meal. I'm just saying it should be you need to be aware of your should be you need to be aware of your should be you need to be aware of your fat content. I try to go low sugar as fat content. I try to go low sugar as fat content. I try to go low sugar as much as I possibly can. I do not try I much as I possibly can. I do not try I much as I possibly can. I do not try I try to avoid processed foods. I try to try to avoid processed foods. I try to try to avoid processed foods. I try to avoid um blatant sugars unless it's my avoid um blatant sugars unless it's my avoid um blatant sugars unless it's my birthday and I'm having my carrot cake. birthday and I'm having my carrot cake. birthday and I'm having my carrot cake. But for the most part, But for the most part, But for the most part, &gt;&gt; that's really your only quote unquote. &gt;&gt; that's really your only quote unquote. &gt;&gt; that's really your only quote unquote. That's not my That's not my only like, That's not my That's not my only like, That's not my That's not my only like, you know, that that's a that's become an you know, that that's a that's become an you know, that that's a that's become an urban myth a little bit. Maybe I'll have urban myth a little bit. Maybe I'll have urban myth a little bit. Maybe I'll have it twice a year, but no, I don't I it twice a year, but no, I don't I it twice a year, but no, I don't I don't I really try not to um indulge in don't I really try not to um indulge in don't I really try not to um indulge in those things, but I'm not missing it. those things, but I'm not missing it. those things, but I'm not missing it. &gt;&gt; I really enjoy it when I have it, but &gt;&gt; I really enjoy it when I have it, but &gt;&gt; I really enjoy it when I have it, but I'm not depriving myself of it along the I'm not depriving myself of it along the I'm not depriving myself of it along the way. If people felt deprived and have it way. If people felt deprived and have it way. If people felt deprived and have it more often, you could have I could have more often, you could have I could have more often, you could have I could have a piece of carrot cake uh once a week a piece of carrot cake uh once a week a piece of carrot cake uh once a week and probably not have anything happen to and probably not have anything happen to and probably not have anything happen to my physique. So the fact that I don't is my physique. So the fact that I don't is my physique. So the fact that I don't is just really more out of habit than just really more out of habit than just really more out of habit than anything else. But if you're in a plan anything else. But if you're in a plan anything else. But if you're in a plan where you feel so deprived that you know where you feel so deprived that you know where you feel so deprived that you know you're pulling your hair out and you're pulling your hair out and you're pulling your hair out and you're trying to like the first chance you get trying to like the first chance you get trying to like the first chance you get to just jump off your diet and eat to just jump off your diet and eat to just jump off your diet and eat all the things that you really were all the things that you really were all the things that you really were keeping yourself away from, then you're keeping yourself away from, then you're keeping yourself away from, then you're on the wrong plan. So I think that no on the wrong plan. So I think that no on the wrong plan. So I think that no matter what it is, whether it be keto, matter what it is, whether it be keto, matter what it is, whether it be keto, whether it be the what I guess you'd whether it be the what I guess you'd whether it be the what I guess you'd call this a bodybuilder style diet that call this a bodybuilder style diet that call this a bodybuilder style diet that I eat or I eat or I eat or &gt;&gt; or I call it clean omnivore. &gt;&gt; or I call it clean omnivore. &gt;&gt; or I call it clean omnivore. &gt;&gt; There you go. Yeah. you know, like &gt;&gt; There you go. Yeah. you know, like &gt;&gt; There you go. Yeah. you know, like you're not like I basically eat the same you're not like I basically eat the same you're not like I basically eat the same as you, although I suppose I probably as you, although I suppose I probably as you, although I suppose I probably a little high on the fats a little high on the fats a little high on the fats sometimes just cuz sometimes just cuz sometimes just cuz &gt;&gt; I mean I love, you know, nuts and &gt;&gt; I mean I love, you know, nuts and &gt;&gt; I mean I love, you know, nuts and parmesan cheese and a little bit parmesan cheese and a little bit parmesan cheese and a little bit little bit of butter and some olive oil little bit of butter and some olive oil little bit of butter and some olive oil and stuff and stuff and stuff &gt;&gt; which are all good foods. It's &gt;&gt; which are all good foods. It's &gt;&gt; which are all good foods. It's just that calorically there's an impact just that calorically there's an impact just that calorically there's an impact there. &gt;&gt; And if you're going to eat them, what I &gt;&gt; And if you're going to eat them, what I &gt;&gt; And if you're going to eat them, what I always recommend people do is again you always recommend people do is again you always recommend people do is again you could just cut back a little bit on some could just cut back a little bit on some could just cut back a little bit on some of the other portion sizes to just to of the other portion sizes to just to of the other portion sizes to just to accommodate calorically for what you're accommodate calorically for what you're accommodate calorically for what you're doing. But I do think that concept doing. But I do think that concept doing. But I do think that concept of the equivalent swaps is big because of the equivalent swaps is big because of the equivalent swaps is big because if you learn to eat the way I just if you learn to eat the way I just if you learn to eat the way I just suggested and there's no magic behind suggested and there's no magic behind suggested and there's no magic behind what I do. It's just been very I've been what I do. It's just been very I've been what I do. It's just been very I've been very consistent with it is that you'll very consistent with it is that you'll very consistent with it is that you'll be able to make swaps when you go be able to make swaps when you go be able to make swaps when you go anywhere. What's a protein I could have anywhere. What's a protein I could have anywhere. What's a protein I could have here today? What's the restaurant have? here today? What's the restaurant have? here today? What's the restaurant have? Oh, they only have uh pork chops. Oh, they only have uh pork chops. Oh, they only have uh pork chops. Okay, fine. I'll have a pork chop. Like Okay, fine. I'll have a pork chop. Like Okay, fine. I'll have a pork chop. Like like you can you're visually just like you can you're visually just like you can you're visually just replacing equivalents on the plate. replacing equivalents on the plate. replacing equivalents on the plate. Sometimes it doesn't always work. I Sometimes it doesn't always work. I Sometimes it doesn't always work. I just did a video where I talked about a just did a video where I talked about a just did a video where I talked about a steak and a and a grilled chicken breast steak and a and a grilled chicken breast steak and a and a grilled chicken breast are potentially are potentially are potentially uh the same protein in terms of their uh the same protein in terms of their uh the same protein in terms of their protein content, but they're not the protein content, but they're not the protein content, but they're not the same calorically because the steak has a same calorically because the steak has a same calorically because the steak has a lot more fat than the chicken breast lot more fat than the chicken breast lot more fat than the chicken breast does. So, you might have a smaller steak does. So, you might have a smaller steak does. So, you might have a smaller steak to make that equivalent swap out. But to make that equivalent swap out. But to make that equivalent swap out. But that's only going to come through your that's only going to come through your that's only going to come through your understanding and knowledge of the foods understanding and knowledge of the foods understanding and knowledge of the foods and what they contain. So, that early and what they contain. So, that early and what they contain. So, that early phase of learning what they have is phase of learning what they have is phase of learning what they have is important there. But ultimately, important there. But ultimately, important there. But ultimately, nutritional freedom comes from the nutritional freedom comes from the nutritional freedom comes from the ability to be consistent with what you ability to be consistent with what you ability to be consistent with what you do. I talk a lot about the fact that we do. I talk a lot about the fact that we do. I talk a lot about the fact that we can get to the gym, we can train for an can get to the gym, we can train for an can get to the gym, we can train for an hour. It's not easy for people, hour. It's not easy for people, hour. It's not easy for people, especially to do it at a high enough especially to do it at a high enough especially to do it at a high enough intensity level, but we can train for an intensity level, but we can train for an intensity level, but we can train for an hour, go home, and feel like I did my hour, go home, and feel like I did my hour, go home, and feel like I did my work today. I feel good. I did what I work today. I feel good. I did what I work today. I feel good. I did what I was supposed to do. Great. Your was supposed to do. Great. Your was supposed to do. Great. Your nutritional job just started. you now nutritional job just started. you now nutritional job just started. you now have to figure out how do I navigate the have to figure out how do I navigate the have to figure out how do I navigate the next 23 hours whether I'm asleep or I'm next 23 hours whether I'm asleep or I'm next 23 hours whether I'm asleep or I'm awake but how am I gonna navigate the awake but how am I gonna navigate the awake but how am I gonna navigate the next 23 hours because that's what next 23 hours because that's what next 23 hours because that's what nutrition is that challenge is nutrition is that challenge is nutrition is that challenge is infinitely harder and the reason why a infinitely harder and the reason why a infinitely harder and the reason why a lot of people struggle with their weight lot of people struggle with their weight lot of people struggle with their weight is because they have to figure out how is because they have to figure out how is because they have to figure out how to get that right and do that in a to get that right and do that in a to get that right and do that in a repeatable way day in day out day in and repeatable way day in day out day in and repeatable way day in day out day in and day out and I've been doing what I've day out and I've been doing what I've day out and I've been doing what I've been doing here now with my nutrition been doing here now with my nutrition been doing here now with my nutrition approach for 30 years 30 years so when approach for 30 years 30 years so when approach for 30 years 30 years so when people ask me is it hard it's for me people ask me is it hard it's for me people ask me is it hard it's for me it's not hard at all. But it wasn't it's not hard at all. But it wasn't it's not hard at all. But it wasn't super easy in the beginning. It just super easy in the beginning. It just super easy in the beginning. It just there's a process to go through to get there's a process to go through to get there's a process to go through to get it there. And I was willing to go it there. And I was willing to go it there. And I was willing to go slowly, but also not sacrifice the slowly, but also not sacrifice the slowly, but also not sacrifice the things that I really knew I wouldn't be things that I really knew I wouldn't be things that I really knew I wouldn't be able to live without. So therefore, I able to live without. So therefore, I able to live without. So therefore, I could live with it for forever. And I could live with it for forever. And I could live with it for forever. And I think people make way too aggressive think people make way too aggressive think people make way too aggressive changes when it comes to nutrition. changes when it comes to nutrition. changes when it comes to nutrition. They're basically, you're not just They're basically, you're not just They're basically, you're not just changing your diet, you're changing your changing your diet, you're changing your changing your diet, you're changing your habits and you're changing your habits and you're changing your habits and you're changing your lifestyle. So when you go and you start lifestyle. So when you go and you start lifestyle. So when you go and you start making these radical changes to your making these radical changes to your making these radical changes to your nutrition plan because you're on a diet, nutrition plan because you're on a diet, nutrition plan because you're on a diet, it does not work. it does not work. it does not work. &gt;&gt; Listen, what you described, what I'll &gt;&gt; Listen, what you described, what I'll &gt;&gt; Listen, what you described, what I'll just call clean omnivore is I think is just call clean omnivore is I think is just call clean omnivore is I think is it's just an awesome way to approach it's just an awesome way to approach it's just an awesome way to approach nutrition for a couple of reasons. One, nutrition for a couple of reasons. One, nutrition for a couple of reasons. One, it works. Like you said, it's flexible. it works. Like you said, it's flexible. it works. Like you said, it's flexible. Even with travel, you can always make Even with travel, you can always make Even with travel, you can always make some adjustment toward that. It handles some adjustment toward that. It handles some adjustment toward that. It handles the protein needs thing the protein needs thing the protein needs thing &gt;&gt; pretty much on its own. I mean, you have &gt;&gt; pretty much on its own. I mean, you have &gt;&gt; pretty much on its own. I mean, you have to make sure you eat enough of those to make sure you eat enough of those to make sure you eat enough of those meals and enough protein. But as you meals and enough protein. But as you meals and enough protein. But as you were saying it, I realized that it were saying it, I realized that it were saying it, I realized that it gets people if they adopt this mindset gets people if they adopt this mindset gets people if they adopt this mindset that you do that you have for nutrition. that you do that you have for nutrition. that you do that you have for nutrition. It gets them out and away from the It gets them out and away from the It gets them out and away from the marketing based draw of nutrition cuz marketing based draw of nutrition cuz marketing based draw of nutrition cuz people say like, "Oh, like protein bar people say like, "Oh, like protein bar people say like, "Oh, like protein bar or you know, high protein yogurt." or you know, high protein yogurt." or you know, high protein yogurt." And listen, there's some great yogurts. And listen, there's some great yogurts. And listen, there's some great yogurts. I love Bulgarian yogurt. It's like Greek I love Bulgarian yogurt. It's like Greek I love Bulgarian yogurt. It's like Greek yogurt's great. Bulgarian yogurt, no yogurt's great. Bulgarian yogurt, no yogurt's great. Bulgarian yogurt, no disrespect to the Greeks. Love Greek disrespect to the Greeks. Love Greek disrespect to the Greeks. Love Greek food, by the way, too. But Bulgarian food, by the way, too. But Bulgarian food, by the way, too. But Bulgarian yogurt is so good. full fat Bulgarian yogurt is so good. full fat Bulgarian yogurt is so good. full fat Bulgarian yogurt or lowfat Bulgarian amazing and yogurt or lowfat Bulgarian amazing and yogurt or lowfat Bulgarian amazing and yeah and it you know the Bulgarians are yeah and it you know the Bulgarians are yeah and it you know the Bulgarians are known for their strength in many ways known for their strength in many ways known for their strength in many ways but you get outside that the marketing but you get outside that the marketing but you get outside that the marketing pole and you start thinking about food pole and you start thinking about food pole and you start thinking about food for its macronutrient content for its macronutrient content for its macronutrient content &gt;&gt; and its micronutrient content and &gt;&gt; and its micronutrient content and &gt;&gt; and its micronutrient content and quality as opposed to like the packaging quality as opposed to like the packaging quality as opposed to like the packaging based stuff because even the based stuff because even the based stuff because even the nonprocessed or non- highly processed nonprocessed or non- highly processed nonprocessed or non- highly processed foods mostly we're reaching for them foods mostly we're reaching for them foods mostly we're reaching for them because of what's on the label like the because of what's on the label like the because of what's on the label like the colors the words and these And what colors the words and these And what colors the words and these And what you're describing is completely you're describing is completely you're describing is completely different. It's getting to the different. It's getting to the different. It's getting to the actual food. I think that's a very uh actual food. I think that's a very uh actual food. I think that's a very uh very important not so subtle very important not so subtle very important not so subtle distinction. And once people make that distinction. And once people make that distinction. And once people make that switch, they're really in the driver's switch, they're really in the driver's switch, they're really in the driver's seat. It's not like you're like have to seat. It's not like you're like have to seat. It's not like you're like have to go prepare every meal, this kind of go prepare every meal, this kind of go prepare every meal, this kind of thing. &gt;&gt; Well, yeah. I mean, and again, even with &gt;&gt; Well, yeah. I mean, and again, even with &gt;&gt; Well, yeah. I mean, and again, even with some of the push towards higher some of the push towards higher some of the push towards higher protein foods now, again, the packaging protein foods now, again, the packaging protein foods now, again, the packaging is brag bragging about the protein is brag bragging about the protein is brag bragging about the protein content, but they've also increased the content, but they've also increased the content, but they've also increased the sugar, they've increased the fat, and sugar, they've increased the fat, and sugar, they've increased the fat, and it's like you've all you've made it's like you've all you've made it's like you've all you've made is a higher protein. I mean, even is a higher protein. I mean, even is a higher protein. I mean, even Snickers has a high protein bar. Snickers has a high protein bar. Snickers has a high protein bar. &gt;&gt; Are you serious? &gt;&gt; Are you serious? &gt;&gt; Are you serious? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I Snickers are Milky Way. They &gt;&gt; Yeah, I Snickers are Milky Way. They &gt;&gt; Yeah, I Snickers are Milky Way. They have a high protein bar. It's like, have a high protein bar. It's like, have a high protein bar. It's like, &gt;&gt; okay, this is this is insanity. So, show &gt;&gt; okay, this is this is insanity. So, show &gt;&gt; okay, this is this is insanity. So, show me the seauite of the Snickers. Uh, you me the seauite of the Snickers. Uh, you me the seauite of the Snickers. Uh, you know, I'm going to get in trouble for know, I'm going to get in trouble for know, I'm going to get in trouble for this, but whatever. Um, I want to see this, but whatever. Um, I want to see this, but whatever. Um, I want to see how fit these people actually look, you how fit these people actually look, you how fit these people actually look, you know, and if they're eating that stuff, know, and if they're eating that stuff, know, and if they're eating that stuff, you know, it's like something tells me you know, it's like something tells me you know, it's like something tells me they're not. they're not. they're not. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you again for being a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you again for being a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you again for being a voice of reason in the nutrition voice of reason in the nutrition voice of reason in the nutrition space. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I'm not a nutritionist, you I &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I'm not a nutritionist, you I &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I'm not a nutritionist, you I and people are quick to remind me of I and people are quick to remind me of I and people are quick to remind me of that when I whenever I speak of that when I whenever I speak of that when I whenever I speak of nutrition. I'm only speaking from my nutrition. I'm only speaking from my nutrition. I'm only speaking from my experience both with myself and anybody experience both with myself and anybody experience both with myself and anybody I've ever advised on how to do that. It I've ever advised on how to do that. It I've ever advised on how to do that. It works. It's it's sensible and um it's works. It's it's sensible and um it's works. It's it's sensible and um it's something that could be sustained. So something that could be sustained. So something that could be sustained. So for me, that's what's most important for me, that's what's most important for me, that's what's most important with nutrition. And again, I don't with nutrition. And again, I don't with nutrition. And again, I don't fixate on any one particular way. If if fixate on any one particular way. If if fixate on any one particular way. If if doing keto works for you, great. As long doing keto works for you, great. As long doing keto works for you, great. As long as you can sustain your eating that as you can sustain your eating that as you can sustain your eating that way, great. because all we're trying to way, great. because all we're trying to way, great. because all we're trying to do is manage our weight long term and do is manage our weight long term and do is manage our weight long term and not sacrifice other elements of and not sacrifice other elements of and not sacrifice other elements of our health in the process. So, if it our health in the process. So, if it our health in the process. So, if it works for you, cool. But this is what's works for you, cool. But this is what's works for you, cool. But this is what's worked for me. worked for me. worked for me. &gt;&gt; I'm starting to see more content out &gt;&gt; I'm starting to see more content out &gt;&gt; I'm starting to see more content out there about foot strength. You've there about foot strength. You've there about foot strength. You've mentioned you have flat feet. I uh had mentioned you have flat feet. I uh had mentioned you have flat feet. I uh had some foot injuries from skateboarding some foot injuries from skateboarding some foot injuries from skateboarding years ago, broke my left foot twice, years ago, broke my left foot twice, years ago, broke my left foot twice, some quote unquote snapped arches. It's some quote unquote snapped arches. It's some quote unquote snapped arches. It's not really a thing, but um and have not really a thing, but um and have not really a thing, but um and have started to think about, you know, foot started to think about, you know, foot started to think about, you know, foot health and foot training and stability. health and foot training and stability. health and foot training and stability. And so, on the one hand, it seems kind And so, on the one hand, it seems kind And so, on the one hand, it seems kind of silly. is like are really we're going of silly. is like are really we're going of silly. is like are really we're going to start training our feet but on the to start training our feet but on the to start training our feet but on the other hand you know our feet are always other hand you know our feet are always other hand you know our feet are always in contact with at least our shoes if in contact with at least our shoes if in contact with at least our shoes if not the ground. So what are your not the ground. So what are your not the ground. So what are your thoughts on um this notion of flat feet thoughts on um this notion of flat feet thoughts on um this notion of flat feet um foot strength and how it plays into um foot strength and how it plays into um foot strength and how it plays into stability and uh and performance and stability and uh and performance and stability and uh and performance and just overall ability in life. Yeah, it's just overall ability in life. Yeah, it's just overall ability in life. Yeah, it's actually something I wish I had done actually something I wish I had done actually something I wish I had done more of at an early age. One of the more of at an early age. One of the more of at an early age. One of the easiest ways to test this is to easiest ways to test this is to easiest ways to test this is to especially for someone like me who has I especially for someone like me who has I especially for someone like me who has I mean I have flippers for feet flat out mean I have flippers for feet flat out mean I have flippers for feet flat out just &gt;&gt; genetic &gt;&gt; genetic &gt;&gt; genetic sports based. sports based. sports based. &gt;&gt; I think it is partially genetic. My mom &gt;&gt; I think it is partially genetic. My mom &gt;&gt; I think it is partially genetic. My mom had pretty flat feet and then I also had pretty flat feet and then I also had pretty flat feet and then I also think that it was years of doing things think that it was years of doing things think that it was years of doing things um without addressing that. So I was I um without addressing that. So I was I um without addressing that. So I was I was as I started to lift weights and was as I started to lift weights and was as I started to lift weights and applying a lot of external force and applying a lot of external force and applying a lot of external force and load onto those feet that were not able load onto those feet that were not able load onto those feet that were not able to support that, it just got worse and to support that, it just got worse and to support that, it just got worse and worse. They they definitely they didn't worse. They they definitely they didn't worse. They they definitely they didn't always they weren't always as bad as always they weren't always as bad as always they weren't always as bad as they got to. But I wish I had done more they got to. But I wish I had done more they got to. But I wish I had done more for it at an early age because even now for it at an early age because even now for it at an early age because even now if I were to go back and try to train if I were to go back and try to train if I were to go back and try to train the intrinsic foot muscles more, it's the intrinsic foot muscles more, it's the intrinsic foot muscles more, it's just not going to reverse the it's just not going to reverse the it's just not going to reverse the damage that I've done in the knee to damage that I've done in the knee to damage that I've done in the knee to this point. So I'm less motivated to try this point. So I'm less motivated to try this point. So I'm less motivated to try to do it cuz I've also figured out how to do it cuz I've also figured out how to do it cuz I've also figured out how to manage with the flat feet now to manage with the flat feet now to manage with the flat feet now to decrease the impacts of it. So, I'm not decrease the impacts of it. So, I'm not decrease the impacts of it. So, I'm not so motivated to go jump in now and spend so motivated to go jump in now and spend so motivated to go jump in now and spend extra time on something that may not extra time on something that may not extra time on something that may not have a huge impact for me. But for have a huge impact for me. But for have a huge impact for me. But for someone who's just starting to, you someone who's just starting to, you someone who's just starting to, you know, deal with flat feet and the know, deal with flat feet and the know, deal with flat feet and the weakness in the in their feet, um, I weakness in the in their feet, um, I weakness in the in their feet, um, I would definitely jump in and do would definitely jump in and do would definitely jump in and do something. And and the easiest test is something. And and the easiest test is something. And and the easiest test is simply to put a towel on the floor, put simply to put a towel on the floor, put simply to put a towel on the floor, put your foot on a barefoot, try to scrunch your foot on a barefoot, try to scrunch your foot on a barefoot, try to scrunch up the towel with your feet, and if up the towel with your feet, and if up the towel with your feet, and if you start to rapidly cramp up in those you start to rapidly cramp up in those you start to rapidly cramp up in those foot muscles of yours, and again, it foot muscles of yours, and again, it foot muscles of yours, and again, it goes back to what we talked about before goes back to what we talked about before goes back to what we talked about before in the low back. in the low back. in the low back. The cramps are coming from a lack of The cramps are coming from a lack of The cramps are coming from a lack of strength. They're trying to provide strength. They're trying to provide strength. They're trying to provide support in an area that doesn't have it. support in an area that doesn't have it. support in an area that doesn't have it. So, if you don't have intrinsic support So, if you don't have intrinsic support So, if you don't have intrinsic support or arch strength, then you're trying to or arch strength, then you're trying to or arch strength, then you're trying to ask the foot to do too much of what it ask the foot to do too much of what it ask the foot to do too much of what it can. Even a simple scrunching or can. Even a simple scrunching or can. Even a simple scrunching or activation of those muscles to scrunch activation of those muscles to scrunch activation of those muscles to scrunch the towel together is too much for you the towel together is too much for you the towel together is too much for you to handle. Kind of like the weak neck on to handle. Kind of like the weak neck on to handle. Kind of like the weak neck on a crunch. You have very weak feet and a crunch. You have very weak feet and a crunch. You have very weak feet and you would benefit from doing a lot of you would benefit from doing a lot of you would benefit from doing a lot of those activities that help to do that. those activities that help to do that. those activities that help to do that. Some people recommend uh running in Some people recommend uh running in Some people recommend uh running in sand. Some people recommend using these sand. Some people recommend using these sand. Some people recommend using these towel drills. Um just even just towel drills. Um just even just towel drills. Um just even just balancing barefoot and doing single leg balancing barefoot and doing single leg balancing barefoot and doing single leg balance drills barefoot are going to not balance drills barefoot are going to not balance drills barefoot are going to not just cause ankle strength improvements, just cause ankle strength improvements, just cause ankle strength improvements, but intrinsic foot strength but intrinsic foot strength but intrinsic foot strength improvements. They're all good things to improvements. They're all good things to improvements. They're all good things to do because you can improve. They're do because you can improve. They're do because you can improve. They're muscles. They are literally muscles, muscles. They are literally muscles, muscles. They are literally muscles, too. You can improve the muscle muscular too. You can improve the muscle muscular too. You can improve the muscle muscular strength of your feet. And when you do, strength of your feet. And when you do, strength of your feet. And when you do, you can I think you can start to restore you can I think you can start to restore you can I think you can start to restore some of the natural arch that you've some of the natural arch that you've some of the natural arch that you've lost to the foot. If it's if it's lost to the foot. If it's if it's lost to the foot. If it's if it's because of tendonous because of tendonous because of tendonous um dysfunction that's there or um dysfunction that's there or um dysfunction that's there or inherited, as you said, a genetic um inherited, as you said, a genetic um inherited, as you said, a genetic um predisposition to this, you may not be predisposition to this, you may not be predisposition to this, you may not be able to have the arch of somebody able to have the arch of somebody able to have the arch of somebody who has naturally better arches, but you who has naturally better arches, but you who has naturally better arches, but you could certainly create enough of an arch could certainly create enough of an arch could certainly create enough of an arch where all the arch is really doing is where all the arch is really doing is where all the arch is really doing is it's just changing the position of your it's just changing the position of your it's just changing the position of your ankle joint itself. Right? So of how the ankle joint itself. Right? So of how the ankle joint itself. Right? So of how the tibia sits on your ankle. If the if the tibia sits on your ankle. If the if the tibia sits on your ankle. If the if the foot collapses, the tibia is now torqued foot collapses, the tibia is now torqued foot collapses, the tibia is now torqued essentially on in the in its essentially on in the in its essentially on in the in its relationship to the foot. And so now relationship to the foot. And so now relationship to the foot. And so now every time you step, whatever forces are every time you step, whatever forces are every time you step, whatever forces are being incurred on the ground are being incurred on the ground are being incurred on the ground are being sent up through the ankle into the being sent up through the ankle into the being sent up through the ankle into the knee into the hip into the back. So knee into the hip into the back. So knee into the hip into the back. So you're just trying to maintain a better, you're just trying to maintain a better, you're just trying to maintain a better, more natural alignment between the tibia more natural alignment between the tibia more natural alignment between the tibia and the foot itself. So that's what and the foot itself. So that's what and the foot itself. So that's what happens with the with the happens with the with the happens with the with the weakness of the foot is you're basically weakness of the foot is you're basically weakness of the foot is you're basically allowing it to collapse too far to start allowing it to collapse too far to start allowing it to collapse too far to start to create that torque in its to create that torque in its to create that torque in its relationship to the tibia. So if you can relationship to the tibia. So if you can relationship to the tibia. So if you can start to increase the strength of those start to increase the strength of those start to increase the strength of those muscles resting, they can basically muscles resting, they can basically muscles resting, they can basically maintain a higher arch or more natural maintain a higher arch or more natural maintain a higher arch or more natural position that's more aligned with the position that's more aligned with the position that's more aligned with the tibia and that's where the benefits come tibia and that's where the benefits come tibia and that's where the benefits come from. Something I knew nothing about from. Something I knew nothing about from. Something I knew nothing about back in my 20s, nothing. I didn't think back in my 20s, nothing. I didn't think back in my 20s, nothing. I didn't think for at all to do that. All I did was go for at all to do that. All I did was go for at all to do that. All I did was go put an orthotic in, right? which put an orthotic in, right? which put an orthotic in, right? which basically put me in a better position basically put me in a better position basically put me in a better position for that. It it lifts the foot up and it for that. It it lifts the foot up and it for that. It it lifts the foot up and it puts me in a better alignment to try to puts me in a better alignment to try to puts me in a better alignment to try to start decreasing some of the ongoing start decreasing some of the ongoing start decreasing some of the ongoing damage I was doing to my knees by being damage I was doing to my knees by being damage I was doing to my knees by being in that torqued position. But did in that torqued position. But did in that torqued position. But did nothing to actually fix the problem nothing to actually fix the problem nothing to actually fix the problem itself. &gt;&gt; It's like wearing braces. &gt;&gt; It's like wearing braces. &gt;&gt; It's like wearing braces. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. So, &gt;&gt; not mouth braces, but like a knee say, &gt;&gt; not mouth braces, but like a knee say, &gt;&gt; not mouth braces, but like a knee say, right? Yeah. Like a mouth brace actually right? Yeah. Like a mouth brace actually right? Yeah. Like a mouth brace actually would actually create some long-term would actually create some long-term would actually create some long-term change, but this is doing nothing but change, but this is doing nothing but change, but this is doing nothing but limb brace. limb brace. limb brace. &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, um this is something &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, um this is something &gt;&gt; Yeah. you know, um this is something I've been thinking about and reading up I've been thinking about and reading up I've been thinking about and reading up about a lot, but you might find about a lot, but you might find about a lot, but you might find interesting. And I don't know may maybe interesting. And I don't know may maybe interesting. And I don't know may maybe uh since you're so much uh more versed uh since you're so much uh more versed uh since you're so much uh more versed and formally trained in uh you know and formally trained in uh you know and formally trained in uh you know strength training and these uh strength training and these uh strength training and these uh offsetting these unhealthy compensations offsetting these unhealthy compensations offsetting these unhealthy compensations and spending a lot of time looking at and spending a lot of time looking at and spending a lot of time looking at how the human body degenerates as it how the human body degenerates as it how the human body degenerates as it gets older because I'm trained as a gets older because I'm trained as a gets older because I'm trained as a developmental neurobiologist and developmental neurobiologist and developmental neurobiologist and what we what you learn is that what we what you learn is that what we what you learn is that development it doesn't just stop at like development it doesn't just stop at like development it doesn't just stop at like puberty or something or even in when puberty or something or even in when puberty or something or even in when someone turns 25. It's our whole life is someone turns 25. It's our whole life is someone turns 25. It's our whole life is a developmental arc. Mhm. a developmental arc. Mhm. a developmental arc. Mhm. &gt;&gt; And it really is an arc, right? And &gt;&gt; And it really is an arc, right? And &gt;&gt; And it really is an arc, right? And people who can offset that, you know, people who can offset that, you know, people who can offset that, you know, last third of the ark have remarkably last third of the ark have remarkably last third of the ark have remarkably better lives in terms of their better lives in terms of their better lives in terms of their unassisted living, their ability to be unassisted living, their ability to be unassisted living, their ability to be there for others, etc., cognitively and there for others, etc., cognitively and there for others, etc., cognitively and physically. To make a long story short, physically. To make a long story short, physically. To make a long story short, it really appears that both at the level it really appears that both at the level it really appears that both at the level of the spinal cord and brain, but also of the spinal cord and brain, but also of the spinal cord and brain, but also at the level of the muscles that the at the level of the muscles that the at the level of the muscles that the muscles that are furthest away from the muscles that are furthest away from the muscles that are furthest away from the midline degenerate first. And it's midline degenerate first. And it's midline degenerate first. And it's interesting, today we've been talking interesting, today we've been talking interesting, today we've been talking about neck. Yesterday we did forearm about neck. Yesterday we did forearm about neck. Yesterday we did forearm training. We'll provide a link to that. training. We'll provide a link to that. training. We'll provide a link to that. You know, for grip strength goes, calf You know, for grip strength goes, calf You know, for grip strength goes, calf strength goes, foot strength goes. And strength goes, foot strength goes. And strength goes, foot strength goes. And this could be taken down to the motor this could be taken down to the motor this could be taken down to the motor neuron level, the spinal cord level, neuron level, the spinal cord level, neuron level, the spinal cord level, molecular level. There are data starting molecular level. There are data starting molecular level. There are data starting to emerge. So, I'm of the mind that many to emerge. So, I'm of the mind that many to emerge. So, I'm of the mind that many of the things that you've been teaching of the things that you've been teaching of the things that you've been teaching and that we've been talking about today and that we've been talking about today and that we've been talking about today of working these distal muscles, of working these distal muscles, of working these distal muscles, especially as one gets older, but especially as one gets older, but especially as one gets older, but ideally one's entire life, are really a ideally one's entire life, are really a ideally one's entire life, are really a going to be a big piece of the longevity going to be a big piece of the longevity going to be a big piece of the longevity game. I really am. longevity ultimately game. I really am. longevity ultimately game. I really am. longevity ultimately is basically in my eyes is be being is basically in my eyes is be being is basically in my eyes is be being able to maintain function as you age able to maintain function as you age able to maintain function as you age because again it's not the because again it's not the because again it's not the number of years but the quality of the number of years but the quality of the number of years but the quality of the years. So all muscles in your body serve years. So all muscles in your body serve years. So all muscles in your body serve a function. They're all there for a function. They're all there for a function. They're all there for a reason almost. I think there's one or reason almost. I think there's one or reason almost. I think there's one or two that were potentially they don't two that were potentially they don't two that were potentially they don't actually even have a function. I forget actually even have a function. I forget actually even have a function. I forget which ones they are but they're but which ones they are but they're but which ones they are but they're but they're but for the most part they're but for the most part they're but for the most part they're there for to serve a purpose. The idea there for to serve a purpose. The idea there for to serve a purpose. The idea that we don't train all of them in some that we don't train all of them in some that we don't train all of them in some way is a little bit crazy because like way is a little bit crazy because like way is a little bit crazy because like we're they're there. They need we're they're there. They need we're they're there. They need to be able to function for the lifetime to be able to function for the lifetime to be able to function for the lifetime of however long you're going to be of however long you're going to be of however long you're going to be here. Finding ways to do it where we don't Finding ways to do it where we don't Finding ways to do it where we don't have to do hundreds of different have to do hundreds of different have to do hundreds of different exercises to address all these muscles exercises to address all these muscles exercises to address all these muscles is the ultimate goal so we can become is the ultimate goal so we can become is the ultimate goal so we can become more efficient with our efforts and more efficient with our efforts and more efficient with our efforts and we're not skipping them. But the idea we're not skipping them. But the idea we're not skipping them. But the idea that they're not necessary or they're that they're not necessary or they're that they're not necessary or they're not they don't need to be maintained or not they don't need to be maintained or not they don't need to be maintained or ma or m or maximized over a lifetime ma or m or maximized over a lifetime ma or m or maximized over a lifetime doesn't make sense to me either. Right? doesn't make sense to me either. Right? doesn't make sense to me either. Right? So I think we need to be able to just So I think we need to be able to just So I think we need to be able to just find ways that we can work them into find ways that we can work them into find ways that we can work them into what we're already doing. And again I do what we're already doing. And again I do what we're already doing. And again I do think that we have different rates of think that we have different rates of think that we have different rates of decay too. You versus me versus someone decay too. You versus me versus someone decay too. You versus me versus someone else. So that's where I really believe else. So that's where I really believe else. So that's where I really believe people need to adopt these people need to adopt these people need to adopt these individualized plans. We all do, let's individualized plans. We all do, let's individualized plans. We all do, let's say, the basic strength say, the basic strength say, the basic strength training, but then your specialized plan training, but then your specialized plan training, but then your specialized plan that addresses your accelerated that addresses your accelerated that addresses your accelerated weaknesses is this group of exercises. weaknesses is this group of exercises. weaknesses is this group of exercises. And my specific plan to address my And my specific plan to address my And my specific plan to address my accelerated weaknesses is this specific accelerated weaknesses is this specific accelerated weaknesses is this specific exercise plan. So, but they're all exercise plan. So, but they're all exercise plan. So, but they're all they're all there to be to be worked on they're all there to be to be worked on they're all there to be to be worked on and they're all there to be maintained. and they're all there to be maintained. and they're all there to be maintained. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. acknowledge our sponsor, Function. Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab Function provides over 160 advanced lab tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of tests to give you a clear snapshot of your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives your bodily health. This snapshot gives you insights into your heart health, you insights into your heart health, you insights into your heart health, your hormone health, autoimmune your hormone health, autoimmune your hormone health, autoimmune function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much function, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access more. They've also recently added access to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function to advanced MRI and CT scans. Function not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 not only provides testing of over 160 biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, it also analyzes these mental health, it also analyzes these mental health, it also analyzes these results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for results and provides recommendations for improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. improving your health from top doctors. For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with For example, in a recent test with function, I learned that some of my function, I learned that some of my function, I learned that some of my blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. blood lipids were slightly out of range. As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start As a result, I decided to start supplementing with nattokinise, which supplementing with nattokinise, which supplementing with nattokinise, which can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL can naturally help reduce LDL cholesterol, and it did. In a follow-up cholesterol, and it did. In a follow-up cholesterol, and it did. In a follow-up test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy test, I could confirm that this strategy worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back worked. My blood lipids are now back exactly where I want them. Comprehensive exactly where I want them. Comprehensive exactly where I want them. Comprehensive lab testing of the sort that function lab testing of the sort that function lab testing of the sort that function offers is just so important for health. offers is just so important for health. offers is just so important for health. I mean, how else are you going to know I mean, how else are you going to know I mean, how else are you going to know what's going on under the hood? And what's going on under the hood? And what's going on under the hood? And while I've been doing blood work for while I've been doing blood work for while I've been doing blood work for years, it used to be timeconuming, years, it used to be timeconuming, years, it used to be timeconuming, complicated, and expensive. In fact, I complicated, and expensive. In fact, I complicated, and expensive. In fact, I used to spend thousands of dollars per used to spend thousands of dollars per used to spend thousands of dollars per year trying to get this kind of data. year trying to get this kind of data. year trying to get this kind of data. And the data, frankly, were not all that And the data, frankly, were not all that And the data, frankly, were not all that good. But now with Function, it's good. But now with Function, it's good. But now with Function, it's extremely easy and affordable. A extremely easy and affordable. A extremely easy and affordable. A Function membership is only a dollar a Function membership is only a dollar a Function membership is only a dollar a day, $365 a year. And if you think about day, $365 a year. And if you think about day, $365 a year. And if you think about the information it provides and the information it provides and the information it provides and the health challenges it helps you avoid and health challenges it helps you avoid and health challenges it helps you avoid and the proactive things that it can do for the proactive things that it can do for the proactive things that it can do for you to enhance your health, I truly look you to enhance your health, I truly look you to enhance your health, I truly look at it as a savings. To learn more, visit at it as a savings. To learn more, visit at it as a savings. To learn more, visit functionhealth.com/huberman and use the code hubbererman for a $50 and use the code hubbererman for a $50 and use the code hubbererman for a $50 credit towards your membership. Again, credit towards your membership. Again, credit towards your membership. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman. There are millions of hours of content There are millions of hours of content There are millions of hours of content on the internet about body part splits on the internet about body part splits on the internet about body part splits and ways to train. So, I know you've and ways to train. So, I know you've and ways to train. So, I know you've covered essentially all of them, but covered essentially all of them, but covered essentially all of them, but maybe we could do a pseudo yes no uh maybe we could do a pseudo yes no uh maybe we could do a pseudo yes no uh &gt;&gt; Q&amp;A type thing uh for a moment about &gt;&gt; Q&amp;A type thing uh for a moment about &gt;&gt; Q&amp;A type thing uh for a moment about body type splits and rests and training body type splits and rests and training body type splits and rests and training to failure, etc. And then I have a very to failure, etc. And then I have a very to failure, etc. And then I have a very specific question about training splits specific question about training splits specific question about training splits that relates to real life and how to that relates to real life and how to that relates to real life and how to incorporate uh resistance training incorporate uh resistance training incorporate uh resistance training program into real life in a way that's program into real life in a way that's program into real life in a way that's truly sustainable. Okay, so first things truly sustainable. Okay, so first things truly sustainable. Okay, so first things first, how many warm-up sets per first, how many warm-up sets per first, how many warm-up sets per exercise? Typically, exercise? Typically, exercise? Typically, &gt;&gt; depending upon what you're doing, we &gt;&gt; depending upon what you're doing, we &gt;&gt; depending upon what you're doing, we we're right off into the nuance of all we're right off into the nuance of all we're right off into the nuance of all this because the nuance is really this because the nuance is really this because the nuance is really everything here when we talk about everything here when we talk about everything here when we talk about muscle splits and there's so many muscle splits and there's so many muscle splits and there's so many factors that contribute to this. But factors that contribute to this. But factors that contribute to this. But let's say you're doing just for sake of let's say you're doing just for sake of let's say you're doing just for sake of argument, you're doing a pull workout. argument, you're doing a pull workout. argument, you're doing a pull workout. If if I'm doing pull would be, let's say If if I'm doing pull would be, let's say If if I'm doing pull would be, let's say back and biceps and even rear delts if back and biceps and even rear delts if back and biceps and even rear delts if we want to put them on the same the same we want to put them on the same the same we want to put them on the same the same day. So you would warm up your bigger day. So you would warm up your bigger day. So you would warm up your bigger muscle group first. So let's say you muscle group first. So let's say you muscle group first. So let's say you start with back and you warm up the start with back and you warm up the start with back and you warm up the first exercise you're doing there. You first exercise you're doing there. You first exercise you're doing there. You could do a general body warm-up like we could do a general body warm-up like we could do a general body warm-up like we did a little warmup for our arm workout did a little warmup for our arm workout did a little warmup for our arm workout yesterday, which is actually a shoulder yesterday, which is actually a shoulder yesterday, which is actually a shoulder warmup. we talk about in that video why, warmup. we talk about in that video why, warmup. we talk about in that video why, but you do a little general warm-up but you do a little general warm-up but you do a little general warm-up first and then you start the first and then you start the first and then you start the first exercise with lighter weights. You warm exercise with lighter weights. You warm exercise with lighter weights. You warm up. I I'm doing two or three warm-up up. I I'm doing two or three warm-up up. I I'm doing two or three warm-up sets and I'm done. As long as I feel sets and I'm done. As long as I feel sets and I'm done. As long as I feel like I've sufficiently uh warmed up that like I've sufficiently uh warmed up that like I've sufficiently uh warmed up that movement pattern that I'm going to do movement pattern that I'm going to do movement pattern that I'm going to do before I start to load it. As long as I before I start to load it. As long as I before I start to load it. As long as I feel like the joints I've got all the feel like the joints I've got all the feel like the joints I've got all the creeks out and I feel like I've creeks out and I feel like I've creeks out and I feel like I've done the enough of an assessment of how done the enough of an assessment of how done the enough of an assessment of how everything feels for that day, then I'm everything feels for that day, then I'm everything feels for that day, then I'm ready to go. People spend way too much ready to go. People spend way too much ready to go. People spend way too much time warming up to work out. You just time warming up to work out. You just time warming up to work out. You just get yourself ready and what happens is get yourself ready and what happens is get yourself ready and what happens is the workout itself becomes the rest of the workout itself becomes the rest of the workout itself becomes the rest of the warm-up you need for the subsequent the warm-up you need for the subsequent the warm-up you need for the subsequent exercises. Once you get through that exercises. Once you get through that exercises. Once you get through that first exercise, you're usually ready to first exercise, you're usually ready to first exercise, you're usually ready to go. And when we're talking about then go. And when we're talking about then go. And when we're talking about then shifting focus to let's say even the shifting focus to let's say even the shifting focus to let's say even the biceps, my biceps have been done been biceps, my biceps have been done been biceps, my biceps have been done been working every one of my pulling working every one of my pulling working every one of my pulling repetitions whether I was rowing or repetitions whether I was rowing or repetitions whether I was rowing or doing pull downs in some way. So there's doing pull downs in some way. So there's doing pull downs in some way. So there's no more warm-up after that. train work no more warm-up after that. train work no more warm-up after that. train work sets to failure or stop with so-called sets to failure or stop with so-called sets to failure or stop with so-called reps in reserve. reps in reserve. reps in reserve. &gt;&gt; Oh, this is a great one for me. I mean, &gt;&gt; Oh, this is a great one for me. I mean, &gt;&gt; Oh, this is a great one for me. I mean, I'm failure. I'm just I understand the I'm failure. I'm just I understand the I'm failure. I'm just I understand the science shows that they can get close, science shows that they can get close, science shows that they can get close, but it's also very heavily dependent but it's also very heavily dependent but it's also very heavily dependent upon meaning failure or not failure. upon meaning failure or not failure. upon meaning failure or not failure. Very heavily dependent upon volume. So, Very heavily dependent upon volume. So, Very heavily dependent upon volume. So, when you're looking to do a workout that when you're looking to do a workout that when you're looking to do a workout that is going to have you can do it in 30 to is going to have you can do it in 30 to is going to have you can do it in 30 to 45 minutes, have a high impact in terms 45 minutes, have a high impact in terms 45 minutes, have a high impact in terms of its ability to stimulate growth, of its ability to stimulate growth, of its ability to stimulate growth, you're going to train to fail if you're going to train to fail if you're going to train to fail if you're with me, you're going to train to with me, you're going to train to with me, you're going to train to failure. And I like objectively training failure. And I like objectively training failure. And I like objectively training to failure because I know I got to failure because I know I got to failure because I know I got to failure. I'm not talking about getting failure. I'm not talking about getting failure. I'm not talking about getting to a point where I don't recognize the to a point where I don't recognize the to a point where I don't recognize the exercise I'm doing, where I'm exercise I'm doing, where I'm exercise I'm doing, where I'm compromising the quality of the compromising the quality of the compromising the quality of the exercise I'm doing. I'm not talking exercise I'm doing. I'm not talking exercise I'm doing. I'm not talking about doing it on the comp the more about doing it on the comp the more about doing it on the comp the more compound or complicated exercises that compound or complicated exercises that compound or complicated exercises that do require synchronized movement for do require synchronized movement for do require synchronized movement for multiple muscle groups because it could multiple muscle groups because it could multiple muscle groups because it could you like let's say a row a heavy row you like let's say a row a heavy row you like let's say a row a heavy row could start to get dangerous if you're could start to get dangerous if you're could start to get dangerous if you're losing body position because of fatigue. losing body position because of fatigue. losing body position because of fatigue. So we're doing it on the exercises So we're doing it on the exercises So we're doing it on the exercises that are the hypertrophy based exercises that are the hypertrophy based exercises that are the hypertrophy based exercises a little bit more focused on one single a little bit more focused on one single a little bit more focused on one single muscle group a little bit more isolated muscle group a little bit more isolated muscle group a little bit more isolated in nature. So, for instance, a uh um a in nature. So, for instance, a uh um a in nature. So, for instance, a uh um a single arm row versus a bent over single arm row versus a bent over single arm row versus a bent over barbell row. That'd be a good difference barbell row. That'd be a good difference barbell row. That'd be a good difference between &gt;&gt; So, you won't take the bent over bar &gt;&gt; So, you won't take the bent over bar &gt;&gt; So, you won't take the bent over bar barbell row to fail your necess. Yeah. Oh, yeah. For me, it's always Yeah. Oh, yeah. For me, it's always Yeah. Oh, yeah. For me, it's always going to be close. My criteria there going to be close. My criteria there going to be close. My criteria there would be form breakdown. So, as soon as would be form breakdown. So, as soon as would be form breakdown. So, as soon as my form started to break down, I might my form started to break down, I might my form started to break down, I might have had another two reps left or three have had another two reps left or three have had another two reps left or three reps left, but that's it for that on the reps left, but that's it for that on the reps left, but that's it for that on the barbell row. Whereas, if I'm doing a barbell row. Whereas, if I'm doing a barbell row. Whereas, if I'm doing a here's a better example. If I'm doing a here's a better example. If I'm doing a here's a better example. If I'm doing a one arm cable pull down for my lats, one arm cable pull down for my lats, one arm cable pull down for my lats, which I love that exercise. Gets a which I love that exercise. Gets a which I love that exercise. Gets a really good stretch on the lats and come really good stretch on the lats and come really good stretch on the lats and come down like I could I it could look a down like I could I it could look a down like I could I it could look a little ugly at the end where I'm just little ugly at the end where I'm just little ugly at the end where I'm just doing a couple partial repetitions or doing a couple partial repetitions or doing a couple partial repetitions or something just to just to add a little something just to just to add a little something just to just to add a little bit more stimulus that with no extra bit more stimulus that with no extra bit more stimulus that with no extra risk to my to my body from doing it. So, risk to my to my body from doing it. So, risk to my to my body from doing it. So, there's the difference between them. there's the difference between them. there's the difference between them. But, I'm always advising that you're But, I'm always advising that you're But, I'm always advising that you're training towards the high end training towards the high end training towards the high end unless you're training for strength, unless you're training for strength, unless you're training for strength, which is a whole different game. That's which is a whole different game. That's which is a whole different game. That's a whole different set of rules. It's a whole different set of rules. It's a whole different set of rules. It's a whole different stimulus that you're whole different stimulus that you're whole different stimulus that you're trying to build there. That is high trying to build there. That is high trying to build there. That is high loads that you're trying to manage loads that you're trying to manage loads that you're trying to manage efficiently, not with inefficiency to efficiently, not with inefficiency to efficiently, not with inefficiency to try to force muscle growth. So, that's a try to force muscle growth. So, that's a try to force muscle growth. So, that's a whole different ball of wax. You're whole different ball of wax. You're whole different ball of wax. You're really trying to uh stay away from true really trying to uh stay away from true really trying to uh stay away from true failure there. It's actually not the way failure there. It's actually not the way failure there. It's actually not the way you would actually build maximum you would actually build maximum you would actually build maximum strength because maximum strength relies strength because maximum strength relies strength because maximum strength relies on clean, efficient, well performed on clean, efficient, well performed on clean, efficient, well performed repetitions done cumulatively over time. repetitions done cumulatively over time. repetitions done cumulatively over time. That's how we get neurologically That's how we get neurologically That's how we get neurologically stronger volume stronger volume stronger volume &gt;&gt; and a lot more volume. Right? So that &gt;&gt; and a lot more volume. Right? So that &gt;&gt; and a lot more volume. Right? So that that's a different that's a different that's a different that's a different that's a different that's a different game here. game here. game here. &gt;&gt; Well, so for squats and deadlifts, are &gt;&gt; Well, so for squats and deadlifts, are &gt;&gt; Well, so for squats and deadlifts, are you taking them to failure? you taking them to failure? you taking them to failure? &gt;&gt; No. Same same concept as the row, those &gt;&gt; No. Same same concept as the row, those &gt;&gt; No. Same same concept as the row, those big those big presses like that. I'm not big those big presses like that. I'm not big those big presses like that. I'm not going to or leg movements. I'm not going to or leg movements. I'm not going to or leg movements. I'm not I'm not doing true failure on those. I I'm not doing true failure on those. I I'm not doing true failure on those. I could do other exercises in different could do other exercises in different could do other exercises in different variations. I could do a Bulgarian split variations. I could do a Bulgarian split variations. I could do a Bulgarian split squat to failure, squat to failure, squat to failure, &gt;&gt; right? Because it's a I love that to &gt;&gt; right? Because it's a I love that to &gt;&gt; right? Because it's a I love that to failure because when I go down and I failure because when I go down and I failure because when I go down and I can't go up anymore, I just simply drop can't go up anymore, I just simply drop can't go up anymore, I just simply drop the weights right to the floor right the weights right to the floor right the weights right to the floor right next to me. So, there's different ways next to me. So, there's different ways next to me. So, there's different ways to still do squatting patterns without to still do squatting patterns without to still do squatting patterns without having to put a bar on my back with the having to put a bar on my back with the having to put a bar on my back with the heaviest of loads that I can handle and heaviest of loads that I can handle and heaviest of loads that I can handle and do and do that. do and do that. do and do that. &gt;&gt; And then, uh, total volume, I guess, if &gt;&gt; And then, uh, total volume, I guess, if &gt;&gt; And then, uh, total volume, I guess, if you're going close to failure or you're going close to failure or you're going close to failure or failure, um, per muscle group, and I'm failure, um, per muscle group, and I'm failure, um, per muscle group, and I'm not calling legs a muscle group. I'm not calling legs a muscle group. I'm not calling legs a muscle group. I'm calling quads a muscle group, hamstrings calling quads a muscle group, hamstrings calling quads a muscle group, hamstrings a muscle group, glutes a muscle group, a muscle group, glutes a muscle group, a muscle group, glutes a muscle group, work set ranges, um, per workout, work set ranges, um, per workout, work set ranges, um, per workout, &gt;&gt; per workout. Um, again, probably &gt;&gt; per workout. Um, again, probably &gt;&gt; per workout. Um, again, probably somewhere between somewhere between somewhere between 6 to 6 to 10 on some of the smaller 6 to 6 to 10 on some of the smaller 6 to 6 to 10 on some of the smaller muscle groups like the biceps, and a muscle groups like the biceps, and a muscle groups like the biceps, and a little bit more um maybe 10 to 10 to 12, little bit more um maybe 10 to 10 to 12, little bit more um maybe 10 to 10 to 12, 10 to 15 at most if you're looking at 10 to 15 at most if you're looking at 10 to 15 at most if you're looking at some of the larger muscle groups like some of the larger muscle groups like some of the larger muscle groups like the quads, like the lats. I would I the quads, like the lats. I would I the quads, like the lats. I would I would go a little bit more. So, that would go a little bit more. So, that would go a little bit more. So, that breaks down into around if you're doing breaks down into around if you're doing breaks down into around if you're doing roughly three sets an exercise, you're roughly three sets an exercise, you're roughly three sets an exercise, you're looking at three to four exercises to looking at three to four exercises to looking at three to four exercises to get to those larger muscle groups. And get to those larger muscle groups. And get to those larger muscle groups. And for the biceps, you can get away with for the biceps, you can get away with for the biceps, you can get away with doing two exercises or three doing two exercises or three doing two exercises or three exercises for a total of around exercises for a total of around exercises for a total of around seven or eight sets. When we do our seven or eight sets. When we do our seven or eight sets. When we do our workout and did our workout like what we workout and did our workout like what we workout and did our workout like what we do to ex expose ourselves to more do to ex expose ourselves to more do to ex expose ourselves to more exercises because we can influence the exercises because we can influence the exercises because we can influence the biceps in different ways. A little bit biceps in different ways. A little bit biceps in different ways. A little bit long head stretch, short head focus, long head stretch, short head focus, long head stretch, short head focus, heavier load, more concentration work. heavier load, more concentration work. heavier load, more concentration work. You can do that just by doing less sets You can do that just by doing less sets You can do that just by doing less sets of the exercise. And again, when you're of the exercise. And again, when you're of the exercise. And again, when you're properly warmed up and if you have properly warmed up and if you have properly warmed up and if you have enough experience training, there is enough experience training, there is enough experience training, there is nothing magic about doing three, right? nothing magic about doing three, right? nothing magic about doing three, right? We all think three, but like you could We all think three, but like you could We all think three, but like you could do two and then move on to a different do two and then move on to a different do two and then move on to a different exercise that stimulates the biceps exercise that stimulates the biceps exercise that stimulates the biceps differently. That's a better total differently. That's a better total differently. That's a better total effect than maintaining that you have to effect than maintaining that you have to effect than maintaining that you have to do three of this and three of this and do three of this and three of this and do three of this and three of this and three of this and then therefore three of this and then therefore three of this and then therefore limiting yourselves to the three limiting yourselves to the three limiting yourselves to the three exercises. I could do four or five exercises. I could do four or five exercises. I could do four or five exercises that give all complimentary exercises that give all complimentary exercises that give all complimentary functions to the biceps, do two of them functions to the biceps, do two of them functions to the biceps, do two of them each and get a better workout. each and get a better workout. each and get a better workout. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I like a couple of warm-ups on the &gt;&gt; Yeah, I like a couple of warm-ups on the &gt;&gt; Yeah, I like a couple of warm-ups on the first exercise. first exercise. first exercise. &gt;&gt; Two two work sets, move to something &gt;&gt; Two two work sets, move to something &gt;&gt; Two two work sets, move to something else. Two work I tend to do, else. Two work I tend to do, else. Two work I tend to do, &gt;&gt; you know. And a few uh regular listeners &gt;&gt; you know. And a few uh regular listeners &gt;&gt; you know. And a few uh regular listeners of this podcast are probably thinking, of this podcast are probably thinking, of this podcast are probably thinking, well, how's this square with the well, how's this square with the well, how's this square with the conversation with Dorian where it was conversation with Dorian where it was conversation with Dorian where it was really like one, maybe two work sets per really like one, maybe two work sets per really like one, maybe two work sets per exercise. He's always insisting on exercise. He's always insisting on exercise. He's always insisting on taking the work sets to failure and taking the work sets to failure and taking the work sets to failure and often beyond failure with force reps. So often beyond failure with force reps. So often beyond failure with force reps. So &gt;&gt; when you start looking at it as like you &gt;&gt; when you start looking at it as like you &gt;&gt; when you start looking at it as like you were saying like with squats and were saying like with squats and were saying like with squats and deadlifts or rows, you're not going deadlifts or rows, you're not going deadlifts or rows, you're not going completely to failure completely to failure completely to failure &gt;&gt; in the I'm not going to say they're &gt;&gt; in the I'm not going to say they're &gt;&gt; in the I'm not going to say they're equivalent. Um but equivalent. Um but equivalent. Um but &gt;&gt; there is some offset there, right? It's &gt;&gt; there is some offset there, right? It's &gt;&gt; there is some offset there, right? It's either taking one maybe two sets to either taking one maybe two sets to either taking one maybe two sets to complete failure with four reps per complete failure with four reps per complete failure with four reps per exercise &gt;&gt; and then another exercise. It wasn't &gt;&gt; and then another exercise. It wasn't &gt;&gt; and then another exercise. It wasn't like we just did one exercise for back. like we just did one exercise for back. like we just did one exercise for back. Then we did the pullover and then you Then we did the pullover and then you Then we did the pullover and then you know we had a row and a pull down and know we had a row and a pull down and know we had a row and a pull down and then some rowing and you know and so then some rowing and you know and so then some rowing and you know and so forth. So it ends up being about six forth. So it ends up being about six forth. So it ends up being about six work sets with some uh pushing beyond work sets with some uh pushing beyond work sets with some uh pushing beyond failure. You're talking about you know failure. You're talking about you know failure. You're talking about you know 10 to 12 but maybe not so many sets 10 to 12 but maybe not so many sets 10 to 12 but maybe not so many sets where you're pushing past failure. where you're pushing past failure. where you're pushing past failure. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I grew up watching Dorian &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I grew up watching Dorian &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I grew up watching Dorian Yates and doing the workouts and I loved Yates and doing the workouts and I loved Yates and doing the workouts and I loved it. Um, I found it hard for me to it. Um, I found it hard for me to it. Um, I found it hard for me to maintain that kind of intensity, maintain that kind of intensity, maintain that kind of intensity, especially training alone, right? especially training alone, right? especially training alone, right? Training in force reps are almost Training in force reps are almost Training in force reps are almost impossible alone unless you have impossible alone unless you have impossible alone unless you have machines that can allow you to do that. machines that can allow you to do that. machines that can allow you to do that. &gt;&gt; So, it was more of a of a of a &gt;&gt; So, it was more of a of a of a &gt;&gt; So, it was more of a of a of a difficulty of being able to stick with difficulty of being able to stick with difficulty of being able to stick with that type of training or reproduce it that type of training or reproduce it that type of training or reproduce it over and over and over again. Dorian over and over and over again. Dorian over and over and over again. Dorian Yates is Dorian Yates for a reason Yates is Dorian Yates for a reason Yates is Dorian Yates for a reason because in a six-time Mr. Olympia for a because in a six-time Mr. Olympia for a because in a six-time Mr. Olympia for a reason because he had the ability. It's reason because he had the ability. It's reason because he had the ability. It's like it's like Michael he's like the like it's like Michael he's like the like it's like Michael he's like the Michael Jordan of bodybuilding. Michael Jordan of bodybuilding. Michael Jordan of bodybuilding. Michael Jordan did the things he could Michael Jordan did the things he could Michael Jordan did the things he could do because he could do things other do because he could do things other do because he could do things other people couldn't. Jordan Yates I feel people couldn't. Jordan Yates I feel people couldn't. Jordan Yates I feel could do things that a lot of other could do things that a lot of other could do things that a lot of other people couldn't in terms of tapping into people couldn't in terms of tapping into people couldn't in terms of tapping into that pain discomfort and ability to go that pain discomfort and ability to go that pain discomfort and ability to go further when he wanted to quit. Right further when he wanted to quit. Right further when he wanted to quit. Right when it got to the be the hardest part when it got to the be the hardest part when it got to the be the hardest part of the set he could like start to revel of the set he could like start to revel of the set he could like start to revel in it and go further and further and in it and go further and further and in it and go further and further and further. I don't know if everybody has further. I don't know if everybody has further. I don't know if everybody has that ability. I can do it that ability. I can do it that ability. I can do it intermittently but I can't do it intermittently but I can't do it intermittently but I can't do it consistently. And so for me, I just have consistently. And so for me, I just have consistently. And so for me, I just have to realize that and say, "Okay, I'm to realize that and say, "Okay, I'm to realize that and say, "Okay, I'm going to have to back off a little bit going to have to back off a little bit going to have to back off a little bit of the intensity, some of the force of the intensity, some of the force of the intensity, some of the force reps, increase my volume just a little reps, increase my volume just a little reps, increase my volume just a little bit." Because it ultimately comes down bit." Because it ultimately comes down bit." Because it ultimately comes down to a volume and intensity game. And it to a volume and intensity game. And it to a volume and intensity game. And it and it could be literally the extreme and it could be literally the extreme and it could be literally the extreme examples of this. Like there's a lot of examples of this. Like there's a lot of examples of this. Like there's a lot of cyclists who cycle at 80 to 100 RPMs, cyclists who cycle at 80 to 100 RPMs, cyclists who cycle at 80 to 100 RPMs, but do hours and hours of that who blow but do hours and hours of that who blow but do hours and hours of that who blow up their quads and have amazing lower up their quads and have amazing lower up their quads and have amazing lower body size from their cycling. How is body size from their cycling. How is body size from their cycling. How is that working? Well, there's a metabolic that working? Well, there's a metabolic that working? Well, there's a metabolic effect they're getting too, which we effect they're getting too, which we effect they're getting too, which we know is another stimulus for growth. But know is another stimulus for growth. But know is another stimulus for growth. But at the right amount of volume, even low at the right amount of volume, even low at the right amount of volume, even low levels of in of absolute load can levels of in of absolute load can levels of in of absolute load can create growth, right? There's extreme create growth, right? There's extreme create growth, right? There's extreme examples of that. And I always go back examples of that. And I always go back examples of that. And I always go back and say, she probably hates me for it by and say, she probably hates me for it by and say, she probably hates me for it by now, but I always use the example of now, but I always use the example of now, but I always use the example of my wife who was a barber, and she used my wife who was a barber, and she used my wife who was a barber, and she used to cut 40 haircuts a day. 30 to 40 to cut 40 haircuts a day. 30 to 40 to cut 40 haircuts a day. 30 to 40 haircuts a day. She was like a machine, haircuts a day. She was like a machine, haircuts a day. She was like a machine, but she's a little girl and she has like but she's a little girl and she has like but she's a little girl and she has like these great traps, like really these great traps, like really these great traps, like really well-developed traps. And it's not well-developed traps. And it's not well-developed traps. And it's not necessarily from the load of the necessarily from the load of the necessarily from the load of the scissors that weigh ounces, but it's the scissors that weigh ounces, but it's the scissors that weigh ounces, but it's the weight of the arm being held like this weight of the arm being held like this weight of the arm being held like this all day long. No direct trap work ever all day long. No direct trap work ever all day long. No direct trap work ever in her entire life. Massive traps that in her entire life. Massive traps that in her entire life. Massive traps that look great, by the way. Baby look great. look great, by the way. Baby look great. look great, by the way. Baby look great. But but had great trap development But but had great trap development But but had great trap development because of that. That's an extreme because of that. That's an extreme because of that. That's an extreme example. That's eight hours a day, every example. That's eight hours a day, every example. That's eight hours a day, every day. That's no load or just again very day. That's no load or just again very day. That's no load or just again very minimal load but extreme amounts of minimal load but extreme amounts of minimal load but extreme amounts of volume. So in terms of muscle growth, I volume. So in terms of muscle growth, I volume. So in terms of muscle growth, I always think there's always a always think there's always a always think there's always a possibility to get where you want to possibility to get where you want to possibility to get where you want to get, but you have to know how to balance get, but you have to know how to balance get, but you have to know how to balance volume and intensity. In terms of volume and intensity. In terms of volume and intensity. In terms of frequency of training a given muscle frequency of training a given muscle frequency of training a given muscle group across the week, I'll just say two group across the week, I'll just say two group across the week, I'll just say two things that most people don't think things that most people don't think things that most people don't think about. One, there's nothing special about. One, there's nothing special about. One, there's nothing special about a week. I mean, we use a week as a about a week. I mean, we use a week as a about a week. I mean, we use a week as a as a as a division of time, but muscles as a as a division of time, but muscles as a as a division of time, but muscles don't really care about weeks. They care don't really care about weeks. They care don't really care about weeks. They care about stimulus and recovery, the about stimulus and recovery, the about stimulus and recovery, the adaptation, the hypertrophy, the adaptation, the hypertrophy, the adaptation, the hypertrophy, the strength. &gt;&gt; So, I consider myself somebody with a &gt;&gt; So, I consider myself somebody with a &gt;&gt; So, I consider myself somebody with a relatively poor recovery quotient. relatively poor recovery quotient. relatively poor recovery quotient. &gt;&gt; I can hit each muscle group directly &gt;&gt; I can hit each muscle group directly &gt;&gt; I can hit each muscle group directly hard &gt;&gt; once per week. So, sets to failure. Um, &gt;&gt; once per week. So, sets to failure. Um, &gt;&gt; once per week. So, sets to failure. Um, somewhere in between what say Dorian somewhere in between what say Dorian somewhere in between what say Dorian does and what you do. You know, does and what you do. You know, does and what you do. You know, yesterday's workout felt slight slightly yesterday's workout felt slight slightly yesterday's workout felt slight slightly higher than the normal volume that I higher than the normal volume that I higher than the normal volume that I would do. The workout I did with him was would do. The workout I did with him was would do. The workout I did with him was slightly lower. So, somewhere in slightly lower. So, somewhere in slightly lower. So, somewhere in between. But there's a lot of indirect training. But there's a lot of indirect training. But there's a lot of indirect training. Uh for instance, I'll train my legs Uh for instance, I'll train my legs Uh for instance, I'll train my legs really hard one day per week, but then really hard one day per week, but then really hard one day per week, but then I'll also do a HIT workout on the I'll also do a HIT workout on the I'll also do a HIT workout on the assault bike. And yeah, it's not a squat assault bike. And yeah, it's not a squat assault bike. And yeah, it's not a squat workout, but my legs get some workout, but my legs get some workout, but my legs get some stimulation from that. My lat my lats do stimulation from that. My lat my lats do stimulation from that. My lat my lats do too. And I'll do a sprint workout one too. And I'll do a sprint workout one too. And I'll do a sprint workout one day per week. So that's what works for day per week. So that's what works for day per week. So that's what works for me. For you personally, before you make me. For you personally, before you make me. For you personally, before you make a suggestion, the larger world out a suggestion, the larger world out a suggestion, the larger world out there, how often can you directly hit a there, how often can you directly hit a there, how often can you directly hit a muscle group with the kind of intensity muscle group with the kind of intensity muscle group with the kind of intensity and volume that we did in the video that and volume that we did in the video that and volume that we did in the video that you know we provide a link to. I can you know we provide a link to. I can you know we provide a link to. I can only directly hit that muscle group the only directly hit that muscle group the only directly hit that muscle group the same as you once a week with that level same as you once a week with that level same as you once a week with that level of intensity. Even in what we were doing of intensity. Even in what we were doing of intensity. Even in what we were doing yesterday, a lot of my focus is on you. I'm trying a lot of my focus is on you. I'm trying a lot of my focus is on you. I'm trying to focus on making sure you you're doing to focus on making sure you you're doing to focus on making sure you you're doing what you're doing right. Um, I'm trying what you're doing right. Um, I'm trying what you're doing right. Um, I'm trying to like, you know, coach my way through to like, you know, coach my way through to like, you know, coach my way through what I'm doing. So, it's like if it was what I'm doing. So, it's like if it was what I'm doing. So, it's like if it was just me and my own gym, I might have just me and my own gym, I might have just me and my own gym, I might have even zoned out a little bit more, gone a even zoned out a little bit more, gone a even zoned out a little bit more, gone a little bit harder, got a little bit little bit harder, got a little bit little bit harder, got a little bit uglier face when I was doing my uglier face when I was doing my uglier face when I was doing my repetitions that were hard. So, it might repetitions that were hard. So, it might repetitions that were hard. So, it might be even a little notch above what be even a little notch above what be even a little notch above what was shown in our in our video in terms was shown in our in our video in terms was shown in our in our video in terms of intensity. I can't do that more than of intensity. I can't do that more than of intensity. I can't do that more than once a week for a muscle group. Now, once a week for a muscle group. Now, once a week for a muscle group. Now, &gt;&gt; but you're also training back, you're &gt;&gt; but you're also training back, you're &gt;&gt; but you're also training back, you're also training chest, you're also training chest, you're also training chest, you're also training shoulders on a separate day in training shoulders on a separate day in training shoulders on a separate day in that. &gt;&gt; Well, that's the key, right? So what I &gt;&gt; Well, that's the key, right? So what I &gt;&gt; Well, that's the key, right? So what I So when people recommend higher frequency when people recommend higher frequency when people recommend higher frequency sessions or every 48 hours or sessions or every 48 hours or sessions or every 48 hours or twice a week minimum and all that, you twice a week minimum and all that, you twice a week minimum and all that, you are also forcing yourselves into some are also forcing yourselves into some are also forcing yourselves into some splits that have a lot more muscles splits that have a lot more muscles splits that have a lot more muscles being trained at once. Cuz in order to being trained at once. Cuz in order to being trained at once. Cuz in order to get back to them again in the same 7-day get back to them again in the same 7-day get back to them again in the same 7-day week period, you have to do multiple in week period, you have to do multiple in week period, you have to do multiple in one day. So let's just say in a pushpull one day. So let's just say in a pushpull one day. So let's just say in a pushpull leg scenario, you have to do all your leg scenario, you have to do all your leg scenario, you have to do all your pushing muscles. So, right off the bat, pushing muscles. So, right off the bat, pushing muscles. So, right off the bat, you're doing chest, shoulders, triceps you're doing chest, shoulders, triceps you're doing chest, shoulders, triceps in one day. I find even that to be a lot in one day. I find even that to be a lot in one day. I find even that to be a lot to ask for me at times, not all the to ask for me at times, not all the to ask for me at times, not all the time, but especially if I'm short on time, but especially if I'm short on time, but especially if I'm short on sleep and short on time that day. I sleep and short on time that day. I sleep and short on time that day. I can't get through all those and get an can't get through all those and get an can't get through all those and get an adequate stimulus because I'm adequate stimulus because I'm adequate stimulus because I'm there's just too much work to be done. there's just too much work to be done. there's just too much work to be done. So that creates a need to have to So that creates a need to have to So that creates a need to have to condense into these multi muscle group condense into these multi muscle group condense into these multi muscle group splits that you go through the push, you splits that you go through the push, you splits that you go through the push, you go through the pull, you go through the go through the pull, you go through the go through the pull, you go through the legs. Now you got to have, let's say, legs. Now you got to have, let's say, legs. Now you got to have, let's say, one rest day, come right back again. So one rest day, come right back again. So one rest day, come right back again. So you're training six days a week. Some you're training six days a week. Some you're training six days a week. Some people can't manage that either. But people can't manage that either. But people can't manage that either. But what I do is I say, "All right, if I what I do is I say, "All right, if I what I do is I say, "All right, if I train, let's just say biceps like we train, let's just say biceps like we train, let's just say biceps like we did, and I do them really hard." And I did, and I do them really hard." And I did, and I do them really hard." And I even just did biceps and triceps, say, even just did biceps and triceps, say, even just did biceps and triceps, say, if I did those two, I still have to get if I did those two, I still have to get if I did those two, I still have to get through legs. because I have to get through legs. because I have to get through legs. because I have to get through shoulders, I have to get through shoulders, I have to get through shoulders, I have to get through chest, I have to get through uh I chest, I have to get through uh I chest, I have to get through uh I break legs into anterior and posterior break legs into anterior and posterior break legs into anterior and posterior chain. So, there sort of two workouts. chain. So, there sort of two workouts. chain. So, there sort of two workouts. I have to get through a lot more in I have to get through a lot more in I have to get through a lot more in the week. So, if I had to get it all the week. So, if I had to get it all the week. So, if I had to get it all done in one week, I would run out of done in one week, I would run out of done in one week, I would run out of time. I first thing I do is I extend time. I first thing I do is I extend time. I first thing I do is I extend beyond the seven days. So, I break that beyond the seven days. So, I break that beyond the seven days. So, I break that rule cuz I realize like you said that rule cuz I realize like you said that rule cuz I realize like you said that our body doesn't know the difference. our body doesn't know the difference. our body doesn't know the difference. So, it's okay if it takes me a little So, it's okay if it takes me a little So, it's okay if it takes me a little bit longer to wrap around before I do bit longer to wrap around before I do bit longer to wrap around before I do whatever the arms again. Let's say in whatever the arms again. Let's say in whatever the arms again. Let's say in this case, the arms again. So I break this case, the arms again. So I break this case, the arms again. So I break that rule. It could be nine days for me that rule. It could be nine days for me that rule. It could be nine days for me in terms of my cycle. But I know that in terms of my cycle. But I know that in terms of my cycle. But I know that when I come back after biceps, if I do when I come back after biceps, if I do when I come back after biceps, if I do two, let's say I do posterior chain legs two, let's say I do posterior chain legs two, let's say I do posterior chain legs and then I do um let's say I do after and then I do um let's say I do after and then I do um let's say I do after that uh chest, right? Even just a single that uh chest, right? Even just a single that uh chest, right? Even just a single muscle group. When I come back and I do muscle group. When I come back and I do muscle group. When I come back and I do back, the reason why back is following back, the reason why back is following back, the reason why back is following chest is I'm going to give my chest a chest is I'm going to give my chest a chest is I'm going to give my chest a reprieve from the day before. I'm going reprieve from the day before. I'm going reprieve from the day before. I'm going to go pulling when I was just pushing. to go pulling when I was just pushing. to go pulling when I was just pushing. Neurologically, I'm giving myself a Neurologically, I'm giving myself a Neurologically, I'm giving myself a complete break. But I also know that I'm complete break. But I also know that I'm complete break. But I also know that I'm looking backwards to when I did biceps looking backwards to when I did biceps looking backwards to when I did biceps and it was 48 to 72 hours prior that I and it was 48 to 72 hours prior that I and it was 48 to 72 hours prior that I did biceps. When I do my back, I know did biceps. When I do my back, I know did biceps. When I do my back, I know I'm going to get indirect work for my I'm going to get indirect work for my I'm going to get indirect work for my biceps again. Guarantee. So, and if I biceps again. Guarantee. So, and if I biceps again. Guarantee. So, and if I don't know that, I can make sure I do by don't know that, I can make sure I do by don't know that, I can make sure I do by doing underhand rows. I could do doing underhand rows. I could do doing underhand rows. I could do underhand pull downs. I could do underhand pull downs. I could do underhand pull downs. I could do chin-ups rather than pull-ups if I chin-ups rather than pull-ups if I chin-ups rather than pull-ups if I feel like I didn't adequately stimulate feel like I didn't adequately stimulate feel like I didn't adequately stimulate my biceps that day. So I can make my biceps that day. So I can make my biceps that day. So I can make selections in these back exercises that selections in these back exercises that selections in these back exercises that indirectly hit the biceps. That's a lot indirectly hit the biceps. That's a lot indirectly hit the biceps. That's a lot of volume. That's enough. Like you're of volume. That's enough. Like you're of volume. That's enough. Like you're getting direct volume. There's no rule getting direct volume. There's no rule getting direct volume. There's no rule again that says that it has to be again that says that it has to be again that says that it has to be directly hit to contribute volume to the directly hit to contribute volume to the directly hit to contribute volume to the work being done by that uh work being done by that uh work being done by that uh muscle group. So I come back and I do my muscle group. So I come back and I do my muscle group. So I come back and I do my indirect volume there. And a lot of indirect volume there. And a lot of indirect volume there. And a lot of times these studies actually uh spoke to times these studies actually uh spoke to times these studies actually uh spoke to Brad Shfeld about this when he spoke at Brad Shfeld about this when he spoke at Brad Shfeld about this when he spoke at my event. They don't do a lot of my event. They don't do a lot of my event. They don't do a lot of accounting for the indirect work because accounting for the indirect work because accounting for the indirect work because we can't quantify what indirect we can't quantify what indirect we can't quantify what indirect contribution that row had to a bicep. So contribution that row had to a bicep. So contribution that row had to a bicep. So there's not a lot of data around that there's not a lot of data around that there's not a lot of data around that anyway about how much contribution the anyway about how much contribution the anyway about how much contribution the indirect work works towards. So when indirect work works towards. So when indirect work works towards. So when they do these studies and they look for they do these studies and they look for they do these studies and they look for how much total volume they're looking at how much total volume they're looking at how much total volume they're looking at direct work for that muscle group. So I direct work for that muscle group. So I direct work for that muscle group. So I feel as if it's um it intuitively from feel as if it's um it intuitively from feel as if it's um it intuitively from my experience I know that I definitely my experience I know that I definitely my experience I know that I definitely get another exposure for that muscle get another exposure for that muscle get another exposure for that muscle group and that contributes to the group and that contributes to the group and that contributes to the overall volume. And then again if it overall volume. And then again if it overall volume. And then again if it takes me a little bit longer to wrap takes me a little bit longer to wrap takes me a little bit longer to wrap around based on how I'm pairing things around based on how I'm pairing things around based on how I'm pairing things together then so be it. But I'm but I'm together then so be it. But I'm but I'm together then so be it. But I'm but I'm getting that indirect work but never getting that indirect work but never getting that indirect work but never twice directly. twice directly. twice directly. So in some sense you are similar to the So in some sense you are similar to the So in some sense you are similar to the Mike Mener Mike Mener Mike Mener um philosophy not of one set to absolute um philosophy not of one set to absolute um philosophy not of one set to absolute failure because he was really on failure because he was really on failure because he was really on the far end of the far end of the far end of &gt;&gt; I did that too. I just couldn't sustain &gt;&gt; I did that too. I just couldn't sustain &gt;&gt; I did that too. I just couldn't sustain that. &gt;&gt; Right. But in terms of not making the &gt;&gt; Right. But in terms of not making the &gt;&gt; Right. But in terms of not making the 7-day week the uh the holy grail of 7-day week the uh the holy grail of 7-day week the uh the holy grail of how you organize your schedule because how you organize your schedule because how you organize your schedule because you know Mike I was fortunate enough to you know Mike I was fortunate enough to you know Mike I was fortunate enough to know him. Um I paid him for a consult know him. Um I paid him for a consult know him. Um I paid him for a consult and got to know him over the years, you and got to know him over the years, you and got to know him over the years, you know, before he unfortunately passed know, before he unfortunately passed know, before he unfortunately passed away. And he had training like I think away. And he had training like I think away. And he had training like I think it was like shoulders and arms rest two it was like shoulders and arms rest two it was like shoulders and arms rest two days, you know, then it was like legs days, you know, then it was like legs days, you know, then it was like legs rest two days and then chest and back rest two days and then chest and back rest two days and then chest and back and rest two days. Mindblowing. Yeah, it and rest two days. Mindblowing. Yeah, it and rest two days. Mindblowing. Yeah, it was it was mind-blowing. And the was it was mind-blowing. And the was it was mind-blowing. And the problem with that I think at for a problem with that I think at for a problem with that I think at for a beginner is you get results. You beginner is you get results. You beginner is you get results. You certainly get results but you don't get certainly get results but you don't get certainly get results but you don't get the opportunity to develop the skill of the opportunity to develop the skill of the opportunity to develop the skill of training. I mean there as you training. I mean there as you training. I mean there as you &gt;&gt; or the enjoyment of it, right? &gt;&gt; or the enjoyment of it, right? &gt;&gt; or the enjoyment of it, right? &gt;&gt; Or the enjoyment. So um three maybe four &gt;&gt; Or the enjoyment. So um three maybe four &gt;&gt; Or the enjoyment. So um three maybe four days a week of resistance training for days a week of resistance training for days a week of resistance training for me just is like the sweet spot. me just is like the sweet spot. me just is like the sweet spot. But as with you, I found that I can give But as with you, I found that I can give But as with you, I found that I can give myself permission like if travel comes myself permission like if travel comes myself permission like if travel comes up or a poor night's sleep or some extra up or a poor night's sleep or some extra up or a poor night's sleep or some extra workload or something like okay, there workload or something like okay, there workload or something like okay, there can be an extra day after legs or you can be an extra day after legs or you can be an extra day after legs or you can you can modify things. Which brings can you can modify things. Which brings can you can modify things. Which brings me to uh my other question. Yesterday me to uh my other question. Yesterday me to uh my other question. Yesterday after we were training, I learned after we were training, I learned after we were training, I learned something remarkable which is there are something remarkable which is there are something remarkable which is there are times when you will split your split times when you will split your split times when you will split your split simply based on uh real life simply based on uh real life simply based on uh real life constraints. And you gave a beautiful constraints. And you gave a beautiful constraints. And you gave a beautiful example. I'm smiling already. Um you example. I'm smiling already. Um you example. I'm smiling already. Um you said, you know, there are times when uh said, you know, there are times when uh said, you know, there are times when uh you're supposed to train at night, but you're supposed to train at night, but you're supposed to train at night, but you go in to read to your boys or spend you go in to read to your boys or spend you go in to read to your boys or spend some time with them before sleep and some time with them before sleep and some time with them before sleep and you'll like fall asleep next to you'll like fall asleep next to you'll like fall asleep next to them. &gt;&gt; That's more often than not. &gt;&gt; That's more often than not. &gt;&gt; That's more often than not. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So then you'll go into the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So then you'll go into the &gt;&gt; Yeah. So then you'll go into the gym at your home gym at like 10 or 11 gym at your home gym at like 10 or 11 gym at your home gym at like 10 or 11 o'clock at night and you'll do half of o'clock at night and you'll do half of o'clock at night and you'll do half of your leg workout your leg workout your leg workout &gt;&gt; and then you'll split literally split &gt;&gt; and then you'll split literally split &gt;&gt; and then you'll split literally split the split and come back and do the split and come back and do the split and come back and do the remainder of that workout um a few days remainder of that workout um a few days remainder of that workout um a few days later. I love this example because it's later. I love this example because it's later. I love this example because it's the real world and obviously you're the real world and obviously you're the real world and obviously you're prioritizing time with your boys and prioritizing time with your boys and prioritizing time with your boys and that's what really matters. That's why that's what really matters. That's why that's what really matters. That's why you're training in the first place. I you're training in the first place. I you're training in the first place. I mean yes to have your physique etc. But mean yes to have your physique etc. But mean yes to have your physique etc. But you're that's what motivates me. you're that's what motivates me. you're that's what motivates me. &gt;&gt; That's what motivates you to be around &gt;&gt; That's what motivates you to be around &gt;&gt; That's what motivates you to be around for a long time. So splitting the split, for a long time. So splitting the split, for a long time. So splitting the split, you wouldn't suggest it to people, but you wouldn't suggest it to people, but you wouldn't suggest it to people, but life happens. So what does that look life happens. So what does that look life happens. So what does that look like? Is it that you're doing like your like? Is it that you're doing like your like? Is it that you're doing like your quad workout and then you're um quad workout and then you're um quad workout and then you're um normally you would also do something normally you would also do something normally you would also do something else, but you're doing the other stuff else, but you're doing the other stuff else, but you're doing the other stuff later or maybe doing three sets of later or maybe doing three sets of later or maybe doing three sets of squats and coming back two days later squats and coming back two days later squats and coming back two days later and doing the other three sets of and doing the other three sets of and doing the other three sets of squats. &gt;&gt; So here's the irony of it. Um I don't &gt;&gt; So here's the irony of it. Um I don't &gt;&gt; So here's the irony of it. Um I don't know if I wouldn't recommend splitting know if I wouldn't recommend splitting know if I wouldn't recommend splitting the split. You know, I feel like I'm the split. You know, I feel like I'm the split. You know, I feel like I'm starting to learn that splitting the starting to learn that splitting the starting to learn that splitting the split is me breaking a bad habit that I split is me breaking a bad habit that I split is me breaking a bad habit that I was unwilling to break a long time was unwilling to break a long time was unwilling to break a long time because of because of the same mentality because of because of the same mentality because of because of the same mentality that led me to think of a 7-day training that led me to think of a 7-day training that led me to think of a 7-day training week, right? That I think what's week, right? That I think what's week, right? That I think what's happening and that I've been seeing is happening and that I've been seeing is happening and that I've been seeing is that splitting the split does a few that splitting the split does a few that splitting the split does a few things for me mentally. It recharges me things for me mentally. It recharges me things for me mentally. It recharges me on a night where I really don't have a on a night where I really don't have a on a night where I really don't have a lot in the tank. If I get over there and lot in the tank. If I get over there and lot in the tank. If I get over there and I was just sleeping for the last 30 I was just sleeping for the last 30 I was just sleeping for the last 30 minutes or 45 minutes, I'm not like in minutes or 45 minutes, I'm not like in minutes or 45 minutes, I'm not like in the greatest state of mind to train. But the greatest state of mind to train. But the greatest state of mind to train. But if I know that the requirement is let's if I know that the requirement is let's if I know that the requirement is let's just get through if I'm going to do my just get through if I'm going to do my just get through if I'm going to do my shoulders. Let's say um let me get shoulders. Let's say um let me get shoulders. Let's say um let me get through half of what I would normally through half of what I would normally through half of what I would normally do. I'm going to focus today on the do. I'm going to focus today on the do. I'm going to focus today on the nonstrength focused stuff because I'm nonstrength focused stuff because I'm nonstrength focused stuff because I'm just not neurologically prepared to do just not neurologically prepared to do just not neurologically prepared to do that right now. So let's just work on that right now. So let's just work on that right now. So let's just work on the lateral raises, the strict lateral the lateral raises, the strict lateral the lateral raises, the strict lateral raises in that case. Um the um the raises in that case. Um the um the raises in that case. Um the um the hip exercise I like is a hip hugger. hip exercise I like is a hip hugger. hip exercise I like is a hip hugger. It's just different exercises that I It's just different exercises that I It's just different exercises that I would do that would be perceived as the would do that would be perceived as the would do that would be perceived as the non-compound exercises. And I'll do the non-compound exercises. And I'll do the non-compound exercises. And I'll do those and what I find very quickly is those and what I find very quickly is those and what I find very quickly is that because I can ease into those that because I can ease into those that because I can ease into those exercises. They're not as heavily exercises. They're not as heavily exercises. They're not as heavily loaded, but they're high intensity. It loaded, but they're high intensity. It loaded, but they're high intensity. It doesn't have to become from the load. It doesn't have to become from the load. It doesn't have to become from the load. It comes from the effort. I can ease into comes from the effort. I can ease into comes from the effort. I can ease into them after one or two sets. I'm good. them after one or two sets. I'm good. them after one or two sets. I'm good. And I'm like kind of into it. And I know And I'm like kind of into it. And I know And I'm like kind of into it. And I know that once I'm done with these six sets that once I'm done with these six sets that once I'm done with these six sets or so, I'm done for the night. and I can or so, I'm done for the night. and I can or so, I'm done for the night. and I can come back and do my strength work when come back and do my strength work when come back and do my strength work when I'm ready, which could be 2 days later I'm ready, which could be 2 days later I'm ready, which could be 2 days later usually, sometimes the very next night. usually, sometimes the very next night. usually, sometimes the very next night. Really, I'll just split it to the next Really, I'll just split it to the next Really, I'll just split it to the next night and whatever was planned gets night and whatever was planned gets night and whatever was planned gets bumped one spot. It's going to extend bumped one spot. It's going to extend bumped one spot. It's going to extend that training week even further so that training week even further so that training week even further so that nine days can become, you know, 11 or nine days can become, you know, 11 or nine days can become, you know, 11 or 12. Uh, but I we talked about recovery 12. Uh, but I we talked about recovery 12. Uh, but I we talked about recovery before like it seems to be working well before like it seems to be working well before like it seems to be working well with me for my recovery at this with me for my recovery at this with me for my recovery at this age. And again, I think this I have very age. And again, I think this I have very age. And again, I think this I have very bad sleep habits only because the result bad sleep habits only because the result bad sleep habits only because the result of working out at 11:00 or 12:00 is you of working out at 11:00 or 12:00 is you of working out at 11:00 or 12:00 is you and then and by the way, eating dinner and then and by the way, eating dinner and then and by the way, eating dinner after that, that's my dinner time. Like after that, that's my dinner time. Like after that, that's my dinner time. Like eating dinner after that, you know, I eating dinner after that, you know, I eating dinner after that, you know, I get to bed 1:30 in the morning and I'm get to bed 1:30 in the morning and I'm get to bed 1:30 in the morning and I'm getting up at 7 or I get up to bed at getting up at 7 or I get up to bed at getting up at 7 or I get up to bed at 2:00 and I get up at 7:00. 2:00 and I get up at 7:00. 2:00 and I get up at 7:00. Th this might be what works for me best Th this might be what works for me best Th this might be what works for me best right now because my I don't have the right now because my I don't have the right now because my I don't have the recovery through as much sleep as I recovery through as much sleep as I recovery through as much sleep as I should get. Now, I know a lot of people should get. Now, I know a lot of people should get. Now, I know a lot of people yell and say, "Well, you need to work on yell and say, "Well, you need to work on yell and say, "Well, you need to work on your sleep and get better recovery." I your sleep and get better recovery." I your sleep and get better recovery." I understand that. Right now, this little understand that. Right now, this little understand that. Right now, this little pattern is where I'm in. You know, it pattern is where I'm in. You know, it pattern is where I'm in. You know, it can be fixed by me training earlier in can be fixed by me training earlier in can be fixed by me training earlier in the day, stepping away from work and the day, stepping away from work and the day, stepping away from work and training earlier in the day. I haven't training earlier in the day. I haven't training earlier in the day. I haven't found the time or the way to do that found the time or the way to do that found the time or the way to do that effectively at this moment. So, this is effectively at this moment. So, this is effectively at this moment. So, this is what I have to navigate. And I encourage what I have to navigate. And I encourage what I have to navigate. And I encourage people to do the same thing. Find what people to do the same thing. Find what people to do the same thing. Find what works with your current schedule. You works with your current schedule. You works with your current schedule. You can have an eye towards fixing it, but can have an eye towards fixing it, but can have an eye towards fixing it, but what works for your schedule to get you what works for your schedule to get you what works for your schedule to get you through this time period? I think it's through this time period? I think it's through this time period? I think it's working because I have more recovery working because I have more recovery working because I have more recovery time in a less recovered sleep state time in a less recovered sleep state time in a less recovered sleep state that seems to still be progressing that seems to still be progressing that seems to still be progressing because I could still lift heavier than because I could still lift heavier than because I could still lift heavier than I have been able to. I'm still able to I have been able to. I'm still able to I have been able to. I'm still able to uh to create effective workouts for uh to create effective workouts for uh to create effective workouts for me. I feel I feel good. My joints are me. I feel I feel good. My joints are me. I feel I feel good. My joints are actually feeling good. Things are actually feeling good. Things are actually feeling good. Things are feeling even a little better than they feeling even a little better than they feeling even a little better than they were. So, it happens to be working for were. So, it happens to be working for were. So, it happens to be working for me. So I might be changing my mind a me. So I might be changing my mind a me. So I might be changing my mind a little bit about frequencies and volumes little bit about frequencies and volumes little bit about frequencies and volumes in terms of what I do in a given in terms of what I do in a given in terms of what I do in a given workout. And accepting the fact that it workout. And accepting the fact that it workout. And accepting the fact that it can happen over two days is so like can happen over two days is so like can happen over two days is so like relieving cuz it's like I don't have to relieving cuz it's like I don't have to relieving cuz it's like I don't have to bring it all today. I can just sort of bring it all today. I can just sort of bring it all today. I can just sort of get this much done today and it allows get this much done today and it allows get this much done today and it allows me to have a higher effort to handle me to have a higher effort to handle me to have a higher effort to handle again some of the lower volumes that again some of the lower volumes that again some of the lower volumes that we're doing. So it's like a win-win we're doing. So it's like a win-win we're doing. So it's like a win-win all around and the kids like me more for all around and the kids like me more for all around and the kids like me more for it too. it too. it too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, and someday they'll see this &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, and someday they'll see this &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, and someday they'll see this and they're going to see uh so much of and they're going to see uh so much of and they're going to see uh so much of your content. I mean, they're your content. I mean, they're your content. I mean, they're grateful. they're grateful. they're grateful. &gt;&gt; They're totally disinterested right now. &gt;&gt; They're totally disinterested right now. &gt;&gt; They're totally disinterested right now. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But they're grateful for I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah. But they're grateful for I mean, &gt;&gt; Yeah. But they're grateful for I mean, they're going to be grateful for they're going to be grateful for they're going to be grateful for the fact that I mean, you're obviously the fact that I mean, you're obviously the fact that I mean, you're obviously prioritizing them uh and your wife and prioritizing them uh and your wife and prioritizing them uh and your wife and your family and that's a your family and that's a your family and that's a beautiful thing. beautiful thing. beautiful thing. &gt;&gt; Well, Jeff, thank you so much for the &gt;&gt; Well, Jeff, thank you so much for the &gt;&gt; Well, Jeff, thank you so much for the workout yesterday. I definitely learned workout yesterday. I definitely learned workout yesterday. I definitely learned a number of things. I'm definitely a number of things. I'm definitely a number of things. I'm definitely feeling more of those. feeling more of those. feeling more of those. &gt;&gt; Yeah, we should do more. Um, and thank &gt;&gt; Yeah, we should do more. Um, and thank &gt;&gt; Yeah, we should do more. Um, and thank you for coming back to educate us. And you for coming back to educate us. And you for coming back to educate us. And you know, some people when they speak, you know, some people when they speak, you know, some people when they speak, like not a whole lot happens except a like not a whole lot happens except a like not a whole lot happens except a bunch of exhales shaped into sound when bunch of exhales shaped into sound when bunch of exhales shaped into sound when you speak. you speak. you speak. &gt;&gt; People learn and they learn super &gt;&gt; People learn and they learn super &gt;&gt; People learn and they learn super valuable information. Everything from valuable information. Everything from valuable information. Everything from the basics all the way up to the nuance. the basics all the way up to the nuance. the basics all the way up to the nuance. Um, you're constantly educating yourself Um, you're constantly educating yourself Um, you're constantly educating yourself already just a moment ago. You know, already just a moment ago. You know, already just a moment ago. You know, you're um, you're still evolving the way you're um, you're still evolving the way you're um, you're still evolving the way you're doing things and you share that. you're doing things and you share that. you're doing things and you share that. And again, these so-called small things And again, these so-called small things And again, these so-called small things that allow one to do the big things for that allow one to do the big things for that allow one to do the big things for much longer and much more effectively is much longer and much more effectively is much longer and much more effectively is really what it's all about. And you really what it's all about. And you really what it's all about. And you clearly walk the walk. You look awesome. clearly walk the walk. You look awesome. clearly walk the walk. You look awesome. You're 50. You know, steroid TRT free, You're 50. You know, steroid TRT free, You're 50. You know, steroid TRT free, all of that. And you look incredible. all of that. And you look incredible. all of that. And you look incredible. And so, you know, there are probably And so, you know, there are probably And so, you know, there are probably none people who are doing what none people who are doing what none people who are doing what you're doing. You're truly an N of one you're doing. You're truly an N of one you're doing. You're truly an N of one that you can encapsulate all this. And that you can encapsulate all this. And that you can encapsulate all this. And you're just so generous with your time you're just so generous with your time you're just so generous with your time and your energy. And so I'm very and your energy. And so I'm very and your energy. And so I'm very grateful for you coming on here again. grateful for you coming on here again. grateful for you coming on here again. &gt;&gt; I was so pumped. I I've been wanting to &gt;&gt; I was so pumped. I I've been wanting to &gt;&gt; I was so pumped. I I've been wanting to come back here for so long and the come back here for so long and the come back here for so long and the negotiating the travel is always a thing negotiating the travel is always a thing negotiating the travel is always a thing for me, but I was so excited to be able for me, but I was so excited to be able for me, but I was so excited to be able to do it. Finally do it and getting the to do it. Finally do it and getting the to do it. Finally do it and getting the workout in and come back and sit down workout in and come back and sit down workout in and come back and sit down with you is always my favorite thing. So with you is always my favorite thing. So with you is always my favorite thing. So thank you for having me. thank you for having me. thank you for having me. &gt;&gt; Well, please come back again. You're an &gt;&gt; Well, please come back again. You're an &gt;&gt; Well, please come back again. You're an inspiration to me and like I said, inspiration to me and like I said, inspiration to me and like I said, you're a absolutely extraordinary you're a absolutely extraordinary you're a absolutely extraordinary educator. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Jeff Cavalier. To learn discussion with Jeff Cavalier. To learn discussion with Jeff Cavalier. To learn more about his work and to find links to more about his work and to find links to more about his work and to find links to Athleen X resources, please see the show Athleen X resources, please see the show Athleen X resources, please see the show note caption. In addition, you'll also note caption. In addition, you'll also note caption. In addition, you'll also find links in the show not captions to find links in the show not captions to find links in the show not captions to the workout that Jeff and I did and that the workout that Jeff and I did and that the workout that Jeff and I did and that was referenced a few times throughout was referenced a few times throughout was referenced a few times throughout the episode. So, that's a link to a the episode. So, that's a link to a the episode. So, that's a link to a proper workout for the biceps, for the proper workout for the biceps, for the proper workout for the biceps, for the triceps, for the forearms, and Jeff's triceps, for the forearms, and Jeff's triceps, for the forearms, and Jeff's signature move, face pulls. If you're signature move, face pulls. If you're signature move, face pulls. If you're learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, platforms. And if you haven't already, subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network subscribe to our neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter. The neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Jeff Cavalier. today's discussion with Jeff Cavalier. today's discussion with Jeff Cavalier. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.