Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing how to study and Today we are discussing how to study and Today we are discussing how to study and learn. That is what the scientific data learn. That is what the scientific data learn. That is what the scientific data say is the best way to study in order to say is the best way to study in order to say is the best way to study in order to remember information and to be able to remember information and to be able to remember information and to be able to use that information effectively in use that information effectively in use that information effectively in different areas of your life. So for different areas of your life. So for different areas of your life. So for those of you that are still in school, those of you that are still in school, those of you that are still in school, this could be any stage of school, this could be any stage of school, this could be any stage of school, today's discussion will be very useful today's discussion will be very useful today's discussion will be very useful for you. for you. for you. However, even if you are not formally However, even if you are not formally However, even if you are not formally enrolled in any kind of school at the enrolled in any kind of school at the enrolled in any kind of school at the moment, today's discussion will also be moment, today's discussion will also be moment, today's discussion will also be extremely effective for you to be able extremely effective for you to be able extremely effective for you to be able to study and learn better information to study and learn better information to study and learn better information from say the internet or podcasts or any from say the internet or podcasts or any from say the internet or podcasts or any area of your life where you are seeking area of your life where you are seeking area of your life where you are seeking to learn and use new knowledge. Now, one to learn and use new knowledge. Now, one to learn and use new knowledge. Now, one of the most important things that you're of the most important things that you're of the most important things that you're going to learn today is that learning, going to learn today is that learning, going to learn today is that learning, that is the best learning practices, are that is the best learning practices, are that is the best learning practices, are not intuitive. not intuitive. not intuitive. So before we dive in, keep in mind that So before we dive in, keep in mind that So before we dive in, keep in mind that whatever you believe about how best to whatever you believe about how best to whatever you believe about how best to learn for you is probably incorrect. And learn for you is probably incorrect. And learn for you is probably incorrect. And I confess this was humbling for me as I confess this was humbling for me as I confess this was humbling for me as well when I started to dive into this well when I started to dive into this well when I started to dive into this literature because as somebody who was a literature because as somebody who was a literature because as somebody who was a student for many years and in some sense student for many years and in some sense student for many years and in some sense still considers himself a student of still considers himself a student of still considers himself a student of science and health information because science and health information because science and health information because of this podcast and certainly somebody of this podcast and certainly somebody of this podcast and certainly somebody who still teaches university courses who still teaches university courses who still teaches university courses both to medical students and graduate both to medical students and graduate both to medical students and graduate students and to undergraduate students and to undergraduate students and to undergraduate students at Stanford, at Stanford, at Stanford, I thought I understood the whole I thought I understood the whole I thought I understood the whole teaching and learning process, but I too teaching and learning process, but I too teaching and learning process, but I too learned that it is anything but learned that it is anything but learned that it is anything but intuitive. In fact, most of what we intuitive. In fact, most of what we intuitive. In fact, most of what we believe about the best ways to study believe about the best ways to study believe about the best ways to study are absolutely false. Fortunately today are absolutely false. Fortunately today are absolutely false. Fortunately today you will learn the best ways to study. you will learn the best ways to study. you will learn the best ways to study. Turns out there's a rich literature on Turns out there's a rich literature on Turns out there's a rich literature on this dating back well over 100 years and this dating back well over 100 years and this dating back well over 100 years and the data are absolutely fascinating and the data are absolutely fascinating and the data are absolutely fascinating and incredibly actionable. It's incredibly actionable. It's incredibly actionable. It's incredibly interesting how the fields of education, interesting how the fields of education, interesting how the fields of education, the fields of psychology, and the fields the fields of psychology, and the fields the fields of psychology, and the fields of neuroscience have now come together of neuroscience have now come together of neuroscience have now come together to define the optimal strategies to define the optimal strategies to define the optimal strategies to study and learn. Before we begin, I'd study and learn. Before we begin, I'd study and learn. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring of my desire and effort to bring of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about zero-cost to consumer information about zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is today's podcast. Our first sponsor is today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, mattress covers with cooling, heating, mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken many times before on this podcast about many times before on this podcast about many times before on this podcast about the critical need to get sleep, both the critical need to get sleep, both the critical need to get sleep, both enough sleep and enough quality sleep. enough sleep and enough quality sleep. enough sleep and enough quality sleep. Now, one of the key things to getting a Now, one of the key things to getting a Now, one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is that your body great night's sleep is that your body great night's sleep is that your body temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3° in order for you to fall about 1 to 3° in order for you to fall about 1 to 3° in order for you to fall and stay deeply asleep. And to wake up and stay deeply asleep. And to wake up and stay deeply asleep. And to wake up feeling refreshed, your body temperature feeling refreshed, your body temperature feeling refreshed, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. One of the best ways to ensure all 3°. One of the best ways to ensure all 3°. One of the best ways to ensure all of that happens is to control the of that happens is to control the of that happens is to control the temperature of your sleeping temperature of your sleeping temperature of your sleeping environment. And with Eight Sleep, it's environment. And with Eight Sleep, it's environment. And with Eight Sleep, it's very easy to do that. You program the very easy to do that. You program the very easy to do that. You program the temperature that you want at the temperature that you want at the temperature that you want at the beginning, middle, and the end of the beginning, middle, and the end of the beginning, middle, and the end of the night, and that's the temperature that night, and that's the temperature that night, and that's the temperature that you're going to sleep at. And it will you're going to sleep at. And it will you're going to sleep at. And it will track your sleep. It tells you how much track your sleep. It tells you how much track your sleep. It tells you how much slow-wave sleep you're getting, how much slow-wave sleep you're getting, how much slow-wave sleep you're getting, how much rapid eye movement sleep you're getting, rapid eye movement sleep you're getting, rapid eye movement sleep you're getting, which is critical, and all of that also which is critical, and all of that also which is critical, and all of that also helps you dial in the exact parameters helps you dial in the exact parameters helps you dial in the exact parameters you need in order to get the best you need in order to get the best you need in order to get the best possible night's sleep for you. I've possible night's sleep for you. I've possible night's sleep for you. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for well over 3 years now, and it cover for well over 3 years now, and it cover for well over 3 years now, and it has completely transformed my sleep for has completely transformed my sleep for has completely transformed my sleep for the better. Eight Sleep recently the better. Eight Sleep recently the better. Eight Sleep recently launched their newest generation Pod launched their newest generation Pod launched their newest generation Pod Cover, the Pod 4 Ultra. The Pod 4 Ultra Cover, the Pod 4 Ultra. The Pod 4 Ultra Cover, the Pod 4 Ultra. The Pod 4 Ultra Cover has improved cooling and heating Cover has improved cooling and heating Cover has improved cooling and heating capacity, higher-fidelity sleep tracking capacity, higher-fidelity sleep tracking capacity, higher-fidelity sleep tracking technology, and the Pod 4 Cover has technology, and the Pod 4 Cover has technology, and the Pod 4 Cover has snoring detection that will snoring detection that will snoring detection that will automatically lift your head a few automatically lift your head a few automatically lift your head a few degrees to improve airflow and stop your degrees to improve airflow and stop your degrees to improve airflow and stop your snoring. If you'd like to try an Eight snoring. If you'd like to try an Eight snoring. If you'd like to try an Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can go to Sleep mattress cover, you can go to Sleep mattress cover, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save $350 off their Pod 4 Pro. Eight to save $350 off their Pod 4 Pro. Eight to save $350 off their Pod 4 Pro. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Sleep currently ships to the USA, Sleep currently ships to the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's and Australia. Again, that's and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. therapist carried out entirely online. I've been doing weekly therapy for well I've been doing weekly therapy for well I've been doing weekly therapy for well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition of being a choice. It was a condition of being a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay in school. But pretty allowed to stay in school. But pretty allowed to stay in school. But pretty soon I realized that therapy is an soon I realized that therapy is an soon I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to overall extremely important component to overall extremely important component to overall health. In fact, I consider doing health. In fact, I consider doing health. In fact, I consider doing regular therapy just as important as regular therapy just as important as regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise. Now, there are getting regular exercise. Now, there are getting regular exercise. Now, there are essentially three things that great essentially three things that great essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it therapy provides. First of all, it provides good rapport with somebody that provides good rapport with somebody that provides good rapport with somebody that you can trust and talk to about the you can trust and talk to about the you can trust and talk to about the issues that are most critical to you. issues that are most critical to you. issues that are most critical to you. Second of all, it can provide support in Second of all, it can provide support in Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or the form of emotional support or directed guidance. And third, expert directed guidance. And third, expert directed guidance. And third, expert therapy should provide insights. With therapy should provide insights. With therapy should provide insights. With BetterHelp, they make it very easy for BetterHelp, they make it very easy for BetterHelp, they make it very easy for you to find an expert therapist with you to find an expert therapist with you to find an expert therapist with whom you have these critical components whom you have these critical components whom you have these critical components of therapy. Also, because BetterHelp of therapy. Also, because BetterHelp of therapy. Also, because BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done entirely allows for therapy to be done entirely allows for therapy to be done entirely online, it's very time efficient and online, it's very time efficient and online, it's very time efficient and easy to fit into your busy schedule with easy to fit into your busy schedule with easy to fit into your busy schedule with no commuting to a therapist's office or no commuting to a therapist's office or no commuting to a therapist's office or looking for parking or sitting in a looking for parking or sitting in a looking for parking or sitting in a waiting room. If you'd like to try waiting room. If you'd like to try waiting room. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, go to BetterHelp, go to BetterHelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Waking Up. Waking Up is a meditation app Waking Up. Waking Up is a meditation app Waking Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that offers hundreds of guided that offers hundreds of guided that offers hundreds of guided meditation programs, mindfulness meditation programs, mindfulness meditation programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga nidra sessions, and trainings, yoga nidra sessions, and trainings, yoga nidra sessions, and more. I started practicing meditation when I started practicing meditation when I started practicing meditation when I was about 15 years old and it made a was about 15 years old and it made a was about 15 years old and it made a profound impact on my life. And by now, profound impact on my life. And by now, profound impact on my life. And by now, there are thousands of quality there are thousands of quality there are thousands of quality peer-reviewed studies that emphasize how peer-reviewed studies that emphasize how peer-reviewed studies that emphasize how useful mindfulness meditation can be for useful mindfulness meditation can be for useful mindfulness meditation can be for improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and improving our focus, managing stress and anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much anxiety, improving our mood, and much more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using more. In recent years, I started using the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations the Waking Up app for my meditations because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific because I find it to be a terrific resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be resource for allowing me to really be consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. consistent with my meditation practice. Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice Many people start a meditation practice and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many and experience some benefits, but many people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up people also have challenges keeping up with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many with that practice. What I and so many other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up other people love about the Waking Up app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different app is that it has a lot of different meditations to choose from, and those meditations to choose from, and those meditations to choose from, and those meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. meditations are of different durations. So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up So, it makes it very easy to keep up with your meditation practice both from with your meditation practice both from with your meditation practice both from the perspective of novelty, you never the perspective of novelty, you never the perspective of novelty, you never get tired of those meditations, there's get tired of those meditations, there's get tired of those meditations, there's always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to always something new to explore and to learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the learn about yourself and about the effectiveness of meditation, and you can effectiveness of meditation, and you can effectiveness of meditation, and you can always fit meditation into your schedule always fit meditation into your schedule always fit meditation into your schedule even if you only have two or three even if you only have two or three even if you only have two or three minutes per day in which to meditate. I minutes per day in which to meditate. I minutes per day in which to meditate. I also really like doing Yoga Nidra or also really like doing Yoga Nidra or also really like doing Yoga Nidra or what is sometimes called non-sleep deep what is sometimes called non-sleep deep what is sometimes called non-sleep deep rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because it is a great way to restore mental and it is a great way to restore mental and it is a great way to restore mental and physical vigor without the tiredness physical vigor without the tiredness physical vigor without the tiredness that some people experience when they that some people experience when they that some people experience when they wake up from a conventional nap. If wake up from a conventional nap. If wake up from a conventional nap. If you'd like to try the Waking Up app, you'd like to try the Waking Up app, you'd like to try the Waking Up app, please go to wakingup.com/huberman, please go to wakingup.com/huberman, please go to wakingup.com/huberman, where you can access a free 30-day where you can access a free 30-day where you can access a free 30-day trial. Again, that's trial. Again, that's trial. Again, that's wakingup.com/huberman to access a free 30-day trial. Okay, to access a free 30-day trial. Okay, to access a free 30-day trial. Okay, let's talk about how best to study and let's talk about how best to study and let's talk about how best to study and learn. And of course, people have learn. And of course, people have learn. And of course, people have different learning styles. Some people different learning styles. Some people different learning styles. Some people prefer to learn by reading. Some people prefer to learn by reading. Some people prefer to learn by reading. Some people prefer to study in a group. Some people prefer to study in a group. Some people prefer to study in a group. Some people prefer to highlight. Some people call prefer to highlight. Some people call prefer to highlight. Some people call themselves auditory learners. Other themselves auditory learners. Other themselves auditory learners. Other people consider themselves visual people consider themselves visual people consider themselves visual learners. But guess what? learners. But guess what? learners. But guess what? When one looks at the research on When one looks at the research on When one looks at the research on preferred learning styles, preferred learning styles, preferred learning styles, pretty much all of that melts away. pretty much all of that melts away. pretty much all of that melts away. It turns out that the best way to study It turns out that the best way to study It turns out that the best way to study and learn and learn and learn is defined not by the medium in which is defined not by the medium in which is defined not by the medium in which that material arrives, whether or not that material arrives, whether or not that material arrives, whether or not it's auditory or visual or combined, it's auditory or visual or combined, it's auditory or visual or combined, whether or not you review slides or a whether or not you review slides or a whether or not you review slides or a textbook, or you watch small videos. textbook, or you watch small videos. textbook, or you watch small videos. It turns out that the best way to study It turns out that the best way to study It turns out that the best way to study and learn and learn and learn is to access components of your memory is to access components of your memory is to access components of your memory systems that offset forgetting. systems that offset forgetting. systems that offset forgetting. This is a theme I'm going to return to This is a theme I'm going to return to This is a theme I'm going to return to over and over again throughout today's over and over again throughout today's over and over again throughout today's episode. Rather than think about episode. Rather than think about episode. Rather than think about studying to learn and retain studying to learn and retain studying to learn and retain information. I want you to think about information. I want you to think about information. I want you to think about studying to offset the natural process studying to offset the natural process studying to offset the natural process of forgetting that everybody experiences of forgetting that everybody experiences of forgetting that everybody experiences when they are exposed to new material of when they are exposed to new material of when they are exposed to new material of any kind, cognitive or motor learning, any kind, cognitive or motor learning, any kind, cognitive or motor learning, musical learning, math, etc. Okay, so musical learning, math, etc. Okay, so musical learning, math, etc. Okay, so keep this in mind throughout today's keep this in mind throughout today's keep this in mind throughout today's episode. The best way to learn is to episode. The best way to learn is to episode. The best way to learn is to think about offsetting the natural think about offsetting the natural think about offsetting the natural forgetting of new information. You're forgetting of new information. You're forgetting of new information. You're trying to inoculate against forgetting. trying to inoculate against forgetting. trying to inoculate against forgetting. That is the way to remember things, that That is the way to remember things, that That is the way to remember things, that is the way to gain mastery over them, is the way to gain mastery over them, is the way to gain mastery over them, and I'm going to teach you how to best and I'm going to teach you how to best and I'm going to teach you how to best do that using the data gleaned from the do that using the data gleaned from the do that using the data gleaned from the peer-reviewed literature. Now, before I peer-reviewed literature. Now, before I peer-reviewed literature. Now, before I do that, I want to talk about what do that, I want to talk about what do that, I want to talk about what learning is. I promise to make this learning is. I promise to make this learning is. I promise to make this fairly brief because I've covered fairly brief because I've covered fairly brief because I've covered learning and so-called neuroplasticity learning and so-called neuroplasticity learning and so-called neuroplasticity before on this podcast. before on this podcast. before on this podcast. For those of you that have heard those For those of you that have heard those For those of you that have heard those discussions, this will serve as a discussions, this will serve as a discussions, this will serve as a refresher. For those of you that have refresher. For those of you that have refresher. For those of you that have not heard those discussions, this will not heard those discussions, this will not heard those discussions, this will be thorough enough for you to be able to be thorough enough for you to be able to be thorough enough for you to be able to digest all the rest of today's digest all the rest of today's digest all the rest of today's information. Neuroplasticity is this incredible Neuroplasticity is this incredible Neuroplasticity is this incredible feature of your nervous system, which of feature of your nervous system, which of feature of your nervous system, which of course includes your brain and your course includes your brain and your course includes your brain and your spinal cord, which is the ability for spinal cord, which is the ability for spinal cord, which is the ability for your nervous system to change in your nervous system to change in your nervous system to change in response to experience. So, any form of response to experience. So, any form of response to experience. So, any form of learning involves neuroplasticity. involves neuroplasticity. involves neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity, we sometimes hear as a Neuroplasticity, we sometimes hear as a Neuroplasticity, we sometimes hear as a neural plasticity, two words, or neural plasticity, two words, or neural plasticity, two words, or neuroplasticity. Those are the same thing, essentially. Those are the same thing, essentially. Those are the same thing, essentially. The change that underlies The change that underlies The change that underlies neuroplasticity at the level of cells, neuroplasticity at the level of cells, neuroplasticity at the level of cells, which we call neurons or nerve cells, which we call neurons or nerve cells, which we call neurons or nerve cells, generally involves three different generally involves three different generally involves three different mechanisms. One is the strengthening of mechanisms. One is the strengthening of mechanisms. One is the strengthening of certain connections, what we call certain connections, what we call certain connections, what we call synaptic connections. Synapses are the synaptic connections. Synapses are the synaptic connections. Synapses are the location between neurons where they location between neurons where they location between neurons where they communicate with one another. It's communicate with one another. It's communicate with one another. It's actually a gap between the neurons. It actually a gap between the neurons. It actually a gap between the neurons. It is technically called the synaptic is technically called the synaptic is technically called the synaptic cleft. It's a gap, and within that gap, cleft. It's a gap, and within that gap, cleft. It's a gap, and within that gap, chemicals are passed across that gap chemicals are passed across that gap chemicals are passed across that gap that allow one neuron to activate other that allow one neuron to activate other that allow one neuron to activate other neurons, or many neurons to activate neurons, or many neurons to activate neurons, or many neurons to activate many other neurons, or to inhibit the many other neurons, or to inhibit the many other neurons, or to inhibit the activity of other neurons, okay? So, activity of other neurons, okay? So, activity of other neurons, okay? So, one form of neuroplasticity is the one form of neuroplasticity is the one form of neuroplasticity is the strengthening of connections between strengthening of connections between strengthening of connections between neurons. Another form of neuroplasticity neurons. Another form of neuroplasticity neurons. Another form of neuroplasticity is the weakening of connections between is the weakening of connections between is the weakening of connections between neurons. And yet a third form of plasticity, And yet a third form of plasticity, And yet a third form of plasticity, which is often discussed in the media, which is often discussed in the media, which is often discussed in the media, but is very rare, actually, in the but is very rare, actually, in the but is very rare, actually, in the nervous system, especially the adult nervous system, especially the adult nervous system, especially the adult nervous system of humans, is nervous system of humans, is nervous system of humans, is neurogenesis, or the addition of new neurogenesis, or the addition of new neurogenesis, or the addition of new neurons. Let's just get this out of the neurons. Let's just get this out of the neurons. Let's just get this out of the way up front because the addition of new way up front because the addition of new way up front because the addition of new neurons, again, grabs so much attention neurons, again, grabs so much attention neurons, again, grabs so much attention in media articles, but it's responsible in media articles, but it's responsible in media articles, but it's responsible for a near trivial amount of the sort of for a near trivial amount of the sort of for a near trivial amount of the sort of neuroplasticity that is important for neuroplasticity that is important for neuroplasticity that is important for today's discussion, or frankly, for most today's discussion, or frankly, for most today's discussion, or frankly, for most all discussions. It is true you have a all discussions. It is true you have a all discussions. It is true you have a specialized set of neurons in your specialized set of neurons in your specialized set of neurons in your olfactory bulb that are responsible for olfactory bulb that are responsible for olfactory bulb that are responsible for smell, as well as a specialized set of smell, as well as a specialized set of smell, as well as a specialized set of neurons in the so-called dentate gyrus neurons in the so-called dentate gyrus neurons in the so-called dentate gyrus of your hippocampus, an area of the of your hippocampus, an area of the of your hippocampus, an area of the brain that's important brain that's important brain that's important for memory, for memory, for memory, in which new neurons appear to be added in which new neurons appear to be added in which new neurons appear to be added throughout the lifespan, but this is not throughout the lifespan, but this is not throughout the lifespan, but this is not the major mechanism by which learning the major mechanism by which learning the major mechanism by which learning and memory occurs in humans. Rather, the and memory occurs in humans. Rather, the and memory occurs in humans. Rather, the major mechanism by which learning and major mechanism by which learning and major mechanism by which learning and memory occurs in humans is the memory occurs in humans is the memory occurs in humans is the strengthening of existing connections, strengthening of existing connections, strengthening of existing connections, and the weakening of existing and the weakening of existing and the weakening of existing connections, or the formation of new connections, or the formation of new connections, or the formation of new connections between already existing connections between already existing connections between already existing neurons, not new neurons, okay? neurons, not new neurons, okay? neurons, not new neurons, okay? Now, the removal or weakening of Now, the removal or weakening of Now, the removal or weakening of connections between neurons, being an connections between neurons, being an connections between neurons, being an important component of neuroplasticity, important component of neuroplasticity, important component of neuroplasticity, is very important for sake of today's is very important for sake of today's is very important for sake of today's discussion. I want to emphasize that discussion. I want to emphasize that discussion. I want to emphasize that when we hear about weakening of when we hear about weakening of when we hear about weakening of connections, we often think, well, that connections, we often think, well, that connections, we often think, well, that means forgetting, or that means the means forgetting, or that means the means forgetting, or that means the brain is getting less good. However, so brain is getting less good. However, so brain is getting less good. However, so much of the neuroplasticity that much of the neuroplasticity that much of the neuroplasticity that underlies, for instance, the acquisition underlies, for instance, the acquisition underlies, for instance, the acquisition of a new motor skill, of a new motor skill, of a new motor skill, is actually the reflection of removal of is actually the reflection of removal of is actually the reflection of removal of connections. So, we don't want to connections. So, we don't want to connections. So, we don't want to project any kind of value onto a project any kind of value onto a project any kind of value onto a discussion about adding new connections discussion about adding new connections discussion about adding new connections or removing new connections. Let's just or removing new connections. Let's just or removing new connections. Let's just leave it at this level mechanistically. leave it at this level mechanistically. leave it at this level mechanistically. When you hear about neuroplasticity, When you hear about neuroplasticity, When you hear about neuroplasticity, just know that it could be the just know that it could be the just know that it could be the consequence of strengthening of consequence of strengthening of consequence of strengthening of connections as well as weakening of connections as well as weakening of connections as well as weakening of connections. And that neither strengthening of And that neither strengthening of And that neither strengthening of connections in the nervous system nor connections in the nervous system nor connections in the nervous system nor weakening of connections can map weakening of connections can map weakening of connections can map directly to the formation or removal of directly to the formation or removal of directly to the formation or removal of memories or information. Just know that memories or information. Just know that memories or information. Just know that these are the important mechanisms. In these are the important mechanisms. In these are the important mechanisms. In fact, if you look at a baby fact, if you look at a baby fact, if you look at a baby that is, let's say, I don't know, 9 that is, let's say, I don't know, 9 that is, let's say, I don't know, 9 months old, their motor skills are not months old, their motor skills are not months old, their motor skills are not terrific, typically, compared to the terrific, typically, compared to the terrific, typically, compared to the motor skills that child will have motor skills that child will have motor skills that child will have when they are 6 or 7 years old. Just when they are 6 or 7 years old. Just when they are 6 or 7 years old. Just look at a kid trying to eat spaghetti or look at a kid trying to eat spaghetti or look at a kid trying to eat spaghetti or something of that sort, or eat anything something of that sort, or eat anything something of that sort, or eat anything when they're a small baby versus a when they're a small baby versus a when they're a small baby versus a toddler versus a young child versus an toddler versus a young child versus an toddler versus a young child versus an adolescent or teen. You know, despite adolescent or teen. You know, despite adolescent or teen. You know, despite the um poor table manners of some the um poor table manners of some the um poor table manners of some adolescents and teens and some adults, adolescents and teens and some adults, adolescents and teens and some adults, for that matter, for that matter, for that matter, they are still exhibiting far more they are still exhibiting far more they are still exhibiting far more precise motor movements than they did as precise motor movements than they did as precise motor movements than they did as an infant, of course. an infant, of course. an infant, of course. And believe it or not, And believe it or not, And believe it or not, the improvement in motor coordination the improvement in motor coordination the improvement in motor coordination that one observes in humans and other that one observes in humans and other that one observes in humans and other species, for that matter, from birth species, for that matter, from birth species, for that matter, from birth until the adolescent and teen years and until the adolescent and teen years and until the adolescent and teen years and adult years is largely the reflection of adult years is largely the reflection of adult years is largely the reflection of the removal, that's right, the removal the removal, that's right, the removal the removal, that's right, the removal of neural connections as opposed to the neural connections as opposed to the neural connections as opposed to the formation of neural connections. formation of neural connections. formation of neural connections. However, the neural connections that However, the neural connections that However, the neural connections that remain become much more robust. They remain become much more robust. They remain become much more robust. They become much more reliable. Okay? So, become much more reliable. Okay? So, become much more reliable. Okay? So, that's the mechanistic backdrop for that's the mechanistic backdrop for that's the mechanistic backdrop for everything that we're going to talk everything that we're going to talk everything that we're going to talk about today, about today, about today, which is how to study and learn. which is how to study and learn. which is how to study and learn. And as I mentioned earlier in my And as I mentioned earlier in my And as I mentioned earlier in my introduction, most of learning and introduction, most of learning and introduction, most of learning and remembering new material is about remembering new material is about remembering new material is about offsetting the forgetting process that offsetting the forgetting process that offsetting the forgetting process that naturally occurs anytime we hear new naturally occurs anytime we hear new naturally occurs anytime we hear new information. So, in keeping with what will ultimately in keeping with what will ultimately in keeping with what will ultimately reveal itself to be the dominant theme reveal itself to be the dominant theme reveal itself to be the dominant theme of today's discussion, right now, and of today's discussion, right now, and of today's discussion, right now, and for reasons that will become clear for reasons that will become clear for reasons that will become clear later, I want you to take a brief quiz. later, I want you to take a brief quiz. later, I want you to take a brief quiz. Now, the moment people hear quiz or Now, the moment people hear quiz or Now, the moment people hear quiz or test, typically it spikes their test, typically it spikes their test, typically it spikes their adrenaline, they start feeling stressed, adrenaline, they start feeling stressed, adrenaline, they start feeling stressed, but don't worry, you're going to keep but don't worry, you're going to keep but don't worry, you're going to keep your answers to yourself, your answers to yourself, your answers to yourself, and you're doing this for a very and you're doing this for a very and you're doing this for a very specific purpose. Here's my question. specific purpose. Here's my question. specific purpose. Here's my question. This is a two-question quiz. How many different ways, mechanistically How many different ways, mechanistically How many different ways, mechanistically speaking, does neuroplasticity occur? does neuroplasticity occur? does neuroplasticity occur? Is it one mechanism, two mechanisms, or Is it one mechanism, two mechanisms, or Is it one mechanism, two mechanisms, or three mechanisms? three mechanisms? three mechanisms? Or is it four or five? Or is it four or five? Or is it four or five? Okay. Can you name, in your head, Can you name, in your head, Can you name, in your head, two of the three major changes that the two of the three major changes that the two of the three major changes that the nervous system can undergo, nervous system can undergo, nervous system can undergo, which are reflective of neuroplasticity? Okay? So, the answer to question was is Okay? So, the answer to question was is Okay? So, the answer to question was is that there are three different modes of that there are three different modes of that there are three different modes of neuroplasticity, as you recall, or as neuroplasticity, as you recall, or as neuroplasticity, as you recall, or as you may not have been able to recall. you may not have been able to recall. you may not have been able to recall. And by the way, if you were not able to And by the way, if you were not able to And by the way, if you were not able to recall the three different modes of recall the three different modes of recall the three different modes of neuroplasticity, or mechanisms neuroplasticity, or mechanisms neuroplasticity, or mechanisms underlying neuroplasticity, that is underlying neuroplasticity, that is underlying neuroplasticity, that is fine. As you'll soon realize, fine. As you'll soon realize, fine. As you'll soon realize, recognizing the errors in your recognizing the errors in your recognizing the errors in your information retention is another information retention is another information retention is another critical and very useful way to retain critical and very useful way to retain critical and very useful way to retain more information, even if you got the more information, even if you got the more information, even if you got the answer wrong or you didn't know. answer wrong or you didn't know. answer wrong or you didn't know. In fact, especially if you got the In fact, especially if you got the In fact, especially if you got the answer wrong or you didn't know. answer wrong or you didn't know. answer wrong or you didn't know. So, the three ways are the strengthening So, the three ways are the strengthening So, the three ways are the strengthening of neural connections, second, the of neural connections, second, the of neural connections, second, the weakening of neural connections, and weakening of neural connections, and weakening of neural connections, and third, through neurogenesis, the third, through neurogenesis, the third, through neurogenesis, the addition of new neurons. Why did I addition of new neurons. Why did I addition of new neurons. Why did I provide this quiz? Why did I test you? provide this quiz? Why did I test you? provide this quiz? Why did I test you? Well, as you'll soon learn, Well, as you'll soon learn, Well, as you'll soon learn, if you look across the total body of if you look across the total body of if you look across the total body of research on how best to study and learn, research on how best to study and learn, research on how best to study and learn, it involves doing exactly what we just it involves doing exactly what we just it involves doing exactly what we just did, which is to periodically stop and did, which is to periodically stop and did, which is to periodically stop and test yourself on the material that you test yourself on the material that you test yourself on the material that you learned. Testing is not just a way of evaluating Testing is not just a way of evaluating Testing is not just a way of evaluating what knowledge you've acquired and which what knowledge you've acquired and which what knowledge you've acquired and which knowledge you have not managed to knowledge you have not managed to knowledge you have not managed to acquire. It also turns out to be the best tool It also turns out to be the best tool It also turns out to be the best tool for offsetting forgetting of any kind. for offsetting forgetting of any kind. for offsetting forgetting of any kind. And I'll go into the data that supports And I'll go into the data that supports And I'll go into the data that supports that statement in a moment. So yes, that statement in a moment. So yes, that statement in a moment. So yes, today we're going to get a little bit today we're going to get a little bit today we're going to get a little bit meta in the sense that we're going to be meta in the sense that we're going to be meta in the sense that we're going to be learning about optimal studying learning about optimal studying learning about optimal studying strategies and applying those as we go strategies and applying those as we go strategies and applying those as we go through this podcast. through this podcast. through this podcast. And no, there will not be a test at the And no, there will not be a test at the And no, there will not be a test at the end, although you're welcome to give end, although you're welcome to give end, although you're welcome to give yourself a test at the end. I'm going to yourself a test at the end. I'm going to yourself a test at the end. I'm going to provide you with an excellent zero-cost provide you with an excellent zero-cost provide you with an excellent zero-cost very fast tool that you can use to very fast tool that you can use to very fast tool that you can use to evaluate your knowledge and your ability evaluate your knowledge and your ability evaluate your knowledge and your ability to study and learn better as a to study and learn better as a to study and learn better as a consequence of having listened to this consequence of having listened to this consequence of having listened to this podcast versus had you not listened to podcast versus had you not listened to podcast versus had you not listened to this podcast. So if ever there was an this podcast. So if ever there was an this podcast. So if ever there was an incentive to listen to the end, incentive to listen to the end, incentive to listen to the end, there it is. Okay, let's talk about some there it is. Okay, let's talk about some there it is. Okay, let's talk about some of the other practical aspects of the other practical aspects of the other practical aspects of studying and learning. I know a lot of studying and learning. I know a lot of studying and learning. I know a lot of you out there who want to learn and want you out there who want to learn and want you out there who want to learn and want to come up with the best studying to come up with the best studying to come up with the best studying strategies are trying to think about how strategies are trying to think about how strategies are trying to think about how to structure your day or how much to structure your day or how much to structure your day or how much to study or when to study. Let's get the study or when to study. Let's get the study or when to study. Let's get the most important things out of the way most important things out of the way most important things out of the way first. Neuroplasticity and learning, that is Neuroplasticity and learning, that is Neuroplasticity and learning, that is converting your studying efforts into converting your studying efforts into converting your studying efforts into retention of knowledge, is a two-step retention of knowledge, is a two-step retention of knowledge, is a two-step process. You've probably heard about active You've probably heard about active You've probably heard about active engagement. That's just a fancy set of engagement. That's just a fancy set of engagement. That's just a fancy set of words for focus, for really attending to words for focus, for really attending to words for focus, for really attending to the information that you're trying to the information that you're trying to the information that you're trying to learn. And it is very important anytime learn. And it is very important anytime learn. And it is very important anytime you're trying to learn new information. you're trying to learn new information. you're trying to learn new information. So focus goes with alertness. You can't So focus goes with alertness. You can't So focus goes with alertness. You can't be focused if you're not alert. This is be focused if you're not alert. This is be focused if you're not alert. This is prerequisite. So you need to be alert So you need to be alert So you need to be alert and you need to be focused in order to and you need to be focused in order to and you need to be focused in order to pay attention to the information that pay attention to the information that pay attention to the information that you're trying to learn. In fact, it is you're trying to learn. In fact, it is you're trying to learn. In fact, it is the process of being focused and the process of being focused and the process of being focused and attending that cues your nervous system that something cues your nervous system that something cues your nervous system that something is important, that something's different is important, that something's different is important, that something's different about whatever sensory experience you about whatever sensory experience you about whatever sensory experience you happen to be having when you're focused happen to be having when you're focused happen to be having when you're focused and attending, whether or not it's the and attending, whether or not it's the and attending, whether or not it's the information you're hearing or that information you're hearing or that information you're hearing or that you're looking at or both. you're looking at or both. you're looking at or both. That cue That cue That cue at the level of neurochemicals in your at the level of neurochemicals in your at the level of neurochemicals in your brain and body brain and body brain and body signals to the neurons, "Hey, you're signals to the neurons, "Hey, you're signals to the neurons, "Hey, you're going to have to change. You're going to going to have to change. You're going to going to have to change. You're going to have to alter your connections, either have to alter your connections, either have to alter your connections, either make them stronger or weaker or a make them stronger or weaker or a make them stronger or weaker or a combination of those things in order to combination of those things in order to combination of those things in order to make sure that your nervous system can make sure that your nervous system can make sure that your nervous system can retain and use the information at a retain and use the information at a retain and use the information at a future time." So, that's step one and of future time." So, that's step one and of future time." So, that's step one and of course, as a part of step one course, as a part of step one course, as a part of step one most people when they hear about optimal most people when they hear about optimal most people when they hear about optimal studying strategies, they want to know, studying strategies, they want to know, studying strategies, they want to know, you know, what should they do? What you know, what should they do? What you know, what should they do? What should they take in order to learn should they take in order to learn should they take in order to learn better? Well, here's what everyone better? Well, here's what everyone better? Well, here's what everyone should take in order to learn better, should take in order to learn better, should take in order to learn better, which is a great night's sleep the night which is a great night's sleep the night which is a great night's sleep the night before. Limiting your external stress, before. Limiting your external stress, before. Limiting your external stress, although some stress is good because it although some stress is good because it although some stress is good because it cues up your alertness. It actually cues up your alertness. It actually cues up your alertness. It actually allows you to remember certain things allows you to remember certain things allows you to remember certain things better. We'll talk about this a little better. We'll talk about this a little better. We'll talk about this a little bit later. bit later. bit later. No one can remove all stress from their No one can remove all stress from their No one can remove all stress from their life, but we know one thing for sure, life, but we know one thing for sure, life, but we know one thing for sure, your ability to be alert and focused is your ability to be alert and focused is your ability to be alert and focused is going to be greater if you slept well going to be greater if you slept well going to be greater if you slept well the night before, okay? So, sleep is the night before, okay? So, sleep is the night before, okay? So, sleep is without question the best nootropic, without question the best nootropic, without question the best nootropic, right? The word nootropic means smart right? The word nootropic means smart right? The word nootropic means smart drug. I don't really like that term drug. I don't really like that term drug. I don't really like that term because learning involves all sorts of because learning involves all sorts of because learning involves all sorts of things. It's not just about being smart. things. It's not just about being smart. things. It's not just about being smart. It's about being able to attend. It's about being able to attend. It's about being able to attend. It's about sometimes being creative, flexible about sometimes being creative, flexible about sometimes being creative, flexible with ideas and information. with ideas and information. with ideas and information. Here's the point. You're going to need Here's the point. You're going to need Here's the point. You're going to need to get your sleep right in order to be to get your sleep right in order to be to get your sleep right in order to be able to study and learn at your absolute able to study and learn at your absolute able to study and learn at your absolute best. And I've done many episodes of the best. And I've done many episodes of the best. And I've done many episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast about sleep. We Huberman Lab Podcast about sleep. We Huberman Lab Podcast about sleep. We have a newsletter about sleep that have a newsletter about sleep that have a newsletter about sleep that details, in a short PDF format, the details, in a short PDF format, the details, in a short PDF format, the various things you can do to get your various things you can do to get your various things you can do to get your sleep optimized, so to speak. You can sleep optimized, so to speak. You can sleep optimized, so to speak. You can find all that hubermanlab.com by putting find all that hubermanlab.com by putting find all that hubermanlab.com by putting sleep into the search function. sleep into the search function. sleep into the search function. We don't have time to discuss that We don't have time to discuss that We don't have time to discuss that material now, but get your sleep right material now, but get your sleep right material now, but get your sleep right so that you can be alert and focused so that you can be alert and focused so that you can be alert and focused when it comes time to learn. when it comes time to learn. when it comes time to learn. Now, the process of being alert and focused the process of being alert and focused the process of being alert and focused on particular material that you want to on particular material that you want to on particular material that you want to learn can be enhanced by just having a learn can be enhanced by just having a learn can be enhanced by just having a silent script within your head. Silent silent script within your head. Silent silent script within your head. Silent meaning you're not saying it out loud, meaning you're not saying it out loud, meaning you're not saying it out loud, where when you sit down to learn, you're where when you sit down to learn, you're where when you sit down to learn, you're looking at a book or you're listening to looking at a book or you're listening to looking at a book or you're listening to a lecture, perhaps a podcast like this, a lecture, perhaps a podcast like this, a lecture, perhaps a podcast like this, you're thinking, "Okay, I need to learn you're thinking, "Okay, I need to learn you're thinking, "Okay, I need to learn this. I need to learn this." You can this. I need to learn this." You can this. I need to learn this." You can voluntarily ramp up your level of focus voluntarily ramp up your level of focus voluntarily ramp up your level of focus and alertness by telling yourself that and alertness by telling yourself that and alertness by telling yourself that information is important. information is important. information is important. Don't be a passive participant in Don't be a passive participant in Don't be a passive participant in learning. This is the basis of active learning. This is the basis of active learning. This is the basis of active learning. By expecting the information learning. By expecting the information learning. By expecting the information to be so interesting that it pulls your to be so interesting that it pulls your to be so interesting that it pulls your level of attention and focus out of you. level of attention and focus out of you. level of attention and focus out of you. Rather, learn to engage your attention Rather, learn to engage your attention Rather, learn to engage your attention and focus voluntarily, volitionally. and focus voluntarily, volitionally. and focus voluntarily, volitionally. Okay? When we hear about ADHD, attention Okay? When we hear about ADHD, attention Okay? When we hear about ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, we know deficit hyperactivity disorder, we know deficit hyperactivity disorder, we know that people with ADHD can attend very that people with ADHD can attend very that people with ADHD can attend very rapidly. They can really pay close rapidly. They can really pay close rapidly. They can really pay close attention for long periods of time if attention for long periods of time if attention for long periods of time if they like a given topic or a given they like a given topic or a given they like a given topic or a given experience or activity. experience or activity. experience or activity. They have serious challenges, however, They have serious challenges, however, They have serious challenges, however, engaging their attention and alertness engaging their attention and alertness engaging their attention and alertness if they are not excited about an if they are not excited about an if they are not excited about an activity or information. And so, it is activity or information. And so, it is activity or information. And so, it is the hallmark of all good learners to be the hallmark of all good learners to be the hallmark of all good learners to be able to able to able to voluntarily force yourself to attend and voluntarily force yourself to attend and voluntarily force yourself to attend and to focus. And when I say force yourself, to focus. And when I say force yourself, to focus. And when I say force yourself, that means a constant bringing back of that means a constant bringing back of that means a constant bringing back of your mind's attention to whatever it is your mind's attention to whatever it is your mind's attention to whatever it is you're trying to learn. It is meant to you're trying to learn. It is meant to you're trying to learn. It is meant to feel difficult. feel difficult. feel difficult. I say meant to feel difficult because I say meant to feel difficult because I say meant to feel difficult because that strain that you feel, that strain that you feel, that strain that you feel, that encouraging or in some cases forcing encouraging or in some cases forcing encouraging or in some cases forcing yourself to attend, sometimes even yourself to attend, sometimes even yourself to attend, sometimes even putting on a hoodie and hat, you know, putting on a hoodie and hat, you know, putting on a hoodie and hat, you know, literally putting blinders so that you literally putting blinders so that you literally putting blinders so that you can only attend to the material right in can only attend to the material right in can only attend to the material right in front of you, front of you, front of you, that straining that you feel reflects in that straining that you feel reflects in that straining that you feel reflects in part the release of neuromodulators like the release of neuromodulators like the release of neuromodulators like epinephrine, adrenaline in the brain and epinephrine, adrenaline in the brain and epinephrine, adrenaline in the brain and body, which serve to cue the neural body, which serve to cue the neural body, which serve to cue the neural circuits that they need to change at a circuits that they need to change at a circuits that they need to change at a later time. Okay? So, the strain that later time. Okay? So, the strain that later time. Okay? So, the strain that you feel in trying to learn, the strain you feel in trying to learn, the strain you feel in trying to learn, the strain that you feel in forcing yourself to that you feel in forcing yourself to that you feel in forcing yourself to learn how to focus, that is good. That's learn how to focus, that is good. That's learn how to focus, that is good. That's a cue to your nervous system that it's a cue to your nervous system that it's a cue to your nervous system that it's going to need to change, that going to need to change, that going to need to change, that neuroplasticity needs to take place. neuroplasticity needs to take place. neuroplasticity needs to take place. Think about it. If you didn't feel that Think about it. If you didn't feel that Think about it. If you didn't feel that strain and you were able to perform strain and you were able to perform strain and you were able to perform whatever it is that you were doing or whatever it is that you were doing or whatever it is that you were doing or remember whatever information it is that remember whatever information it is that remember whatever information it is that you're being exposed to seamlessly, you're being exposed to seamlessly, you're being exposed to seamlessly, well, then your nervous system wouldn't well, then your nervous system wouldn't well, then your nervous system wouldn't have to change because it already has have to change because it already has have to change because it already has the capabilities within the neural the capabilities within the neural the capabilities within the neural circuits. So, that strain that you feel, that So, that strain that you feel, that So, that strain that you feel, that agitation is great. That's a cue that agitation is great. That's a cue that agitation is great. That's a cue that you are learning or that you set the you are learning or that you set the you are learning or that you set the learning process in motion. learning process in motion. learning process in motion. Now, it's also the case that some people Now, it's also the case that some people Now, it's also the case that some people don't have great levels of focus and don't have great levels of focus and don't have great levels of focus and attention. And there are of course attention. And there are of course attention. And there are of course pharmacologic tools. I would encourage pharmacologic tools. I would encourage pharmacologic tools. I would encourage anyone that has clinically diagnosed anyone that has clinically diagnosed anyone that has clinically diagnosed ADHD to talk to their doctor about ADHD to talk to their doctor about ADHD to talk to their doctor about whether or not they should use whether or not they should use whether or not they should use prescription meds and or other methods. prescription meds and or other methods. prescription meds and or other methods. Great sleep is always going to be an Great sleep is always going to be an Great sleep is always going to be an important substrate for attention and important substrate for attention and important substrate for attention and focus for anybody, but especially for focus for anybody, but especially for focus for anybody, but especially for people with ADHD. I highly encourage anyone that's I highly encourage anyone that's I highly encourage anyone that's interested in enhancing their levels of interested in enhancing their levels of interested in enhancing their levels of focus and attention to also consider the focus and attention to also consider the focus and attention to also consider the non-pharmacologic approaches. So, this non-pharmacologic approaches. So, this non-pharmacologic approaches. So, this is irrespective of whether or not you is irrespective of whether or not you is irrespective of whether or not you need pharmacologic approaches. Yes, need pharmacologic approaches. Yes, need pharmacologic approaches. Yes, being well hydrated. Yes, the being well hydrated. Yes, the being well hydrated. Yes, the appropriate amount of caffeine for you appropriate amount of caffeine for you appropriate amount of caffeine for you that allows you to be alert but not, you that allows you to be alert but not, you that allows you to be alert but not, you know, shaking and agitated can be very know, shaking and agitated can be very know, shaking and agitated can be very useful. However, the scientific data also However, the scientific data also However, the scientific data also support the fact that doing support the fact that doing support the fact that doing a brief, say, 5 to 10-minute a brief, say, 5 to 10-minute a brief, say, 5 to 10-minute mindfulness meditation each day, these mindfulness meditation each day, these mindfulness meditation each day, these are the data from Wendy Suzuki's are the data from Wendy Suzuki's are the data from Wendy Suzuki's laboratory at New York University, laboratory at New York University, laboratory at New York University, showing that people who do a 10-minute showing that people who do a 10-minute showing that people who do a 10-minute meditation per day where they simply sit meditation per day where they simply sit meditation per day where they simply sit or lie down, close their eyes, focus on or lie down, close their eyes, focus on or lie down, close their eyes, focus on their breathing, their attention their breathing, their attention their breathing, their attention invariably drifts, they bring their invariably drifts, they bring their invariably drifts, they bring their attention back to their breathing, attention back to their breathing, attention back to their breathing, people who do that on a regular basis people who do that on a regular basis people who do that on a regular basis improve their level of focus, they improve their level of focus, they improve their level of focus, they improve their memory and recall ability, improve their memory and recall ability, improve their memory and recall ability, and of course there are a bunch of other and of course there are a bunch of other and of course there are a bunch of other positive effects of that simple, positive effects of that simple, positive effects of that simple, zero-cost tool of mindfulness zero-cost tool of mindfulness zero-cost tool of mindfulness meditation. So, meditation. So, meditation. So, if you're interested in improving your if you're interested in improving your if you're interested in improving your levels of focus and attention for sake levels of focus and attention for sake levels of focus and attention for sake of learning, of learning, of learning, I highly encourage you to explore the I highly encourage you to explore the I highly encourage you to explore the oh so valuable tool of mindfulness oh so valuable tool of mindfulness oh so valuable tool of mindfulness meditation. Just 5 or 10 minutes per day meditation. Just 5 or 10 minutes per day meditation. Just 5 or 10 minutes per day done on a regular basis. You miss a day, done on a regular basis. You miss a day, done on a regular basis. You miss a day, no big deal, just get right back to it no big deal, just get right back to it no big deal, just get right back to it the next day. Doesn't matter if you do the next day. Doesn't matter if you do the next day. Doesn't matter if you do it morning, afternoon, or night. No. it morning, afternoon, or night. No. it morning, afternoon, or night. No. Some people find that doing it too late Some people find that doing it too late Some people find that doing it too late at night might disrupt their sleep, but at night might disrupt their sleep, but at night might disrupt their sleep, but if you think about meditation of the if you think about meditation of the if you think about meditation of the sort that I just described as a sort that I just described as a sort that I just described as a perceptual exercise, maybe you don't perceptual exercise, maybe you don't perceptual exercise, maybe you don't even call it meditation, you're just even call it meditation, you're just even call it meditation, you're just teaching yourself to focus. You could teaching yourself to focus. You could teaching yourself to focus. You could even do it with eyes open by focusing on even do it with eyes open by focusing on even do it with eyes open by focusing on a visual target, allowing yourself to a visual target, allowing yourself to a visual target, allowing yourself to blink. There are good data on this sort blink. There are good data on this sort blink. There are good data on this sort of approach as well, and then just of approach as well, and then just of approach as well, and then just making sure that your visual attention making sure that your visual attention making sure that your visual attention and cognitive attention comes back to and cognitive attention comes back to and cognitive attention comes back to that visual target over and over again. that visual target over and over again. that visual target over and over again. It's a deliberate process of bringing It's a deliberate process of bringing It's a deliberate process of bringing your attention back to a particular your attention back to a particular your attention back to a particular location. That is very valuable for improving your That is very valuable for improving your That is very valuable for improving your levels of focus. In fact, it is known to levels of focus. In fact, it is known to levels of focus. In fact, it is known to create significant improvements in your create significant improvements in your create significant improvements in your ability to focus, which is critical for ability to focus, which is critical for ability to focus, which is critical for your ability to study and learn. So, I your ability to study and learn. So, I your ability to study and learn. So, I know that many people are interested in know that many people are interested in know that many people are interested in what to take, what to do at the level of what to take, what to do at the level of what to take, what to do at the level of kind of esoteric practices or things to kind of esoteric practices or things to kind of esoteric practices or things to buy. There is stuff out there. Again, I buy. There is stuff out there. Again, I buy. There is stuff out there. Again, I mentioned hydration, caffeine, great mentioned hydration, caffeine, great mentioned hydration, caffeine, great sleep, and so on, but the simple sleep, and so on, but the simple sleep, and so on, but the simple practice of mindfulness meditation or practice of mindfulness meditation or practice of mindfulness meditation or just what I describe as a focusing just what I describe as a focusing just what I describe as a focusing perceptual exercise of bringing your perceptual exercise of bringing your perceptual exercise of bringing your attention back to the same location over attention back to the same location over attention back to the same location over and over again deliberately will train and over again deliberately will train and over again deliberately will train you to train your nervous system to you to train your nervous system to you to train your nervous system to bring your attention back to whatever it bring your attention back to whatever it bring your attention back to whatever it is you're trying to learn. Now, I've is you're trying to learn. Now, I've is you're trying to learn. Now, I've done other podcasts about how to focus, done other podcasts about how to focus, done other podcasts about how to focus, about attention specifically, and ADHD. about attention specifically, and ADHD. about attention specifically, and ADHD. Again, you can find all of those at Again, you can find all of those at Again, you can find all of those at hubermanlab.com. Simply put ADHD or hubermanlab.com. Simply put ADHD or hubermanlab.com. Simply put ADHD or focus or tools for focus into the search focus or tools for focus into the search focus or tools for focus into the search function, and it will take you to the function, and it will take you to the function, and it will take you to the exact timestamps in those episodes that exact timestamps in those episodes that exact timestamps in those episodes that are relevant. are relevant. are relevant. Right now, however, I want to talk about Right now, however, I want to talk about Right now, however, I want to talk about the second part of neuroplasticity, the second part of neuroplasticity, the second part of neuroplasticity, which is that the actual changes in the which is that the actual changes in the which is that the actual changes in the nervous system, the strengthening and nervous system, the strengthening and nervous system, the strengthening and weakening predominantly of connections weakening predominantly of connections weakening predominantly of connections between neurons that underlie learning, between neurons that underlie learning, between neurons that underlie learning, do not occur during the focusing and do not occur during the focusing and do not occur during the focusing and learning, or rather the exposure to the learning, or rather the exposure to the learning, or rather the exposure to the material, but instead during deep sleep material, but instead during deep sleep material, but instead during deep sleep and sleep-like states. And again, I've and sleep-like states. And again, I've and sleep-like states. And again, I've done a lot of podcasts and talked a lot done a lot of podcasts and talked a lot done a lot of podcasts and talked a lot about tools for getting better sleep, about tools for getting better sleep, about tools for getting better sleep, but I just want to remind everybody that but I just want to remind everybody that but I just want to remind everybody that the actual reordering of the actual reordering of the actual reordering of the connections, the strengthening of connections, the strengthening of connections, the strengthening of connections between neurons that connections between neurons that connections between neurons that underlie learning, the weakening of underlie learning, the weakening of underlie learning, the weakening of those connections occurs during sleep in those connections occurs during sleep in those connections occurs during sleep in particular, during rapid eye movement particular, during rapid eye movement particular, during rapid eye movement sleep, which tends to predominate in the sleep, which tends to predominate in the sleep, which tends to predominate in the latter half of the night. So, make sure latter half of the night. So, make sure latter half of the night. So, make sure that you're getting enough sleep for that you're getting enough sleep for that you're getting enough sleep for you. For some people, it's 6 hours. For you. For some people, it's 6 hours. For you. For some people, it's 6 hours. For some people, it's 8 hours. And yes, some people, it's 8 hours. And yes, some people, it's 8 hours. And yes, there is something called the first there is something called the first there is something called the first night effect. The first night effect is night effect. The first night effect is night effect. The first night effect is the experimentally observed phenomenon the experimentally observed phenomenon the experimentally observed phenomenon whereby information that you learn on a whereby information that you learn on a whereby information that you learn on a given day given day given day is mostly consolidated during the is mostly consolidated during the is mostly consolidated during the night's sleep that you have on that night's sleep that you have on that night's sleep that you have on that first night after the learning occurs. first night after the learning occurs. first night after the learning occurs. Does this mean that if you get a poor Does this mean that if you get a poor Does this mean that if you get a poor night's sleep on the first night after night's sleep on the first night after night's sleep on the first night after learning something that you are forever learning something that you are forever learning something that you are forever going to forget that information, that going to forget that information, that going to forget that information, that it cannot be consolidated into your it cannot be consolidated into your it cannot be consolidated into your neural circuits? No. However, it's very neural circuits? No. However, it's very neural circuits? No. However, it's very clear that the first night after clear that the first night after clear that the first night after learning you want to get the best sleep possible. you want to get the best sleep possible. you want to get the best sleep possible. So, if your learning bouts, your So, if your learning bouts, your So, if your learning bouts, your studying is going late into the night studying is going late into the night studying is going late into the night and you're drinking a lot of caffeine, and you're drinking a lot of caffeine, and you're drinking a lot of caffeine, be mindful that the sleep that you get be mindful that the sleep that you get be mindful that the sleep that you get after drinking that caffeine late into after drinking that caffeine late into after drinking that caffeine late into the day, the all-nighters that you're the day, the all-nighters that you're the day, the all-nighters that you're pulling, those are not serving your pulling, those are not serving your pulling, those are not serving your learning well. So, you need to structure learning well. So, you need to structure learning well. So, you need to structure your life as a student of any kind your life as a student of any kind your life as a student of any kind so that you can get focus and attention so that you can get focus and attention so that you can get focus and attention to what it is you want to learn, and you to what it is you want to learn, and you to what it is you want to learn, and you can get sleep to the best of your can get sleep to the best of your can get sleep to the best of your ability. And of course, people who are ability. And of course, people who are ability. And of course, people who are raising young kids, or who have stress raising young kids, or who have stress raising young kids, or who have stress in their lives for whatever reason, in their lives for whatever reason, in their lives for whatever reason, perhaps won't be able to optimize their perhaps won't be able to optimize their perhaps won't be able to optimize their sleep on that first night, or even sleep on that first night, or even sleep on that first night, or even subsequent nights, but do best to get subsequent nights, but do best to get subsequent nights, but do best to get your sleep right. It's the single best your sleep right. It's the single best your sleep right. It's the single best thing you can do for your mental health, thing you can do for your mental health, thing you can do for your mental health, for your physical health, and for your physical health, and for your physical health, and for learning and performance of any kind. learning and performance of any kind. learning and performance of any kind. And it's really worth the effort. And it's really worth the effort. And it's really worth the effort. Now, with an understanding of the mechanisms, with an understanding of the mechanisms, with an understanding of the mechanisms, the focus and alertness, focus and alertness, focus and alertness, and the sleep phase of neuroplasticity, and the sleep phase of neuroplasticity, and the sleep phase of neuroplasticity, what are some other things that you can what are some other things that you can what are some other things that you can do to enhance whatever studying and do to enhance whatever studying and do to enhance whatever studying and learning you've obtained? I already learning you've obtained? I already learning you've obtained? I already talked about a tool, a behavioral tool talked about a tool, a behavioral tool talked about a tool, a behavioral tool for enhancing focus. What about a for enhancing focus. What about a for enhancing focus. What about a behavioral tool for enhancing behavioral tool for enhancing behavioral tool for enhancing plasticity? If your sleep is great, or plasticity? If your sleep is great, or plasticity? If your sleep is great, or especially if your sleep isn't great. especially if your sleep isn't great. especially if your sleep isn't great. And there, I highly recommend you And there, I highly recommend you And there, I highly recommend you explore non-sleep deep rest, or NSDR. explore non-sleep deep rest, or NSDR. explore non-sleep deep rest, or NSDR. There's a script for this in the show There's a script for this in the show There's a script for this in the show note captions. note captions. note captions. NSDR, sometimes referred to as yoga NSDR, sometimes referred to as yoga NSDR, sometimes referred to as yoga nidra, although those things are similar nidra, although those things are similar nidra, although those things are similar but different, but different, but different, is a 10 or 20-minute practice that you is a 10 or 20-minute practice that you is a 10 or 20-minute practice that you can do to restore your mental and can do to restore your mental and can do to restore your mental and physical vigor if you haven't slept physical vigor if you haven't slept physical vigor if you haven't slept enough. So, you could do it first thing enough. So, you could do it first thing enough. So, you could do it first thing in the morning when you wake up if you in the morning when you wake up if you in the morning when you wake up if you feel you haven't slept enough. You can feel you haven't slept enough. You can feel you haven't slept enough. You can do it in the afternoon. You can do it in do it in the afternoon. You can do it in do it in the afternoon. You can do it in the middle of the night if you're not the middle of the night if you're not the middle of the night if you're not able to sleep and offset some of the able to sleep and offset some of the able to sleep and offset some of the sleep loss that you would otherwise sleep loss that you would otherwise sleep loss that you would otherwise would have experienced. would have experienced. would have experienced. NSDR is a very powerful tool NSDR is a very powerful tool NSDR is a very powerful tool in order to enhance neuroplasticity. in order to enhance neuroplasticity. in order to enhance neuroplasticity. And I'll talk more about this in a And I'll talk more about this in a And I'll talk more about this in a future episode. There's a lot of future episode. There's a lot of future episode. There's a lot of exciting data coming out about NSDR and exciting data coming out about NSDR and exciting data coming out about NSDR and yoga nidra. yoga nidra. yoga nidra. But, if you're sleeping well, and even if you if you're sleeping well, and even if you if you're sleeping well, and even if you aren't, I highly encourage you to aren't, I highly encourage you to aren't, I highly encourage you to incorporate a 10 or 20-minute NSDR into incorporate a 10 or 20-minute NSDR into incorporate a 10 or 20-minute NSDR into your schedule someplace. Again, where your schedule someplace. Again, where your schedule someplace. Again, where you place it in your schedule isn't as you place it in your schedule isn't as you place it in your schedule isn't as important as the fact that you do it important as the fact that you do it important as the fact that you do it in order to enhance neuroplasticity. in order to enhance neuroplasticity. in order to enhance neuroplasticity. That is, the reordering of connections That is, the reordering of connections That is, the reordering of connections between neurons to serve the studying between neurons to serve the studying between neurons to serve the studying and learning that you're doing. Now, and learning that you're doing. Now, and learning that you're doing. Now, let's talk about how the best students let's talk about how the best students let's talk about how the best students structure their days. Turns out, there structure their days. Turns out, there structure their days. Turns out, there are great studies on this. are great studies on this. are great studies on this. There is a really nice paper, There is a really nice paper, There is a really nice paper, in fact, in fact, in fact, that surveyed that surveyed that surveyed close to 700 students. These were close to 700 students. These were close to 700 students. These were medical students, approximately equal medical students, approximately equal medical students, approximately equal number of male and female students number of male and female students number of male and female students and analyze the most useful learning and analyze the most useful learning and analyze the most useful learning habits. That is the learning habits habits. That is the learning habits habits. That is the learning habits associated with the most successful associated with the most successful associated with the most successful students. Now anytime you do a study students. Now anytime you do a study students. Now anytime you do a study like this where people take surveys like this where people take surveys like this where people take surveys there's always the issue of causality. there's always the issue of causality. there's always the issue of causality. In fact, we can pretty much set aside In fact, we can pretty much set aside In fact, we can pretty much set aside any possible causality. For instance, any possible causality. For instance, any possible causality. For instance, I'm about to tell you that the very best I'm about to tell you that the very best I'm about to tell you that the very best performing students tend to study for performing students tend to study for performing students tend to study for about 3 or 4 hours per day. But you about 3 or 4 hours per day. But you about 3 or 4 hours per day. But you could easily say, well, they're the best could easily say, well, they're the best could easily say, well, they're the best students because they study 3 or 4 hours students because they study 3 or 4 hours students because they study 3 or 4 hours per day. They don't study 3 or 4 hours per day. They don't study 3 or 4 hours per day. They don't study 3 or 4 hours per day because they're the best per day because they're the best per day because they're the best students and you'd be exactly right, students and you'd be exactly right, students and you'd be exactly right, okay? We can get into all sorts of okay? We can get into all sorts of okay? We can get into all sorts of discussions about correlation versus discussions about correlation versus discussions about correlation versus causation, about reverse causality, and causation, about reverse causality, and causation, about reverse causality, and on and on. However, none of that is the on and on. However, none of that is the on and on. However, none of that is the point here. The point here is to point here. The point here is to point here. The point here is to establish what are the habits that the establish what are the habits that the establish what are the habits that the most successful students seem to most successful students seem to most successful students seem to incorporate over and over again incorporate over and over again incorporate over and over again regardless of what classes they're regardless of what classes they're regardless of what classes they're taking, regardless of where they are in taking, regardless of where they are in taking, regardless of where they are in their arc of their learning trajectory. their arc of their learning trajectory. their arc of their learning trajectory. And so what we know based on this study And so what we know based on this study And so what we know based on this study and I'll provide a link to it in the and I'll provide a link to it in the and I'll provide a link to it in the show note show note show note is that there are at least 10 study is that there are at least 10 study is that there are at least 10 study habits that the highly effective habits that the highly effective habits that the highly effective students use. I'm going to focus on the students use. I'm going to focus on the students use. I'm going to focus on the top five or six just for sake of time top five or six just for sake of time top five or six just for sake of time because it turns out that most of the because it turns out that most of the because it turns out that most of the effect, it appears effect, it appears effect, it appears of being a better student can be of being a better student can be of being a better student can be attributed to these top five or six attributed to these top five or six attributed to these top five or six habits. First of all habits. First of all habits. First of all they set aside time to study. They they set aside time to study. They they set aside time to study. They literally schedule time to study. Now literally schedule time to study. Now literally schedule time to study. Now this probably serves several roles. The this probably serves several roles. The this probably serves several roles. The first one is that they are able to clear first one is that they are able to clear first one is that they are able to clear out other distractions and in fact, out other distractions and in fact, out other distractions and in fact, that's the second thing that they do. that's the second thing that they do. that's the second thing that they do. They are very effective where they make They are very effective where they make They are very effective where they make it a point of putting their phone away it a point of putting their phone away it a point of putting their phone away and off and off and off of isolating themselves. That's right. of isolating themselves. That's right. of isolating themselves. That's right. They're not studying with other people. They're not studying with other people. They're not studying with other people. They study alone which is not to say They study alone which is not to say They study alone which is not to say that people who study with others cannot that people who study with others cannot that people who study with others cannot be effective in their studying, but the be effective in their studying, but the be effective in their studying, but the best performing students seem to study best performing students seem to study best performing students seem to study alone. They put their phone away. They put their phone away. They put their phone away. They tell their friends and families that tell their friends and families that tell their friends and families that they are not going to be able to be they are not going to be able to be they are not going to be able to be reached during that time. And reached during that time. And reached during that time. And yes, they study for 3 or 4 hours per yes, they study for 3 or 4 hours per yes, they study for 3 or 4 hours per day, but they break that up into a day, but they break that up into a day, but they break that up into a couple of different sessions typically, couple of different sessions typically, couple of different sessions typically, two or three sessions. So, they're not two or three sessions. So, they're not two or three sessions. So, they're not doing a 3 or 4 hour study about all in doing a 3 or 4 hour study about all in doing a 3 or 4 hour study about all in one shot. one shot. one shot. So, they're managing their time. So, they're managing their time. So, they're managing their time. They're eliminating distractions, and They're eliminating distractions, and They're eliminating distractions, and they're studying for a consistent amount they're studying for a consistent amount they're studying for a consistent amount of time at least 5 days per week, okay? of time at least 5 days per week, okay? of time at least 5 days per week, okay? Presumably, they're taking some weekends Presumably, they're taking some weekends Presumably, they're taking some weekends off, although that wasn't made clear off, although that wasn't made clear off, although that wasn't made clear from this paper. from this paper. from this paper. The other thing that they do, and this The other thing that they do, and this The other thing that they do, and this is very important, is that they make an is very important, is that they make an is very important, is that they make an effort to then teach their peers, to effort to then teach their peers, to effort to then teach their peers, to teach other students in the class. Now, teach other students in the class. Now, teach other students in the class. Now, some of you may be thinking, and I'm some of you may be thinking, and I'm some of you may be thinking, and I'm thinking back to college here, mostly, thinking back to college here, mostly, thinking back to college here, mostly, that if you spend all this time learning that if you spend all this time learning that if you spend all this time learning the information, and you are in a the information, and you are in a the information, and you are in a competitive scenario with the other competitive scenario with the other competitive scenario with the other students, that teaching them the students, that teaching them the students, that teaching them the information is kind of a freebie for information is kind of a freebie for information is kind of a freebie for them, and is harder for you, meaning them, and is harder for you, meaning them, and is harder for you, meaning you're putting yourself at a competitive you're putting yourself at a competitive you're putting yourself at a competitive disadvantage, or you're giving them an disadvantage, or you're giving them an disadvantage, or you're giving them an unfair advantage for not having done the unfair advantage for not having done the unfair advantage for not having done the work. Now, while this paper didn't do an Now, while this paper didn't do an Now, while this paper didn't do an analysis of whether or not these analysis of whether or not these analysis of whether or not these students that served as the learners students that served as the learners students that served as the learners from the other students got an unfair from the other students got an unfair from the other students got an unfair advantage, it's very clear that students advantage, it's very clear that students advantage, it's very clear that students who make it a point to learn material in who make it a point to learn material in who make it a point to learn material in isolation, then bring that material to isolation, then bring that material to isolation, then bring that material to other students in the same course, and other students in the same course, and other students in the same course, and teach them, perform exceedingly well in teach them, perform exceedingly well in teach them, perform exceedingly well in comparison to the other students. So, comparison to the other students. So, comparison to the other students. So, don't be afraid to be a teacher of your don't be afraid to be a teacher of your don't be afraid to be a teacher of your peers in order to test, this is key, to test in order to test, this is key, to test in order to test, this is key, to test and develop mastery of the material. and develop mastery of the material. and develop mastery of the material. Now, in my laboratory for years, we used Now, in my laboratory for years, we used Now, in my laboratory for years, we used to have a saying which I simply picked to have a saying which I simply picked to have a saying which I simply picked up from the laboratories I was trained up from the laboratories I was trained up from the laboratories I was trained in, I didn't come up with the saying, in, I didn't come up with the saying, in, I didn't come up with the saying, which was watch one, do one, teach one. which was watch one, do one, teach one. which was watch one, do one, teach one. And that was referring to doing And that was referring to doing And that was referring to doing surgeries or suturing, or doing an surgeries or suturing, or doing an surgeries or suturing, or doing an antibody reaction, or a Western blot, or antibody reaction, or a Western blot, or antibody reaction, or a Western blot, or things that you do in laboratories. things that you do in laboratories. things that you do in laboratories. Watch one, do one, teach one. Watch one, do one, teach one. Watch one, do one, teach one. Watch one, do one, teach one, of course, Watch one, do one, teach one, of course, Watch one, do one, teach one, of course, should be reserved to anything where no should be reserved to anything where no should be reserved to anything where no one's going to be put in danger by the one's going to be put in danger by the one's going to be put in danger by the watch one, do one, teach one procedure, watch one, do one, teach one procedure, watch one, do one, teach one procedure, right? Some procedures, especially in right? Some procedures, especially in right? Some procedures, especially in laboratories, can be dangerous given the materials you can be dangerous given the materials you can be dangerous given the materials you use, etc. And of course today we're use, etc. And of course today we're use, etc. And of course today we're talking about learning and studying talking about learning and studying talking about learning and studying generally, so provided it's safe, watch generally, so provided it's safe, watch generally, so provided it's safe, watch one, do one, teach one is an excellent one, do one, teach one is an excellent one, do one, teach one is an excellent means to learn, that is to study new means to learn, that is to study new means to learn, that is to study new material, to develop proficiency, and material, to develop proficiency, and material, to develop proficiency, and even mastery, and over time perhaps even mastery, and over time perhaps even mastery, and over time perhaps even virtuosity. We'll return to that later, virtuosity. We'll return to that later, virtuosity. We'll return to that later, those distinctions. those distinctions. those distinctions. So, going back to this idea that the So, going back to this idea that the So, going back to this idea that the best students set aside time, they best students set aside time, they best students set aside time, they designate time to study alone designate time to study alone designate time to study alone without distractions. without distractions. without distractions. That is sure to help them anchor their That is sure to help them anchor their That is sure to help them anchor their focus and attention. They know that focus and attention. They know that focus and attention. They know that they're going to need to use their focus they're going to need to use their focus they're going to need to use their focus and attention during that time. And we and attention during that time. And we and attention during that time. And we know with absolute certainty that focus know with absolute certainty that focus know with absolute certainty that focus and attention are a limited but and attention are a limited but and attention are a limited but renewable resource in the human brain. renewable resource in the human brain. renewable resource in the human brain. The longer you're awake, the more is the The longer you're awake, the more is the The longer you're awake, the more is the buildup of a molecule called adenosine buildup of a molecule called adenosine buildup of a molecule called adenosine in your brain and body. It makes you in your brain and body. It makes you in your brain and body. It makes you sleepy, makes it harder to focus. When sleepy, makes it harder to focus. When sleepy, makes it harder to focus. When you sleep, adenosine levels are pushed you sleep, adenosine levels are pushed you sleep, adenosine levels are pushed down again, you're able to focus again, down again, you're able to focus again, down again, you're able to focus again, you feel more alert. You can think of you feel more alert. You can think of you feel more alert. You can think of adenosine as limiting your attentional adenosine as limiting your attentional adenosine as limiting your attentional budget, which is not to say that some budget, which is not to say that some budget, which is not to say that some people don't study best in the afternoon people don't study best in the afternoon people don't study best in the afternoon or in the evening or even late at night, or in the evening or even late at night, or in the evening or even late at night, right? I recall times during university right? I recall times during university right? I recall times during university when I'd study between the hours of when I'd study between the hours of when I'd study between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. I don't do that 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. I don't do that 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. I don't do that any longer, but any longer, but any longer, but scheduling time where you know you're scheduling time where you know you're scheduling time where you know you're going to need to be focused and going to need to be focused and going to need to be focused and attending is perhaps one of the most attending is perhaps one of the most attending is perhaps one of the most important things toward being able to important things toward being able to important things toward being able to focus and attend to the material. Now, focus and attend to the material. Now, focus and attend to the material. Now, if you're taking courses, you probably if you're taking courses, you probably if you're taking courses, you probably are going to be a slave to the timing of are going to be a slave to the timing of are going to be a slave to the timing of the courses. You aren't going to be able the courses. You aren't going to be able the courses. You aren't going to be able to tell the instructor, "Okay, listen, I to tell the instructor, "Okay, listen, I to tell the instructor, "Okay, listen, I want you to do this course at, you know, want you to do this course at, you know, want you to do this course at, you know, 3:00 p.m. because that's when you learn 3:00 p.m. because that's when you learn 3:00 p.m. because that's when you learn best or at 8:00 a.m. because that's when best or at 8:00 a.m. because that's when best or at 8:00 a.m. because that's when you happen to be able to attend best." you happen to be able to attend best." you happen to be able to attend best." However, to the extent that you have any However, to the extent that you have any However, to the extent that you have any control over the time in which you're control over the time in which you're control over the time in which you're going to study, keeping that at a going to study, keeping that at a going to study, keeping that at a regular time or times, perhaps one block regular time or times, perhaps one block regular time or times, perhaps one block early in the day, one block later in the early in the day, one block later in the early in the day, one block later in the day, perhaps two blocks early in the day, perhaps two blocks early in the day, perhaps two blocks early in the day, and so on, day, and so on, day, and so on, is going to be beneficial. It turns out is going to be beneficial. It turns out is going to be beneficial. It turns out that's also supported by the research that's also supported by the research that's also supported by the research literature, that literature, that literature, that the brain, just like with its sleep-wake the brain, just like with its sleep-wake the brain, just like with its sleep-wake cycles, that entrain to a regular cycles, that entrain to a regular cycles, that entrain to a regular schedule, that is, your brain and body schedule, that is, your brain and body schedule, that is, your brain and body get used to being active and inactive at get used to being active and inactive at get used to being active and inactive at particular times based on your exposure particular times based on your exposure particular times based on your exposure to sunlight, your exposure to sunlight, your exposure to sunlight, your exposure to activities, your social rhythms, etc. activities, your social rhythms, etc. activities, your social rhythms, etc. If you regularly, meaning for the course If you regularly, meaning for the course If you regularly, meaning for the course of about 3 days, of about 3 days, of about 3 days, make it a point to focus and study at make it a point to focus and study at make it a point to focus and study at particular times, again, pulling your particular times, again, pulling your particular times, again, pulling your attention back, it's not an automatic attention back, it's not an automatic attention back, it's not an automatic process, but pulling your attention back process, but pulling your attention back process, but pulling your attention back to a specific location, perhaps on a to a specific location, perhaps on a to a specific location, perhaps on a page or that you're listening to in a page or that you're listening to in a page or that you're listening to in a lecture, your body and brain will start to your body and brain will start to your body and brain will start to entrain to that rhythm entrain to that rhythm entrain to that rhythm such that you will be able to focus and such that you will be able to focus and such that you will be able to focus and attend better attend better attend better simply by virtue of the regularity of simply by virtue of the regularity of simply by virtue of the regularity of the timing of the exposure to the timing of the exposure to the timing of the exposure to the material. Okay? So, you probably need material. Okay? So, you probably need material. Okay? So, you probably need about two or three days to break into a about two or three days to break into a about two or three days to break into a regular schedule of focusing and regular schedule of focusing and regular schedule of focusing and attending and studying at a given time attending and studying at a given time attending and studying at a given time or times. or times. or times. Allow yourself that transition period, Allow yourself that transition period, Allow yourself that transition period, but then make it a point to schedule but then make it a point to schedule but then make it a point to schedule those times to study, set aside your those times to study, set aside your those times to study, set aside your phone, tell people you're going offline, phone, tell people you're going offline, phone, tell people you're going offline, turn off the Wi-Fi if you need to or turn off the Wi-Fi if you need to or turn off the Wi-Fi if you need to or have to. You may need it for your have to. You may need it for your have to. You may need it for your studying, I don't know, depends on what studying, I don't know, depends on what studying, I don't know, depends on what you're studying, but limit distractions you're studying, but limit distractions you're studying, but limit distractions at all costs, and learn to just focus on at all costs, and learn to just focus on at all costs, and learn to just focus on the material, and this is a skill. This the material, and this is a skill. This the material, and this is a skill. This is the most important thing to is the most important thing to is the most important thing to understand, it's a skill to be able to understand, it's a skill to be able to understand, it's a skill to be able to focus and study, and it's a skill that focus and study, and it's a skill that focus and study, and it's a skill that you can learn very quickly, especially you can learn very quickly, especially you can learn very quickly, especially if you schedule it for regular times, if you schedule it for regular times, if you schedule it for regular times, and you give yourself two or three days and you give yourself two or three days and you give yourself two or three days in which to adapt to those schedules and in which to adapt to those schedules and in which to adapt to those schedules and times, and then try and stick to them as times, and then try and stick to them as times, and then try and stick to them as regularly as possible, perhaps even on regularly as possible, perhaps even on regularly as possible, perhaps even on the weekends if you're approaching, you the weekends if you're approaching, you the weekends if you're approaching, you know, the end of the quarter or know, the end of the quarter or know, the end of the quarter or semester, perhaps even on the weekend, even if perhaps even on the weekend, even if perhaps even on the weekend, even if you're not in the quarter or semester. you're not in the quarter or semester. you're not in the quarter or semester. Keeping those regular times will entrain Keeping those regular times will entrain Keeping those regular times will entrain your nervous system to study and learn your nervous system to study and learn your nervous system to study and learn at its best at those particular times. at its best at those particular times. at its best at those particular times. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. By now, acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. By now, acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. By now, many of you have heard me say that if I many of you have heard me say that if I many of you have heard me say that if I could take just one supplement, that could take just one supplement, that could take just one supplement, that supplement would be AG1. The reason for supplement would be AG1. The reason for supplement would be AG1. The reason for that is AG1 is the highest quality and that is AG1 is the highest quality and that is AG1 is the highest quality and most complete of the foundational most complete of the foundational most complete of the foundational nutritional supplements available. What nutritional supplements available. What nutritional supplements available. What that means is that it contains not just that means is that it contains not just that means is that it contains not just vitamins and minerals, but also vitamins and minerals, but also vitamins and minerals, but also probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens to cover any gaps you may have in your to cover any gaps you may have in your to cover any gaps you may have in your diet and provide support for a demanding diet and provide support for a demanding diet and provide support for a demanding life. For me, even if I eat mostly whole life. For me, even if I eat mostly whole life. For me, even if I eat mostly whole foods and minimally processed foods, foods and minimally processed foods, foods and minimally processed foods, which I do for most of my food intake, which I do for most of my food intake, which I do for most of my food intake, it's very difficult for me to get enough it's very difficult for me to get enough it's very difficult for me to get enough fruits and vegetables, vitamins and fruits and vegetables, vitamins and fruits and vegetables, vitamins and minerals, micronutrients, and adaptogens minerals, micronutrients, and adaptogens minerals, micronutrients, and adaptogens from food alone. For that reason, I've from food alone. For that reason, I've from food alone. For that reason, I've been taking AG1 daily since 2012 and been taking AG1 daily since 2012 and been taking AG1 daily since 2012 and often twice a day, once in the morning often twice a day, once in the morning often twice a day, once in the morning or mid-morning, and again in the or mid-morning, and again in the or mid-morning, and again in the afternoon or evening. When I do that, it afternoon or evening. When I do that, it afternoon or evening. When I do that, it clearly bolsters my energy, my immune clearly bolsters my energy, my immune clearly bolsters my energy, my immune system, and my gut microbiome. These are system, and my gut microbiome. These are system, and my gut microbiome. These are all critical to brain function, mood, all critical to brain function, mood, all critical to brain function, mood, physical performance, and much more. If physical performance, and much more. If physical performance, and much more. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you'd like to try AG1, you can go to you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim their special offer. Right now, to claim their special offer. Right now, to claim their special offer. Right now, they're giving away five free travel they're giving away five free travel they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim that special offer. Before I to claim that special offer. Before I to claim that special offer. Before I move into specific ways to study in move into specific ways to study in move into specific ways to study in order to maximally order to maximally order to maximally offset forgetting. Notice I didn't say offset forgetting. Notice I didn't say offset forgetting. Notice I didn't say in order to learn, but rather to in order to learn, but rather to in order to learn, but rather to maximally offset forgetting, aka maximally offset forgetting, aka maximally offset forgetting, aka learning, stably learning material. There's one stably learning material. There's one stably learning material. There's one other point that I want to pass along other point that I want to pass along other point that I want to pass along from this really nice study on the study from this really nice study on the study from this really nice study on the study habits of highly effective medical habits of highly effective medical habits of highly effective medical students that I've been referring to. students that I've been referring to. students that I've been referring to. And that is when one examined And that is when one examined And that is when one examined or these people were asked about their or these people were asked about their or these people were asked about their motivation for studying, the best motivation for studying, the best motivation for studying, the best performing students performing students performing students had an interesting answer. They had a had an interesting answer. They had a had an interesting answer. They had a very long-term understanding of how or very long-term understanding of how or very long-term understanding of how or belief, rather, about how their success belief, rather, about how their success belief, rather, about how their success in medical school would in medical school would in medical school would impact their family, how it would impact their family, how it would impact their family, how it would impact their life arc, how it would change their life arc, how it would change their life arc, how it would change them. and they weren't particular about them. and they weren't particular about them. and they weren't particular about the ways in which it would change them the ways in which it would change them the ways in which it would change them or their family. In fact, it was a or their family. In fact, it was a or their family. In fact, it was a rather broad, abstract, aspirational way rather broad, abstract, aspirational way rather broad, abstract, aspirational way of thinking about their study efforts. of thinking about their study efforts. of thinking about their study efforts. So, what I like so much about this paper So, what I like so much about this paper So, what I like so much about this paper is that you know, in addition to having is that you know, in addition to having is that you know, in addition to having a fairly large sample size, close to 700 a fairly large sample size, close to 700 a fairly large sample size, close to 700 students that were evaluated, and yes, students that were evaluated, and yes, students that were evaluated, and yes, it's purely uh you know, self-report and it's purely uh you know, self-report and it's purely uh you know, self-report and this kind of thing. this kind of thing. this kind of thing. Nonetheless, it bridges the two extremes of studying it bridges the two extremes of studying it bridges the two extremes of studying and learning. You know, it gets right and learning. You know, it gets right and learning. You know, it gets right down into the nitty-gritty of how long down into the nitty-gritty of how long down into the nitty-gritty of how long they study, when they study, the things they study, when they study, the things they study, when they study, the things they do to limit distraction that we they do to limit distraction that we they do to limit distraction that we just discussed, just discussed, just discussed, but it also gets to their underlying but it also gets to their underlying but it also gets to their underlying psychological motivations and the thing psychological motivations and the thing psychological motivations and the thing that they use in order to pull them that they use in order to pull them that they use in order to pull them forward through their study efforts, forward through their study efforts, forward through their study efforts, perhaps especially when their desire is perhaps especially when their desire is perhaps especially when their desire is waning or their uh level of fatigue is waning or their uh level of fatigue is waning or their uh level of fatigue is increasing. I don't know that, I'm increasing. I don't know that, I'm increasing. I don't know that, I'm speculating here, but this is this speculating here, but this is this speculating here, but this is this aspirational component of going to aspirational component of going to aspirational component of going to medical school, which it turns out in medical school, which it turns out in medical school, which it turns out in the country in which the study was done, the country in which the study was done, the country in which the study was done, um only very, very select few of the um only very, very select few of the um only very, very select few of the very best students are able to achieve very best students are able to achieve very best students are able to achieve that. And they have to learn the information And they have to learn the information And they have to learn the information in a different language altogether, in a different language altogether, in a different language altogether, which is incredible. which is incredible. which is incredible. I always marvel at that. You know, I always marvel at that. You know, I always marvel at that. You know, I have friends that did their PhD thesis have friends that did their PhD thesis have friends that did their PhD thesis in Italy. They're Italian by birth. They in Italy. They're Italian by birth. They in Italy. They're Italian by birth. They now happen to run a laboratory in Italy. now happen to run a laboratory in Italy. now happen to run a laboratory in Italy. And they had to do their PhD training And they had to do their PhD training And they had to do their PhD training and write papers and give their thesis and write papers and give their thesis and write papers and give their thesis dissertation and defense in English, dissertation and defense in English, dissertation and defense in English, even though English was their second even though English was their second even though English was their second language. So, talk about a challenge, language. So, talk about a challenge, language. So, talk about a challenge, and um that's just one example that I and um that's just one example that I and um that's just one example that I can think of. Uh there are many examples can think of. Uh there are many examples can think of. Uh there are many examples of that. of that. of that. These students that I'm referring to in These students that I'm referring to in These students that I'm referring to in this study are not necessarily this study are not necessarily this study are not necessarily constantly thinking about how their constantly thinking about how their constantly thinking about how their efforts will transform themselves and efforts will transform themselves and efforts will transform themselves and their families, but they certainly were their families, but they certainly were their families, but they certainly were able to report what it was specifically able to report what it was specifically able to report what it was specifically that they are seeking, what they're that they are seeking, what they're that they are seeking, what they're aspiring to, besides just trying to do aspiring to, besides just trying to do aspiring to, besides just trying to do as well as they can getting into and as well as they can getting into and as well as they can getting into and through medical school. So, the through medical school. So, the through medical school. So, the high-level aspirational stuff within high-level aspirational stuff within high-level aspirational stuff within you, whatever that is for you, it's you, whatever that is for you, it's you, whatever that is for you, it's going to be highly individual, going to be highly individual, going to be highly individual, is certainly important, and it offers a is certainly important, and it offers a is certainly important, and it offers a bookend to the nuts and boltsy kind of bookend to the nuts and boltsy kind of bookend to the nuts and boltsy kind of stuff that you're going to do, stuff that you're going to do, stuff that you're going to do, I would hope, in order to best study and I would hope, in order to best study and I would hope, in order to best study and learn the specific material. So, the learn the specific material. So, the learn the specific material. So, the specific actions that you're going to specific actions that you're going to specific actions that you're going to take each day to learn specific bits of take each day to learn specific bits of take each day to learn specific bits of information that will pull you toward information that will pull you toward information that will pull you toward those important aspirations. And now those important aspirations. And now those important aspirations. And now again, if you love the material you're again, if you love the material you're again, if you love the material you're learning, this aspirational component is probably this aspirational component is probably this aspirational component is probably not as important, right? I can recall not as important, right? I can recall not as important, right? I can recall during university and graduate school during university and graduate school during university and graduate school and so on, and so on, and so on, thinking, "Oh my goodness, this is like thinking, "Oh my goodness, this is like thinking, "Oh my goodness, this is like the coolest thing I've ever heard." I've the coolest thing I've ever heard." I've the coolest thing I've ever heard." I've probably said that about a million probably said that about a million probably said that about a million different topics. Like, "Oh my goodness, different topics. Like, "Oh my goodness, different topics. Like, "Oh my goodness, circadian rhythm, seasonal rhythms, circadian rhythm, seasonal rhythms, circadian rhythm, seasonal rhythms, melatonin, neural circuits, dopamine." I melatonin, neural circuits, dopamine." I melatonin, neural circuits, dopamine." I was just awash with excitement about was just awash with excitement about was just awash with excitement about what I was learning. But of course, what I was learning. But of course, what I was learning. But of course, sometimes I would take a course where sometimes I would take a course where sometimes I would take a course where the material was the material was the material was I don't know if it was more challenging I don't know if it was more challenging I don't know if it was more challenging or not, but I had a harder time getting or not, but I had a harder time getting or not, but I had a harder time getting engaged by the material, either by engaged by the material, either by engaged by the material, either by virtue of how it was being taught to me, virtue of how it was being taught to me, virtue of how it was being taught to me, or the material itself. So, the ability or the material itself. So, the ability or the material itself. So, the ability to attach to some aspirational goal to attach to some aspirational goal to attach to some aspirational goal to pull you through pull you through pull you through can be very valuable. You're not going can be very valuable. You're not going can be very valuable. You're not going to love every topic you have to learn. to love every topic you have to learn. to love every topic you have to learn. However, I will say that, at least in my However, I will say that, at least in my However, I will say that, at least in my experience, some of the courses that I look back on some of the courses that I look back on some of the courses that I look back on most fondly are the courses that I most fondly are the courses that I most fondly are the courses that I struggled with the most. struggled with the most. struggled with the most. And in fact, that's the basis of the And in fact, that's the basis of the And in fact, that's the basis of the next, and easily one of the most next, and easily one of the most next, and easily one of the most important studying tools. So, a key important studying tools. So, a key important studying tools. So, a key theme in all of the excellent theme in all of the excellent theme in all of the excellent literature, that is the peer-reviewed literature, that is the peer-reviewed literature, that is the peer-reviewed research on how best to study, research on how best to study, research on how best to study, is that studying that feels challenging is that studying that feels challenging is that studying that feels challenging is the most effective. is the most effective. is the most effective. I know nobody wants to hear this. I know nobody wants to hear this. I know nobody wants to hear this. Everyone wants to hear about flow. Everyone wants to hear about flow. Everyone wants to hear about flow. Everybody wants to hear about Everybody wants to hear about Everybody wants to hear about information just sinking into their information just sinking into their information just sinking into their brain by osmosis. I think it was a brain by osmosis. I think it was a brain by osmosis. I think it was a Garfield cartoon where he talked about Garfield cartoon where he talked about Garfield cartoon where he talked about learning by osmosis. There's this very learning by osmosis. There's this very learning by osmosis. There's this very cute real-world video of a kid in a cute real-world video of a kid in a cute real-world video of a kid in a uh I believe uh it's in China, where uh I believe uh it's in China, where uh I believe uh it's in China, where he's taking the book and he puts it on he's taking the book and he puts it on he's taking the book and he puts it on his head. Maybe I can find this clip and his head. Maybe I can find this clip and his head. Maybe I can find this clip and he's just kind of like trying to wash it he's just kind of like trying to wash it he's just kind of like trying to wash it into his brain. It's super cute clip, into his brain. It's super cute clip, into his brain. It's super cute clip, but guess what? That doesn't work. I but guess what? That doesn't work. I but guess what? That doesn't work. I mean, it works to put the book on your mean, it works to put the book on your mean, it works to put the book on your head. It doesn't work to It's not going head. It doesn't work to It's not going head. It doesn't work to It's not going to get the information into your brain. to get the information into your brain. to get the information into your brain. Uh perhaps someday there will be ways to perhaps someday there will be ways to perhaps someday there will be ways to rapidly download information into neural rapidly download information into neural rapidly download information into neural circuits. Right now, we know circuits. Right now, we know circuits. Right now, we know we've known for hundreds, if not we've known for hundreds, if not we've known for hundreds, if not thousands, of years that thousands, of years that thousands, of years that effort is effort is effort is the cornerstone of learning. the cornerstone of learning. the cornerstone of learning. So, I know there probably some groans So, I know there probably some groans So, I know there probably some groans about that. I know some of you perhaps about that. I know some of you perhaps about that. I know some of you perhaps were hoping that today I was going to were hoping that today I was going to were hoping that today I was going to tell you how to study so that studying tell you how to study so that studying tell you how to study so that studying wasn't painful. wasn't painful. wasn't painful. I think I can accomplish that by the end I think I can accomplish that by the end I think I can accomplish that by the end of today's episode. of today's episode. of today's episode. But in order to do that, let's take But in order to do that, let's take But in order to do that, let's take another quiz. Okay, so here's the quiz. another quiz. Okay, so here's the quiz. another quiz. Okay, so here's the quiz. Again, you can answer these questions in Again, you can answer these questions in Again, you can answer these questions in your head. You don't have to tell your head. You don't have to tell your head. You don't have to tell anyone, but you could write them down or anyone, but you could write them down or anyone, but you could write them down or say them out loud if you want. say them out loud if you want. say them out loud if you want. The first question is when during either your states of alertness or sleep either your states of alertness or sleep either your states of alertness or sleep does the remodeling of neural does the remodeling of neural does the remodeling of neural connections occur? connections occur? connections occur? I like to think this is a pretty easy I like to think this is a pretty easy I like to think this is a pretty easy one. Okay, the answer is during sleep. Okay, the answer is during sleep. Okay, the answer is during sleep. The second question is The second question is The second question is what is one behavioral tool that you can what is one behavioral tool that you can what is one behavioral tool that you can use to improve focus? The answer is The answer is The answer is simple mindfulness meditation, which I simple mindfulness meditation, which I simple mindfulness meditation, which I prefer you think of simply as a prefer you think of simply as a prefer you think of simply as a perceptual exercise. So, again, just sit perceptual exercise. So, again, just sit perceptual exercise. So, again, just sit or lie down, close your eyes, or lie down, close your eyes, or lie down, close your eyes, focus on your breath. When your focus on your breath. When your focus on your breath. When your attention drifts, bring your attention drifts, bring your attention drifts, bring your attention back to your breath to your breath to your breath and so on. Or, if you prefer, you can do and so on. Or, if you prefer, you can do and so on. Or, if you prefer, you can do this eyes open by focusing on a visual this eyes open by focusing on a visual this eyes open by focusing on a visual target, either a foot or 2 ft or 3 ft away, either a foot or 2 ft or 3 ft away, either a foot or 2 ft or 3 ft away, whatever distance is comfortable for whatever distance is comfortable for whatever distance is comfortable for you, allowing yourself to blink as you, allowing yourself to blink as you, allowing yourself to blink as needed, but needed, but needed, but forcing yourself to focus on that visual forcing yourself to focus on that visual forcing yourself to focus on that visual target for, say, 1 to 3 minutes, maybe target for, say, 1 to 3 minutes, maybe target for, say, 1 to 3 minutes, maybe even 3 to 5 minutes, maybe even 10 even 3 to 5 minutes, maybe even 10 even 3 to 5 minutes, maybe even 10 minutes. Again, please blink. You don't minutes. Again, please blink. You don't minutes. Again, please blink. You don't want your eyes to dry. want your eyes to dry. want your eyes to dry. Both those tools will improve your Both those tools will improve your Both those tools will improve your ability to attend, to focus to other ability to attend, to focus to other ability to attend, to focus to other material when the time comes. material when the time comes. material when the time comes. Okay? The circuits for focus and Okay? The circuits for focus and Okay? The circuits for focus and attention themselves are subject to attention themselves are subject to attention themselves are subject to neuroplasticity. And then the third question is And then the third question is And then the third question is can you name can you name can you name or list off in your mind three tools or list off in your mind three tools or list off in your mind three tools that the most effective students have that the most effective students have that the most effective students have been shown to use? been shown to use? been shown to use? I can think of I can think of I can think of limiting distraction by virtue of limiting distraction by virtue of limiting distraction by virtue of putting away phones and telling others putting away phones and telling others putting away phones and telling others you won't be in contact with them. Two, you won't be in contact with them. Two, you won't be in contact with them. Two, and I'm getting these out of order, I and I'm getting these out of order, I and I'm getting these out of order, I realize, is to isolate, to study alone. And the is to isolate, to study alone. And the is to isolate, to study alone. And the third that I can recall is third that I can recall is third that I can recall is to teach others to teach others to teach others in the same course. in the same course. in the same course. Okay? You can probably think of a few Okay? You can probably think of a few Okay? You can probably think of a few others. Now, why are we taking these silly Now, why are we taking these silly Now, why are we taking these silly little quizzes? Well, little quizzes? Well, little quizzes? Well, it turns out they're not so silly it turns out they're not so silly it turns out they're not so silly when one considers that hopefully you'll when one considers that hopefully you'll when one considers that hopefully you'll remember the information from remember the information from remember the information from today so that you don't have to listen to it so that you don't have to listen to it so that you don't have to listen to it over and over again. over and over again. over and over again. But that if ever there was a strongly But that if ever there was a strongly But that if ever there was a strongly research-supported tool research-supported tool research-supported tool in the literature, in the peer-reviewed in the literature, in the peer-reviewed in the literature, in the peer-reviewed literature, about how students can learn literature, about how students can learn literature, about how students can learn information better, it's testing. information better, it's testing. information better, it's testing. And I know I know I know we think of And I know I know I know we think of And I know I know I know we think of tests as tests as tests as a way to evaluate our knowledge, but it a way to evaluate our knowledge, but it a way to evaluate our knowledge, but it turns out that testing is one of the turns out that testing is one of the turns out that testing is one of the best ways to build our knowledge, to best ways to build our knowledge, to best ways to build our knowledge, to retain our knowledge, and again to retain our knowledge, and again to retain our knowledge, and again to offset forgetting. offset forgetting. offset forgetting. Now, the study of testing as a learning tool, the study of testing as a learning tool, the study of testing as a learning tool, not just as a way to evaluate how much not just as a way to evaluate how much not just as a way to evaluate how much information we've learned, goes back information we've learned, goes back information we've learned, goes back over 100 years. There's a classic study over 100 years. There's a classic study over 100 years. There's a classic study that was done in 1917 where grade school that was done in 1917 where grade school that was done in 1917 where grade school age children age children age children read biographies. read biographies. read biographies. So, they read biographies, and then the So, they read biographies, and then the So, they read biographies, and then the kids were divided into different groups. kids were divided into different groups. kids were divided into different groups. One group One group One group read and reread and reread those read and reread and reread those read and reread and reread those biographies over and over. biographies over and over. biographies over and over. Another group read the biographies once Another group read the biographies once Another group read the biographies once and then were tested on those and then were tested on those and then were tested on those biographies. But get this, they tested biographies. But get this, they tested biographies. But get this, they tested themselves on those biographies simply themselves on those biographies simply themselves on those biographies simply by having to think about the information by having to think about the information by having to think about the information that they had read and trying to that they had read and trying to that they had read and trying to remember the information. Like, what was remember the information. Like, what was remember the information. Like, what was the biography? Who was the person? Who the biography? Who was the person? Who the biography? Who was the person? Who were they married to? What did they do? were they married to? What did they do? were they married to? What did they do? When did they go to school? What did When did they go to school? What did When did they go to school? What did they do in school? What did they do in they do in school? What did they do in they do in school? What did they do in the world? What role did they play in the world? What role did they play in the world? What role did they play in life? So, they essentially tested their own So, they essentially tested their own So, they essentially tested their own knowledge simply by going into their own knowledge simply by going into their own knowledge simply by going into their own head and asking themselves what they head and asking themselves what they head and asking themselves what they could remember about those biographies. could remember about those biographies. could remember about those biographies. Now, keep in mind here that Now, keep in mind here that Now, keep in mind here that even though it's fairly apparent that even though it's fairly apparent that even though it's fairly apparent that reading a biography two, three, four reading a biography two, three, four reading a biography two, three, four times might seem more passive than times might seem more passive than times might seem more passive than testing oneself on a biography that they testing oneself on a biography that they testing oneself on a biography that they had read just once, had read just once, had read just once, right? You could imagine that thinking right? You could imagine that thinking right? You could imagine that thinking about the biography involves more about the biography involves more about the biography involves more effort, and indeed it does. But keep in effort, and indeed it does. But keep in effort, and indeed it does. But keep in mind also that the kids in the second mind also that the kids in the second mind also that the kids in the second group were only exposed to the biography group were only exposed to the biography group were only exposed to the biography once. And yet, when you look at the once. And yet, when you look at the once. And yet, when you look at the percent of accurate recall percent of accurate recall percent of accurate recall of information from those biographies, of information from those biographies, of information from those biographies, the children that read the biography the children that read the biography the children that read the biography once and then once and then once and then made a deliberate point to think about made a deliberate point to think about made a deliberate point to think about that biography in their own mind to that biography in their own mind to that biography in their own mind to effectively test themselves on that effectively test themselves on that effectively test themselves on that material just within their heads over material just within their heads over material just within their heads over and over, and over, and over, but an equal number of times as the kids but an equal number of times as the kids but an equal number of times as the kids that read the biographies directly on a that read the biographies directly on a that read the biographies directly on a page over and over vastly outperformed page over and over vastly outperformed page over and over vastly outperformed the kids that read the biographies over the kids that read the biographies over the kids that read the biographies over and over. Put differently, reading and over. Put differently, reading and over. Put differently, reading and rereading material and rereading material and rereading material and re-re-re-rereading material is far less effective than material is far less effective than material is far less effective than reading material and then thinking about reading material and then thinking about reading material and then thinking about that material, testing yourself on that material, testing yourself on that material, testing yourself on that material, forcing yourself to bring that material, forcing yourself to bring that material, forcing yourself to bring that material to mind in your own mind. And material to mind in your own mind. And material to mind in your own mind. And this is not just for sake of this is not just for sake of this is not just for sake of remembering more volume of material, but remembering more volume of material, but remembering more volume of material, but also accuracy also accuracy also accuracy of recall of that material. And that, at of recall of that material. And that, at of recall of that material. And that, at least to me, was pretty surprising at least to me, was pretty surprising at least to me, was pretty surprising at first until one starts to explore first until one starts to explore first until one starts to explore subsequent studies of the role of subsequent studies of the role of subsequent studies of the role of testing as a learning tool. And then you testing as a learning tool. And then you testing as a learning tool. And then you start to realize that testing yourself start to realize that testing yourself start to realize that testing yourself is far and away the best tool for is far and away the best tool for is far and away the best tool for studying and learning. Not just for studying and learning. Not just for studying and learning. Not just for evaluating your knowledge, but for evaluating your knowledge, but for evaluating your knowledge, but for actually studying actually studying actually studying and incorporating that knowledge into and incorporating that knowledge into and incorporating that knowledge into your neural circuits. Okay, so I realize your neural circuits. Okay, so I realize your neural circuits. Okay, so I realize that anytime I or somebody else talks that anytime I or somebody else talks that anytime I or somebody else talks about a study that was done in 1917, we about a study that was done in 1917, we about a study that was done in 1917, we think of people in these, you know, like think of people in these, you know, like think of people in these, you know, like wooden shoes and wooden shoes and wooden shoes and in these schoolhouses that look so in these schoolhouses that look so in these schoolhouses that look so different and kids dressed so different. different and kids dressed so different. different and kids dressed so different. Let's get a little more modern here. Um Let's get a little more modern here. Um Let's get a little more modern here. Um keep in mind, however, that the nervous keep in mind, however, that the nervous keep in mind, however, that the nervous system hasn't really changed much in system hasn't really changed much in system hasn't really changed much in tens of thousands of years. tens of thousands of years. tens of thousands of years. Um nonetheless, I think it's nice to think nonetheless, I think it's nice to think nonetheless, I think it's nice to think about a more recent study of how best to about a more recent study of how best to about a more recent study of how best to study. And this study, study. And this study, study. And this study, which by the way we'll provide a link to which by the way we'll provide a link to which by the way we'll provide a link to in the show note captions, as well as a in the show note captions, as well as a in the show note captions, as well as a couple of reviews that include results couple of reviews that include results couple of reviews that include results from similar studies. Again, I'm from similar studies. Again, I'm from similar studies. Again, I'm pointing to a body of research, not just pointing to a body of research, not just pointing to a body of research, not just one study here. one study here. one study here. Looked at Looked at Looked at whether or not studying material four whether or not studying material four whether or not studying material four times, so study, times, so study, times, so study, was better in terms of locking that was better in terms of locking that was better in terms of locking that information into people's minds, information into people's minds, information into people's minds, allowing them to use that information allowing them to use that information allowing them to use that information flexibly, which is an element of flexibly, which is an element of flexibly, which is an element of creativity, essentially giving them creativity, essentially giving them creativity, essentially giving them mastery of the material, than mastery of the material, than mastery of the material, than a different group which studied once, a different group which studied once, a different group which studied once, studied the material twice, studied the studied the material twice, studied the studied the material twice, studied the material three times, then was tested material three times, then was tested material three times, then was tested on the material. on the material. on the material. Or a third group that studied Or a third group that studied Or a third group that studied material once, then took one, two, yes, material once, then took one, two, yes, material once, then took one, two, yes, three tests on the material. Now, so three tests on the material. Now, so three tests on the material. Now, so what I just described was what I just described was what I just described was three groups, all of whom read a three groups, all of whom read a three groups, all of whom read a passage. This is a passage about passage. This is a passage about passage. This is a passage about animals, about biology, some other animals, about biology, some other animals, about biology, some other topics, too, in different experiments. topics, too, in different experiments. topics, too, in different experiments. Again, three groups. One group studies Again, three groups. One group studies Again, three groups. One group studies four times. They study the material 1 2 four times. They study the material 1 2 four times. They study the material 1 2 3 4 times. 3 4 times. 3 4 times. Then later Then later Then later they take a test. they take a test. they take a test. Second group Second group Second group studies 1 2 3 times, takes a test on studies 1 2 3 times, takes a test on studies 1 2 3 times, takes a test on that material that material that material and then later and then later and then later takes a test. The third group studies takes a test. The third group studies takes a test. The third group studies the material once, then takes three the material once, then takes three the material once, then takes three tests on the material tests on the material tests on the material and then later takes a test. So, what's and then later takes a test. So, what's and then later takes a test. So, what's analyzed and compared between these analyzed and compared between these analyzed and compared between these different groups is their performance on different groups is their performance on different groups is their performance on that final test, okay? What I put in as that final test, okay? What I put in as that final test, okay? What I put in as the fifth the fifth the fifth bin there, right? Cuz it was Think about bin there, right? Cuz it was Think about bin there, right? Cuz it was Think about it as SSSS, so study study, it as SSSS, so study study, it as SSSS, so study study, and then later test, or SSST, study and then later test, or SSST, study and then later test, or SSST, study test, and then later test, study test, and then later test, study test, and then later test, or STTT, study test test, and then or STTT, study test test, and then or STTT, study test test, and then later test. So, what's compared and later test. So, what's compared and later test. So, what's compared and contrasted is performance on the test contrasted is performance on the test contrasted is performance on the test some period of time later. Now, some period of time later. Now, some period of time later. Now, some experiments made that final test of the material made that final test of the material made that final test of the material a couple days later, other experiments a couple days later, other experiments a couple days later, other experiments made it a couple weeks later, other made it a couple weeks later, other made it a couple weeks later, other experiments made it much later, months experiments made it much later, months experiments made it much later, months or even a year later, okay? or even a year later, okay? or even a year later, okay? The point here The point here The point here is twofold. First of all is twofold. First of all is twofold. First of all based on everything I've told you thus based on everything I've told you thus based on everything I've told you thus far, you can probably guess who far, you can probably guess who far, you can probably guess who performed best on the test that occurred performed best on the test that occurred performed best on the test that occurred some period of time later, okay? some period of time later, okay? some period of time later, okay? Right. The performance on that final test performance on that final test performance on that final test was essentially proportional to the number essentially proportional to the number essentially proportional to the number of tests one had already taken on the of tests one had already taken on the of tests one had already taken on the material. Okay? That should be pretty much obvious Okay? That should be pretty much obvious Okay? That should be pretty much obvious given the way we've been going given the way we've been going given the way we've been going today in this description of tests as a way to in this description of tests as a way to in this description of tests as a way to offset forgetting, okay? So, the more offset forgetting, okay? So, the more offset forgetting, okay? So, the more tests that you take tests that you take tests that you take as a way to expose you yourself to the as a way to expose you yourself to the as a way to expose you yourself to the material, the better you're going to material, the better you're going to material, the better you're going to perform on that material at some later perform on that material at some later perform on that material at some later point. Now, of course, at some point you point. Now, of course, at some point you point. Now, of course, at some point you have to be exposed to the material for have to be exposed to the material for have to be exposed to the material for the first time, right? That's why it's the first time, right? That's why it's the first time, right? That's why it's studying and learning. But, after one studying and learning. But, after one studying and learning. But, after one exposure to new material, taking more exposure to new material, taking more exposure to new material, taking more tests on that material, even if you tests on that material, even if you tests on that material, even if you don't perform that well on those tests, don't perform that well on those tests, don't perform that well on those tests, as long as you're able to see the as long as you're able to see the as long as you're able to see the accurate answers to those tests and accurate answers to those tests and accurate answers to those tests and compare your answers to those answers, compare your answers to those answers, compare your answers to those answers, will lead to better performance on the will lead to better performance on the will lead to better performance on the ultimate test and retention of that ultimate test and retention of that ultimate test and retention of that material at some later time. material at some later time. material at some later time. Put differently, it's not about how many Put differently, it's not about how many Put differently, it's not about how many times you study the material or how many times you study the material or how many times you study the material or how many times you're exposed to the material. times you're exposed to the material. times you're exposed to the material. It's about being exposed to the It's about being exposed to the It's about being exposed to the material, doing your best to focus and material, doing your best to focus and material, doing your best to focus and attend to that material, and then attend to that material, and then attend to that material, and then self-testing yourself on that material. self-testing yourself on that material. self-testing yourself on that material. Or, as the case may be, if an Or, as the case may be, if an Or, as the case may be, if an instructor is the one giving you the test, but is the one giving you the test, but is the one giving you the test, but nonetheless taking tests on that nonetheless taking tests on that nonetheless taking tests on that material, not just once, but ideally two or three not just once, but ideally two or three not just once, but ideally two or three times, that's what really locks the times, that's what really locks the times, that's what really locks the material into your neural circuits. material into your neural circuits. material into your neural circuits. That's what's going to lead to the most That's what's going to lead to the most That's what's going to lead to the most pervasive change, the most durable pervasive change, the most durable pervasive change, the most durable change, we should say, in your neural change, we should say, in your neural change, we should say, in your neural circuits that carry that material, that circuits that carry that material, that circuits that carry that material, that hold that material in your mind, what we hold that material in your mind, what we hold that material in your mind, what we call neural encoding, okay? call neural encoding, okay? call neural encoding, okay? So, the more times you test yourself or that the more times you test yourself or that the more times you test yourself or that you are tested on material, the better you are tested on material, the better you are tested on material, the better your retention of that material. Now, your retention of that material. Now, your retention of that material. Now, some people will immediately say, "Well, some people will immediately say, "Well, some people will immediately say, "Well, goodness, what if I learned it and then goodness, what if I learned it and then goodness, what if I learned it and then I'm tested and I'm somehow consolidating I'm tested and I'm somehow consolidating I'm tested and I'm somehow consolidating the wrong or inaccurate material?" But, the wrong or inaccurate material?" But, the wrong or inaccurate material?" But, it doesn't appear to be the case. As it doesn't appear to be the case. As it doesn't appear to be the case. As long as you learn what the correct long as you learn what the correct long as you learn what the correct answers to the tests are, even if you're answers to the tests are, even if you're answers to the tests are, even if you're getting, you know, 40 or 50% or less getting, you know, 40 or 50% or less getting, you know, 40 or 50% or less accurate on those tests that you take accurate on those tests that you take accurate on those tests that you take immediately after the studying period, immediately after the studying period, immediately after the studying period, that's still going to be a better that's still going to be a better that's still going to be a better strategy than rereading the material, strategy than rereading the material, strategy than rereading the material, which ought to be somewhat surprising. It ought to be somewhat surprising. It ought to be somewhat surprising. It certainly was surprising to me. certainly was surprising to me. certainly was surprising to me. But, you know what's even more But, you know what's even more But, you know what's even more surprising and a little scary and that surprising and a little scary and that surprising and a little scary and that we all should know and I wish I had we all should know and I wish I had we all should know and I wish I had learned when I was like in the second learned when I was like in the second learned when I was like in the second grade is that if you ask students, grade is that if you ask students, grade is that if you ask students, "How confident are you in the material "How confident are you in the material "How confident are you in the material that you just learned? that you just learned? that you just learned? How well do you think you would perform How well do you think you would perform How well do you think you would perform on a test? on a test? on a test? What you see consistently in these What you see consistently in these What you see consistently in these studies, I'm chuckling because it's kind studies, I'm chuckling because it's kind studies, I'm chuckling because it's kind of mind-blowing is that the students who of mind-blowing is that the students who of mind-blowing is that the students who study the material, that is who were study the material, that is who were study the material, that is who were exposed to the material four times, exposed to the material four times, exposed to the material four times, think that they are going to perform think that they are going to perform think that they are going to perform best on the ultimate exam. best on the ultimate exam. best on the ultimate exam. However, the students that study the However, the students that study the However, the students that study the material once and then are tested three material once and then are tested three material once and then are tested three times on that material, times on that material, times on that material, they think they think they think that ultimately they're going to perform that ultimately they're going to perform that ultimately they're going to perform least well. least well. least well. For instance, they ask them their For instance, they ask them their For instance, they ask them their confidence, "How well do you think you confidence, "How well do you think you confidence, "How well do you think you would perform on a test of this material would perform on a test of this material would perform on a test of this material in 2 weeks? Or in a year? Or in 6 in 2 weeks? Or in a year? Or in 6 in 2 weeks? Or in a year? Or in 6 months? Or even tomorrow?" months? Or even tomorrow?" months? Or even tomorrow?" They report, that is the students in the They report, that is the students in the They report, that is the students in the study test study test study test group, report group, report group, report much lower confidence in the material, much lower confidence in the material, much lower confidence in the material, much lower sense of mastery of the much lower sense of mastery of the much lower sense of mastery of the material compared to the students that material compared to the students that material compared to the students that were exposed to the material four times. were exposed to the material four times. were exposed to the material four times. Who are saying, "Yeah, I think I would Who are saying, "Yeah, I think I would Who are saying, "Yeah, I think I would do pretty well or very well." And guess do pretty well or very well." And guess do pretty well or very well." And guess what? The exact opposite is true. Put what? The exact opposite is true. Put what? The exact opposite is true. Put differently, when you're exposed to differently, when you're exposed to differently, when you're exposed to material over and over and over again, material over and over and over again, material over and over and over again, you think you've learned the material. you think you've learned the material. you think you've learned the material. In fact, your confidence that you've In fact, your confidence that you've In fact, your confidence that you've learned the material increases with each learned the material increases with each learned the material increases with each subsequent exposure to the material, but subsequent exposure to the material, but subsequent exposure to the material, but actually you haven't learned it at all actually you haven't learned it at all actually you haven't learned it at all compared to the people that compared to the people that compared to the people that are exposed to the material and then are exposed to the material and then are exposed to the material and then take tests on the material, often times take tests on the material, often times take tests on the material, often times straining to get the answers right on straining to get the answers right on straining to get the answers right on those tests, in fact sometimes getting those tests, in fact sometimes getting those tests, in fact sometimes getting those answers dead wrong, those answers dead wrong, those answers dead wrong, and then realizing they get those and then realizing they get those and then realizing they get those answers dead wrong or sometimes they answers dead wrong or sometimes they answers dead wrong or sometimes they just sense it, but guess what? Testing just sense it, but guess what? Testing just sense it, but guess what? Testing yourself once, twice, maybe three times yourself once, twice, maybe three times yourself once, twice, maybe three times prior to the ultimate test of your prior to the ultimate test of your prior to the ultimate test of your knowledge of that material, is far and knowledge of that material, is far and knowledge of that material, is far and away the best way to lock that material away the best way to lock that material away the best way to lock that material into those neural circuits. into those neural circuits. into those neural circuits. Now, I say I wish I had learned this Now, I say I wish I had learned this Now, I say I wish I had learned this when I was a student because when I was a student because when I was a student because to some extent I used a self-testing to some extent I used a self-testing to some extent I used a self-testing approach. The one most salient example of that is The one most salient example of that is The one most salient example of that is I took a course when I was in college. I took a course when I was in college. I took a course when I was in college. I still remember. It was biosciences 169L, still remember. It was biosciences 169L, still remember. It was biosciences 169L, neuroanatomy laboratory taught by Ben neuroanatomy laboratory taught by Ben neuroanatomy laboratory taught by Ben Reese. He's still there, I believe, and Reese. He's still there, I believe, and Reese. He's still there, I believe, and he was known then, and I'm sure still he was known then, and I'm sure still he was known then, and I'm sure still now if he's still teaching, as extremely now if he's still teaching, as extremely now if he's still teaching, as extremely challenging professor. Extremely challenging professor. Extremely challenging professor. Extremely challenging, not as a person, not as challenging, not as a person, not as challenging, not as a person, not as personality, but a ton of detail and personality, but a ton of detail and personality, but a ton of detail and rigor and high expectation for this rigor and high expectation for this rigor and high expectation for this laboratory course in neuroanatomy, which laboratory course in neuroanatomy, which laboratory course in neuroanatomy, which involved lectures. It involved a involved lectures. It involved a involved lectures. It involved a neuroanatomy textbook where you'd look neuroanatomy textbook where you'd look neuroanatomy textbook where you'd look at, you know, essentially panels of at, you know, essentially panels of at, you know, essentially panels of different brain sections from different brain sections from different brain sections from different species, different types of stains of species, different types of stains of species, different types of stains of different brain tissue. Mind you, this different brain tissue. Mind you, this different brain tissue. Mind you, this is an undergraduate course. And then is an undergraduate course. And then is an undergraduate course. And then there was a laboratory component, hence there was a laboratory component, hence there was a laboratory component, hence the L in 169L, where you'd have to go the L in 169L, where you'd have to go the L in 169L, where you'd have to go from microscope station to microscope from microscope station to microscope from microscope station to microscope station identifying structures station identifying structures station identifying structures based simply on what you could see down based simply on what you could see down based simply on what you could see down the microscope. the microscope. the microscope. And therefore you had to know what the And therefore you had to know what the And therefore you had to know what the stain was, you know, what was stain was, you know, what was stain was, you know, what was essentially visible to you on the slide essentially visible to you on the slide essentially visible to you on the slide because certain stains reveal certain because certain stains reveal certain because certain stains reveal certain things like the what we call the cell things like the what we call the cell things like the what we call the cell body of neurons versus the body of neurons versus the body of neurons versus the sort of wires, what we call the sort of wires, what we call the sort of wires, what we call the axons between neurons, etc. axons between neurons, etc. axons between neurons, etc. I remember thinking, this is a really I remember thinking, this is a really I remember thinking, this is a really hard course. It was a very difficult hard course. It was a very difficult hard course. It was a very difficult course. And my mode of studying for the course. And my mode of studying for the course. And my mode of studying for the course involved, of course, going to course involved, of course, going to course involved, of course, going to class, doing the dissection. We class, doing the dissection. We class, doing the dissection. We dissected a sheep brain at that time. dissected a sheep brain at that time. dissected a sheep brain at that time. Um so, we're literally dissecting an Um so, we're literally dissecting an Um so, we're literally dissecting an actual brain. We're doing microscope actual brain. We're doing microscope actual brain. We're doing microscope work. We're learning about it from the work. We're learning about it from the work. We're learning about it from the textbook and from lecture. textbook and from lecture. textbook and from lecture. And there was a ton of new nomenclature And there was a ton of new nomenclature And there was a ton of new nomenclature about rostral, caudal, dorsal, ventral, about rostral, caudal, dorsal, ventral, about rostral, caudal, dorsal, ventral, all the stuff of neuroanatomy. all the stuff of neuroanatomy. all the stuff of neuroanatomy. And then And then And then at some point I made the decision, at some point I made the decision, at some point I made the decision, perhaps on the basis of sheer overwhelm, perhaps on the basis of sheer overwhelm, perhaps on the basis of sheer overwhelm, to study for to study for to study for neuroanatomy by neuroanatomy by neuroanatomy by laying down on my bed in my laying down on my bed in my laying down on my bed in my studio apartment. I lived alone. studio apartment. I lived alone. studio apartment. I lived alone. And closing my eyes and And closing my eyes and And closing my eyes and flying through the nervous system from flying through the nervous system from flying through the nervous system from different entry points. Through the ear, different entry points. Through the ear, different entry points. Through the ear, review my cochlear anatomy. review my cochlear anatomy. review my cochlear anatomy. Through the eye, review my retinal Through the eye, review my retinal Through the eye, review my retinal anatomy. Through the dorsal surface of anatomy. Through the dorsal surface of anatomy. Through the dorsal surface of the brain, think about the sulci and the brain, think about the sulci and the brain, think about the sulci and gyri and then the corpus callosum and gyri and then the corpus callosum and gyri and then the corpus callosum and then I got and I can still see it in then I got and I can still see it in then I got and I can still see it in my mind's eye. my mind's eye. my mind's eye. So, my process of studying for So, my process of studying for So, my process of studying for neuroanatomy, yes, involved exposure to neuroanatomy, yes, involved exposure to neuroanatomy, yes, involved exposure to the material, but it involved hours upon the material, but it involved hours upon the material, but it involved hours upon hours of hours of hours of thinking about the material within my thinking about the material within my thinking about the material within my own brain. So, it's a little bit meta unto itself So, it's a little bit meta unto itself So, it's a little bit meta unto itself there. As a consequence, I like to there. As a consequence, I like to there. As a consequence, I like to think, in fact, I believe um with some think, in fact, I believe um with some think, in fact, I believe um with some confidence that I have uh confidence that I have uh confidence that I have uh very high mastery of neuroanatomy in very high mastery of neuroanatomy in very high mastery of neuroanatomy in different species as well. different species as well. different species as well. Now, that's my particular area of Now, that's my particular area of Now, that's my particular area of expertise. I don't think I'm any kind of expertise. I don't think I'm any kind of expertise. I don't think I'm any kind of savant with respect to neuroanatomy. I savant with respect to neuroanatomy. I savant with respect to neuroanatomy. I just spent hours upon hours learning the just spent hours upon hours learning the just spent hours upon hours learning the material and then reviewing the material and then reviewing the material and then reviewing the material within my mind. So, in other words, within my mind. So, in other words, within my mind. So, in other words, testing myself. testing myself. testing myself. Here's what I would do if I were moving Here's what I would do if I were moving Here's what I would do if I were moving down a trajectory of an of an neural down a trajectory of an of an neural down a trajectory of an of an neural tract, for instance, between say the tract, for instance, between say the tract, for instance, between say the hippocampus and a neighboring structure hippocampus and a neighboring structure hippocampus and a neighboring structure and I didn't know what was next, I would and I didn't know what was next, I would and I didn't know what was next, I would then go look it up in the textbook and then go look it up in the textbook and then go look it up in the textbook and then I'd go back to this, you know, then I'd go back to this, you know, then I'd go back to this, you know, mental exercise, visualization type mental exercise, visualization type mental exercise, visualization type studying. It really wasn't studying is studying. It really wasn't studying is studying. It really wasn't studying is the point. The point is that I was the point. The point is that I was the point. The point is that I was testing myself. I was trying to find the testing myself. I was trying to find the testing myself. I was trying to find the points in which I no longer had the points in which I no longer had the points in which I no longer had the knowledge to move further through, in knowledge to move further through, in knowledge to move further through, in this case, my mental image of the brain, this case, my mental image of the brain, this case, my mental image of the brain, but through the material. And this is but through the material. And this is but through the material. And this is the key aspect of testing. It's not the key aspect of testing. It's not the key aspect of testing. It's not about just knowing how many things you about just knowing how many things you about just knowing how many things you get right, how many things you get right, how many things you get right, how many things you get wrong. It's about recognizing exactly wrong. It's about recognizing exactly wrong. It's about recognizing exactly what you know and don't know. An what you know and don't know. An what you know and don't know. An important component of testing is important component of testing is important component of testing is running up against those things where running up against those things where running up against those things where you say, "Ah, I can't remember. I don't you say, "Ah, I can't remember. I don't you say, "Ah, I can't remember. I don't know what comes next." Or, "I'm certain know what comes next." Or, "I'm certain know what comes next." Or, "I'm certain that structure is the fimbria." And that structure is the fimbria." And that structure is the fimbria." And then you go and you look and you go, then you go and you look and you go, then you go and you look and you go, "Ah, it's not the fimbria." But guess "Ah, it's not the fimbria." But guess "Ah, it's not the fimbria." But guess what? I'll never forget, for instance, what? I'll never forget, for instance, what? I'll never forget, for instance, the location of the habenula or what it the location of the habenula or what it the location of the habenula or what it looks like. A structure of which, by the looks like. A structure of which, by the looks like. A structure of which, by the way, since these names are kind of way, since these names are kind of way, since these names are kind of esoteric, at that time we didn't know esoteric, at that time we didn't know esoteric, at that time we didn't know what it does. It turns out it's involved what it does. It turns out it's involved what it does. It turns out it's involved in disappointment. It's key to the in disappointment. It's key to the in disappointment. It's key to the depression circuits or the circuits that depression circuits or the circuits that depression circuits or the circuits that underlie depression in some individuals. underlie depression in some individuals. underlie depression in some individuals. It is It is It is suppressed by viewing of morning suppressed by viewing of morning suppressed by viewing of morning sunlight. We know that, too. And by sunlight. We know that, too. And by sunlight. We know that, too. And by getting too much artificial light getting too much artificial light getting too much artificial light exposure in the middle of the night, you exposure in the middle of the night, you exposure in the middle of the night, you enhance activity of the habenula. enhance activity of the habenula. enhance activity of the habenula. Beautiful work not done by my Beautiful work not done by my Beautiful work not done by my laboratory, but other laboratories laboratory, but other laboratories laboratory, but other laboratories demonstrates that. So, what I just did demonstrates that. So, what I just did demonstrates that. So, what I just did for you there was hopefully teach you a for you there was hopefully teach you a for you there was hopefully teach you a little something about neuroanatomy and little something about neuroanatomy and little something about neuroanatomy and depression, but more importantly to just depression, but more importantly to just depression, but more importantly to just illustrate that how you test yourself illustrate that how you test yourself illustrate that how you test yourself can be highly individual to the ways in can be highly individual to the ways in can be highly individual to the ways in which you learn best. Now, that which you learn best. Now, that which you learn best. Now, that contradicts what I said earlier, which contradicts what I said earlier, which contradicts what I said earlier, which is that this notion that people have is that this notion that people have is that this notion that people have different learning styles, and you know, different learning styles, and you know, different learning styles, and you know, some people are verbal learners, and some people are verbal learners, and some people are verbal learners, and some people are auditory learners, and some people are auditory learners, and some people are auditory learners, and etc., doesn't really hold up so well anymore. doesn't really hold up so well anymore. doesn't really hold up so well anymore. But, which, by the way, is not to say there which, by the way, is not to say there which, by the way, is not to say there isn't any research to support it. It's isn't any research to support it. It's isn't any research to support it. It's just that it's heavily contradicted by just that it's heavily contradicted by just that it's heavily contradicted by other research that contradicts that other research that contradicts that other research that contradicts that idea. But, your idea. But, your idea. But, your approach, your mode of best testing approach, your mode of best testing approach, your mode of best testing yourself on material for sake of yourself on material for sake of yourself on material for sake of offsetting the forgetting process, and offsetting the forgetting process, and offsetting the forgetting process, and for identifying where you have gaps in for identifying where you have gaps in for identifying where you have gaps in your knowledge or where you thought you your knowledge or where you thought you your knowledge or where you thought you knew something but you don't or you knew something but you don't or you knew something but you don't or you knew something but it's wrong, something but it's wrong, something but it's wrong, that can be accomplished through the that can be accomplished through the that can be accomplished through the approach that's best for you, which in approach that's best for you, which in approach that's best for you, which in my case turned out to be lying down and my case turned out to be lying down and my case turned out to be lying down and thinking about the material in my head. thinking about the material in my head. thinking about the material in my head. And still to this day, when I read a And still to this day, when I read a And still to this day, when I read a paper, I try, I don't always do this, but what I try, I don't always do this, but what I try, I don't always do this, but what I try to do is then take a walk in my I try to do is then take a walk in my I try to do is then take a walk in my yard or outside, and I try and think yard or outside, and I try and think yard or outside, and I try and think about the key components of that paper, about the key components of that paper, about the key components of that paper, and think about some of the graphs that and think about some of the graphs that and think about some of the graphs that are especially important, which is what are especially important, which is what are especially important, which is what I'm going to do now. I'd like to take a I'm going to do now. I'd like to take a I'm going to do now. I'd like to take a brief break to thank one of our brief break to thank one of our brief break to thank one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, in the correct magnesium, and potassium, in the correct magnesium, and potassium, in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Now, I and others ratios, but no sugar. Now, I and others ratios, but no sugar. Now, I and others on the podcast have talked a lot about on the podcast have talked a lot about on the podcast have talked a lot about the critical importance of hydration for the critical importance of hydration for the critical importance of hydration for proper brain and bodily function. proper brain and bodily function. proper brain and bodily function. Research shows that even a slight degree Research shows that even a slight degree Research shows that even a slight degree of dehydration can really diminish of dehydration can really diminish of dehydration can really diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's cognitive and physical performance. It's cognitive and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate also important that you get adequate also important that you get adequate electrolytes in order for your body and electrolytes in order for your body and electrolytes in order for your body and brain to function at their best. The brain to function at their best. The brain to function at their best. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are critical for the potassium are critical for the potassium are critical for the functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or nerve body, especially your neurons or nerve body, especially your neurons or nerve cells. To make sure that I'm getting cells. To make sure that I'm getting cells. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and proper amounts of hydration and proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of Element in about 16 to 32 oz of water Element in about 16 to 32 oz of water Element in about 16 to 32 oz of water when I wake up in the morning, and I when I wake up in the morning, and I when I wake up in the morning, and I drink that basically first thing in the drink that basically first thing in the drink that basically first thing in the morning. I also drink Element dissolved morning. I also drink Element dissolved morning. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical in water during any kind of physical in water during any kind of physical exercise I'm doing, especially on hot exercise I'm doing, especially on hot exercise I'm doing, especially on hot days if I'm sweating a lot and losing days if I'm sweating a lot and losing days if I'm sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. If you'd like to water and electrolytes. If you'd like to water and electrolytes. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman, spelled drinklmnt.com/huberman, to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with the purchase of any Element drink mix. the purchase of any Element drink mix. the purchase of any Element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Okay, so I to claim a free sample pack. Okay, so I to claim a free sample pack. Okay, so I like to think that we're establishing like to think that we're establishing like to think that we're establishing that testing yourself or testing your that testing yourself or testing your that testing yourself or testing your students or being tested by your teacher is the or being tested by your teacher is the or being tested by your teacher is the best way to offset forgetting. best way to offset forgetting. best way to offset forgetting. Let's look at the literature that Let's look at the literature that Let's look at the literature that actually supports that statement actually supports that statement actually supports that statement directly. Because in the previous directly. Because in the previous directly. Because in the previous experiment I described, it was either experiment I described, it was either experiment I described, it was either study or study or study or study test or study test test, and study test or study test test, and study test or study test test, and then later everybody takes a test at the then later everybody takes a test at the then later everybody takes a test at the same time. same time. same time. A variance on that was done A variance on that was done A variance on that was done where they had one group of students where they had one group of students where they had one group of students study material, so this is new material. study material, so this is new material. study material, so this is new material. And when I say study, I mean they were And when I say study, I mean they were And when I say study, I mean they were exposed to the material for the first exposed to the material for the first exposed to the material for the first time. And I realize this is a little bit of a And I realize this is a little bit of a And I realize this is a little bit of a problem cuz we're using the word study problem cuz we're using the word study problem cuz we're using the word study when in fact I'm trying to make the when in fact I'm trying to make the when in fact I'm trying to make the point that testing yourself is studying, point that testing yourself is studying, point that testing yourself is studying, okay? So, uh forgive me, but this is the okay? So, uh forgive me, but this is the okay? So, uh forgive me, but this is the way it's mapped out in these experiments way it's mapped out in these experiments way it's mapped out in these experiments and these papers should you look them up and these papers should you look them up and these papers should you look them up in our show note captions. in our show note captions. in our show note captions. One group One group One group is exposed to the material, what we're is exposed to the material, what we're is exposed to the material, what we're call studying, and then takes a test call studying, and then takes a test call studying, and then takes a test immediately after. immediately after. immediately after. They are told what they got right, what They are told what they got right, what They are told what they got right, what they got wrong on that test, and what they got wrong on that test, and what they got wrong on that test, and what the correct answers are. And then the correct answers are. And then the correct answers are. And then sometime later, after a delay, sometime later, after a delay, sometime later, after a delay, they take a test of the same material. they take a test of the same material. they take a test of the same material. Another group studies, that is they're Another group studies, that is they're Another group studies, that is they're exposed to the material, then there's a exposed to the material, then there's a exposed to the material, then there's a delay. Okay, that delay could be days, it could Okay, that delay could be days, it could Okay, that delay could be days, it could be weeks. be weeks. be weeks. This experiment has been done This experiment has been done This experiment has been done every which way, it seems by now. every which way, it seems by now. every which way, it seems by now. Then they're tested. Then they're tested. Then they're tested. And then there's another delay. And then there's another delay. And then there's another delay. And then they take a test at the same And then they take a test at the same And then they take a test at the same time that group one did. Okay? So again, time that group one did. Okay? So again, time that group one did. Okay? So again, it's study test, long delay test for it's study test, long delay test for it's study test, long delay test for group one, or study delay test group one, or study delay test group one, or study delay test delay test for group two. Remember, the delay test for group two. Remember, the delay test for group two. Remember, the final test is taken at the same time by final test is taken at the same time by final test is taken at the same time by everybody. Or group three, study, everybody. Or group three, study, everybody. Or group three, study, that is they're exposed to the material, that is they're exposed to the material, that is they're exposed to the material, then a long delay, then a long delay, then a long delay, then a test, then a test, then a test, and then the ultimate test. Okay? The and then the ultimate test. Okay? The and then the ultimate test. Okay? The test that everybody takes at the same test that everybody takes at the same test that everybody takes at the same time. Can you guess which group performed Can you guess which group performed Can you guess which group performed best? And the essence of this best? And the essence of this best? And the essence of this experiment, if you're listening to this experiment, if you're listening to this experiment, if you're listening to this and it's not clear in your mind, is and it's not clear in your mind, is and it's not clear in your mind, is you're either exposed to the material you're either exposed to the material you're either exposed to the material and tested very soon after, and then and tested very soon after, and then and tested very soon after, and then take a test after a delay, say a week or take a test after a delay, say a week or take a test after a delay, say a week or two weeks later, or you're exposed to two weeks later, or you're exposed to two weeks later, or you're exposed to the material, the material, the material, there's a delay of a few days, then you there's a delay of a few days, then you there's a delay of a few days, then you take a test, and then another few days, take a test, and then another few days, take a test, and then another few days, and then you take a test, so it's more and then you take a test, so it's more and then you take a test, so it's more evenly spaced. Or if you were assigned evenly spaced. Or if you were assigned evenly spaced. Or if you were assigned to the third group, you'd study, you're to the third group, you'd study, you're to the third group, you'd study, you're not going to see the material or be not going to see the material or be not going to see the material or be tested on it until a day or two before tested on it until a day or two before tested on it until a day or two before the big test, then you're tested on it, the big test, then you're tested on it, the big test, then you're tested on it, you get your answers back, and then you get your answers back, and then you get your answers back, and then you're tested on it again. You could you're tested on it again. You could you're tested on it again. You could imagine that the last group might imagine that the last group might imagine that the last group might perform best because they're re-exposed perform best because they're re-exposed perform best because they're re-exposed to the material, they're told what the to the material, they're told what the to the material, they're told what the correct answers are, so they know what correct answers are, so they know what correct answers are, so they know what they got wrong, they know what they got they got wrong, they know what they got they got wrong, they know what they got right, and then the next day they're right, and then the next day they're right, and then the next day they're taking the test again. I would have taking the test again. I would have taking the test again. I would have thought that group would perform best. thought that group would perform best. thought that group would perform best. But it turns out the opposite is true. But it turns out the opposite is true. But it turns out the opposite is true. It's pretty wild. It's pretty wild. It's pretty wild. The best performance comes from being The best performance comes from being The best performance comes from being exposed to material, what in this exposed to material, what in this exposed to material, what in this experiment they're called studying. experiment they're called studying. experiment they're called studying. Okay, so they read a passage or they Okay, so they read a passage or they Okay, so they read a passage or they learn some math material or language learn some math material or language learn some math material or language material or music material or motor material or music material or motor material or music material or motor learning, then they take a test very soon after, then they take a test very soon after, then they take a test very soon after, even same day or next day, and then even same day or next day, and then even same day or next day, and then there's a long delay, and then they take there's a long delay, and then they take there's a long delay, and then they take the test. That group performs best. Put the test. That group performs best. Put the test. That group performs best. Put differently, test yourself very soon, differently, test yourself very soon, differently, test yourself very soon, if not the same day, certainly the next if not the same day, certainly the next if not the same day, certainly the next day or so, very soon after being exposed day or so, very soon after being exposed day or so, very soon after being exposed to material for the first time. to material for the first time. to material for the first time. As opposed to the last group, which As opposed to the last group, which As opposed to the last group, which performs worst. performs worst. performs worst. They perform worst. Being exposed to They perform worst. Being exposed to They perform worst. Being exposed to material, then there's a long period of material, then there's a long period of material, then there's a long period of time, then you're tested on that time, then you're tested on that time, then you're tested on that material, you are told what you got material, you are told what you got material, you are told what you got right, what you got wrong, and then the right, what you got wrong, and then the right, what you got wrong, and then the next day you take a test again, even next day you take a test again, even next day you take a test again, even with overlapping questions to the test with overlapping questions to the test with overlapping questions to the test you took just the day before, and that you took just the day before, and that you took just the day before, and that group performs worst. And the group performs worst. And the group performs worst. And the group that studied, had a gap test, had group that studied, had a gap test, had group that studied, had a gap test, had a gap test, they perform somewhere in a gap test, they perform somewhere in a gap test, they perform somewhere in the middle. What does this tell us? What the middle. What does this tell us? What the middle. What does this tell us? What it tells us is so important vis-à-vis it tells us is so important vis-à-vis it tells us is so important vis-à-vis neuroplasticity, vis-à-vis best learning neuroplasticity, vis-à-vis best learning neuroplasticity, vis-à-vis best learning strategies. This is something that strategies. This is something that strategies. This is something that goodness, I wish I had learned when I goodness, I wish I had learned when I goodness, I wish I had learned when I was in was in was in graduate school, when I was an graduate school, when I was an graduate school, when I was an undergraduate, when I was in high school undergraduate, when I was in high school undergraduate, when I was in high school and elementary school. and elementary school. and elementary school. Goodness, even when I was in Goodness, even when I was in Goodness, even when I was in kindergarten, I wish I'd learned this. Test yourself on the material that you Test yourself on the material that you Test yourself on the material that you were just exposed to very soon after were just exposed to very soon after were just exposed to very soon after your first exposure to it your first exposure to it your first exposure to it because that offsets the natural forgetting of that offsets the natural forgetting of that offsets the natural forgetting of new material that the brain is exposed new material that the brain is exposed new material that the brain is exposed to. This is absolutely the hallmark of to. This is absolutely the hallmark of to. This is absolutely the hallmark of all the impressive data about testing as all the impressive data about testing as all the impressive data about testing as a tool for learning. Testing oneself or a tool for learning. Testing oneself or a tool for learning. Testing oneself or your students or being tested if you're your students or being tested if you're your students or being tested if you're the student by your teacher the student by your teacher the student by your teacher as a tool not just for evaluating as a tool not just for evaluating as a tool not just for evaluating performance, for knowing what you know performance, for knowing what you know performance, for knowing what you know and don't know, but for and don't know, but for and don't know, but for consolidating that information in your consolidating that information in your consolidating that information in your neural circuits. neural circuits. neural circuits. And when I say consolidating that And when I say consolidating that And when I say consolidating that information in your neural circuits, I information in your neural circuits, I information in your neural circuits, I realize it's a mouthful. realize it's a mouthful. realize it's a mouthful. What we know is that this business of What we know is that this business of What we know is that this business of putting the testing soon after exposure putting the testing soon after exposure putting the testing soon after exposure to new material is about offsetting the to new material is about offsetting the to new material is about offsetting the forgetting of that material. forgetting of that material. forgetting of that material. So, you might say, "Wait, if that's So, you might say, "Wait, if that's So, you might say, "Wait, if that's true, how come studying the material and true, how come studying the material and true, how come studying the material and then waiting and then taking two tests then waiting and then taking two tests then waiting and then taking two tests right back-to-back where you're learning right back-to-back where you're learning right back-to-back where you're learning the material again during the test? That the material again during the test? That the material again during the test? That should be the best-performing group." should be the best-performing group." should be the best-performing group." Ah, well, there seems to be something Ah, well, there seems to be something Ah, well, there seems to be something fundamentally different about first fundamentally different about first fundamentally different about first exposure to material exposure to material exposure to material versus testing yourself on that versus testing yourself on that versus testing yourself on that material. And we don't know exactly what material. And we don't know exactly what material. And we don't know exactly what that is. There's some interesting neural that is. There's some interesting neural that is. There's some interesting neural imaging data in humans imaging data in humans imaging data in humans that this has to do something with this that this has to do something with this that this has to do something with this notion of familiarity with material. notion of familiarity with material. notion of familiarity with material. This is very simple, so this is easy to This is very simple, so this is easy to This is very simple, so this is easy to understand even though it involves a understand even though it involves a understand even though it involves a little bit of memory neuroscience little bit of memory neuroscience little bit of memory neuroscience nomenclature. Familiarity with something, recognizing Familiarity with something, recognizing Familiarity with something, recognizing it, is not the same thing it, is not the same thing it, is not the same thing as having agility with that thing, of as having agility with that thing, of as having agility with that thing, of having mastery of that thing. Is not the having mastery of that thing. Is not the having mastery of that thing. Is not the same thing as having mastery of the same thing as having mastery of the same thing as having mastery of the material, of having committed it to material, of having committed it to material, of having committed it to memory. Okay? So, when you read something over Okay? So, when you read something over Okay? So, when you read something over and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, you see it over and over, you hear it you see it over and over, you hear it you see it over and over, you hear it over and over, you think about it over and over, you think about it over and over, you think about it over and over. Of course, you're reading it and over. Of course, you're reading it and over. Of course, you're reading it or you're hearing about it. or you're hearing about it. or you're hearing about it. And you think that you're learning the And you think that you're learning the And you think that you're learning the material, that your neural circuits are material, that your neural circuits are material, that your neural circuits are changing, but it's a pretty passive changing, but it's a pretty passive changing, but it's a pretty passive process. Or even if it's a difficult process. Or even if it's a difficult process. Or even if it's a difficult chapter to read or a difficult passage chapter to read or a difficult passage chapter to read or a difficult passage of music, of music, of music, the difference is when you're tested on the difference is when you're tested on the difference is when you're tested on material, something happens in your material, something happens in your material, something happens in your performance of or recalling of, if it's performance of or recalling of, if it's performance of or recalling of, if it's just, you know, cognitive or you're just, you know, cognitive or you're just, you know, cognitive or you're writing it down or you're told to play writing it down or you're told to play writing it down or you're told to play the music or do the motor the music or do the motor the music or do the motor movement, something happens in the movement, something happens in the movement, something happens in the error, the getting wrong of certain error, the getting wrong of certain error, the getting wrong of certain things that cues your nervous system to things that cues your nervous system to things that cues your nervous system to lock in the information that you have lock in the information that you have lock in the information that you have right, and to remember what you have right, and to remember what you have right, and to remember what you have wrong so that you then correct it, which wrong so that you then correct it, which wrong so that you then correct it, which is far and away different than is far and away different than is far and away different than exposure and re-exposure and exposure and re-exposure and exposure and re-exposure and re-exposure. Okay, so it's a re-exposure. Okay, so it's a re-exposure. Okay, so it's a prerequisite to learning that you need prerequisite to learning that you need prerequisite to learning that you need to see the material for the first time. to see the material for the first time. to see the material for the first time. You can't just start testing yourself on You can't just start testing yourself on You can't just start testing yourself on material that you've never been exposed material that you've never been exposed material that you've never been exposed to. I suppose you could, but you're to. I suppose you could, but you're to. I suppose you could, but you're going to get it, well, I would imagine going to get it, well, I would imagine going to get it, well, I would imagine mostly wrong mostly wrong mostly wrong or all wrong. or all wrong. or all wrong. But, this business of using testing very soon this business of using testing very soon this business of using testing very soon after first exposure to material after first exposure to material after first exposure to material as a tool to study as a tool to study as a tool to study in order to offset forgetting is clearly in order to offset forgetting is clearly in order to offset forgetting is clearly tapping into this difference between tapping into this difference between tapping into this difference between familiarity with something for which we familiarity with something for which we familiarity with something for which we know certain brain areas are activated know certain brain areas are activated know certain brain areas are activated versus recollection, being able to take that recollection, being able to take that recollection, being able to take that material and bring it to memory, material and bring it to memory, material and bring it to memory, bring it to your focused attention and bring it to your focused attention and bring it to your focused attention and use that material. I realize this is a use that material. I realize this is a use that material. I realize this is a bit abstract and some of this is still bit abstract and some of this is still bit abstract and some of this is still being parsed. If you're interested in being parsed. If you're interested in being parsed. If you're interested in the neuroscience of familiarity with the neuroscience of familiarity with the neuroscience of familiarity with something versus your ability to something versus your ability to something versus your ability to actually recall something and have actually recall something and have actually recall something and have mastery of that material, mastery of that material, mastery of that material, there's a really nice review there's a really nice review there's a really nice review that I provide a link to in the show that I provide a link to in the show that I provide a link to in the show note caption. It's published in the note caption. It's published in the note caption. It's published in the journal Hippocampus. I always chuckle at journal Hippocampus. I always chuckle at journal Hippocampus. I always chuckle at the fact that there's a journal that the fact that there's a journal that the fact that there's a journal that named after a brain structure. After named after a brain structure. After named after a brain structure. After all, as far as I know, there isn't a all, as far as I know, there isn't a all, as far as I know, there isn't a journal called retina or amygdala. Um, journal called retina or amygdala. Um, journal called retina or amygdala. Um, and I have a brief anecdote from uh and I have a brief anecdote from uh and I have a brief anecdote from uh graduate school whereby I'd learned that graduate school whereby I'd learned that graduate school whereby I'd learned that there was this journal Hippocampus and I there was this journal Hippocampus and I there was this journal Hippocampus and I was at a grad- it was my first graduate was at a grad- it was my first graduate was at a grad- it was my first graduate student gathering in graduate school and student gathering in graduate school and student gathering in graduate school and the guy who hosted it, the guy who hosted it, the guy who hosted it, um, turns out is a luminary in the field um, turns out is a luminary in the field um, turns out is a luminary in the field of learning and memory. And I was of learning and memory. And I was of learning and memory. And I was saying, you know, this is ridiculous. saying, you know, this is ridiculous. saying, you know, this is ridiculous. Like there's a journal called Like there's a journal called Like there's a journal called Hippocampus. Here I am, first-year Hippocampus. Here I am, first-year Hippocampus. Here I am, first-year graduate student. He goes, yeah, there graduate student. He goes, yeah, there graduate student. He goes, yeah, there is. And I said, you know, that's only so is. And I said, you know, that's only so is. And I said, you know, that's only so silly. Like who are the who are the like silly. Like who are the who are the like silly. Like who are the who are the like who are the idiots that name a journal who are the idiots that name a journal who are the idiots that name a journal after a brain structure? Turns out after a brain structure? Turns out after a brain structure? Turns out there's also a journal called cerebral there's also a journal called cerebral there's also a journal called cerebral cortex and there's probably one about cortex and there's probably one about cortex and there's probably one about spinal cord. So, it turns out I was spinal cord. So, it turns out I was spinal cord. So, it turns out I was the idiot saying this. And the guy I was the idiot saying this. And the guy I was the idiot saying this. And the guy I was talking to, who of course was the host talking to, who of course was the host talking to, who of course was the host of the party, said, yeah, actually, uh, of the party, said, yeah, actually, uh, of the party, said, yeah, actually, uh, that's my journal. I founded the journal that's my journal. I founded the journal that's my journal. I founded the journal Hippocampus. So, you can look him up. Hippocampus. So, you can look him up. Hippocampus. So, you can look him up. So, at At point, you're going to take a So, at At point, you're going to take a So, at At point, you're going to take a test and it's a super easy test. Okay? I test and it's a super easy test. Okay? I test and it's a super easy test. Okay? I realize we're a bit into the material, realize we're a bit into the material, realize we're a bit into the material, and we're all probably fatiguing a and we're all probably fatiguing a and we're all probably fatiguing a little bit, marveling, I hope, at what little bit, marveling, I hope, at what little bit, marveling, I hope, at what an incredible tool testing, and in an incredible tool testing, and in an incredible tool testing, and in particular self-testing soon after being particular self-testing soon after being particular self-testing soon after being exposed to new material, is. exposed to new material, is. exposed to new material, is. And the question is this. And by the And the question is this. And by the And the question is this. And by the way, this is an open-ended question. way, this is an open-ended question. way, this is an open-ended question. You're not supposed to know the answer, You're not supposed to know the answer, You're not supposed to know the answer, cuz I haven't told you the answer yet, cuz I haven't told you the answer yet, cuz I haven't told you the answer yet, but I want you to think about this. If one looks at the majority of data in If one looks at the majority of data in If one looks at the majority of data in this whole field of testing as a this whole field of testing as a this whole field of testing as a studying tool, studying tool, studying tool, how much improvement do you think you how much improvement do you think you how much improvement do you think you get from testing yourself once on new get from testing yourself once on new get from testing yourself once on new material? Do you think it's a, Do you think it's a, Do you think it's a, you know, 10% improvement, a 20% you know, 10% improvement, a 20% you know, 10% improvement, a 20% improvement? So, here I'm just comparing improvement? So, here I'm just comparing improvement? So, here I'm just comparing to testing yourself once on material to testing yourself once on material to testing yourself once on material that you were just exposed to you for that you were just exposed to you for that you were just exposed to you for the first time, versus not testing the first time, versus not testing the first time, versus not testing yourself at all. yourself at all. yourself at all. Okay? How much do you think you Okay? How much do you think you Okay? How much do you think you improve? The answer is The answer is The answer is about 50% 5 0. And I can say that on the about 50% 5 0. And I can say that on the about 50% 5 0. And I can say that on the basis of the fact that basis of the fact that basis of the fact that in studies of musical learning, of in studies of musical learning, of in studies of musical learning, of mathematical learning, of language mathematical learning, of language mathematical learning, of language learning, of motor learning, when learning, of motor learning, when learning, of motor learning, when subjects are exposed to new material, subjects are exposed to new material, subjects are exposed to new material, and then tested at some period of time and then tested at some period of time and then tested at some period of time later, the percentage of information they get the percentage of information they get the percentage of information they get right, or that they are right, or that they are right, or that they are able to able to able to perform something correctly, perform something correctly, perform something correctly, diminishes over time, diminishes over time, diminishes over time, especially because they're not doing any especially because they're not doing any especially because they're not doing any practice and no testing in the practice and no testing in the practice and no testing in the intervening time. This was built into intervening time. This was built into intervening time. This was built into these experiments. these experiments. these experiments. And then you simply ask, how much of the And then you simply ask, how much of the And then you simply ask, how much of the material was forgotten material was forgotten material was forgotten if they just were exposed to the if they just were exposed to the if they just were exposed to the material. So, in the case of, say, music material. So, in the case of, say, music material. So, in the case of, say, music learning, this would be, you know, your learning, this would be, you know, your learning, this would be, you know, your teacher sits down next to you and shows teacher sits down next to you and shows teacher sits down next to you and shows you the scales on the piano. you the scales on the piano. you the scales on the piano. But then you're not practicing them in But then you're not practicing them in But then you're not practicing them in between. Versus, um, between. Versus, um, between. Versus, um, or perhaps another example would be or perhaps another example would be or perhaps another example would be somebody gives you a lecture about a somebody gives you a lecture about a somebody gives you a lecture about a particular phase in history, and then particular phase in history, and then particular phase in history, and then you're not being exposed to the material you're not being exposed to the material you're not being exposed to the material again, and you're not self-testing. again, and you're not self-testing. again, and you're not self-testing. Versus if you just take one test, a even Versus if you just take one test, a even Versus if you just take one test, a even a self-directed test of the material a self-directed test of the material a self-directed test of the material immediately after, irrespective of how immediately after, irrespective of how immediately after, irrespective of how well you perform, you have the amount of well you perform, you have the amount of well you perform, you have the amount of forgetting. Okay, I want you to think forgetting. Okay, I want you to think forgetting. Okay, I want you to think about self-testing in this way, because about self-testing in this way, because about self-testing in this way, because we're thinking about optimal studying we're thinking about optimal studying we're thinking about optimal studying strategies. You have the amount of strategies. You have the amount of strategies. You have the amount of forgetting that would normally occur. forgetting that would normally occur. forgetting that would normally occur. This is oh so important. In fact, I This is oh so important. In fact, I This is oh so important. In fact, I don't even know that most don't even know that most don't even know that most neuroscientists think about learning and neuroscientists think about learning and neuroscientists think about learning and neuroplasticity this way. Most neuroplasticity this way. Most neuroplasticity this way. Most everybody, including neuroscientists, everybody, including neuroscientists, everybody, including neuroscientists, are taught we're taught continued to be are taught we're taught continued to be are taught we're taught continued to be taught that you're exposed to new taught that you're exposed to new taught that you're exposed to new material, you focus, okay, then during material, you focus, okay, then during material, you focus, okay, then during sleep there's remodeling of the sleep there's remodeling of the sleep there's remodeling of the connections. All that's true. connections. All that's true. connections. All that's true. But we really need to think about how But we really need to think about how But we really need to think about how most information that comes into our most information that comes into our most information that comes into our nervous system each day is forgotten. nervous system each day is forgotten. nervous system each day is forgotten. Most of it is completely discarded. Most of it is completely discarded. Most of it is completely discarded. There are some rare clinical deficits There are some rare clinical deficits There are some rare clinical deficits where people remember everything. And where people remember everything. And where people remember everything. And I'll tell you, these people really I'll tell you, these people really I'll tell you, these people really struggle in life. They do not do well in struggle in life. They do not do well in struggle in life. They do not do well in work, in relationships. They remember work, in relationships. They remember work, in relationships. They remember every little detail of everything, and every little detail of everything, and every little detail of everything, and it is incredibly disruptive to their it is incredibly disruptive to their it is incredibly disruptive to their quality of life. It's nothing you want. quality of life. It's nothing you want. quality of life. It's nothing you want. You want to have a great memory for the You want to have a great memory for the You want to have a great memory for the right things. right things. right things. So, when you self-test material, you have when you self-test material, you have when you self-test material, you have the amount of forgetting that occurs the amount of forgetting that occurs the amount of forgetting that occurs compared to if you're just exposed to compared to if you're just exposed to compared to if you're just exposed to the material. I want you to keep that the material. I want you to keep that the material. I want you to keep that fact in mind, because that fact is the fact in mind, because that fact is the fact in mind, because that fact is the one that really hit me upside the head one that really hit me upside the head one that really hit me upside the head and made me realize, goodness gracious, and made me realize, goodness gracious, and made me realize, goodness gracious, how I wish that I self-tested myself on how I wish that I self-tested myself on how I wish that I self-tested myself on material that I wanted to remember over material that I wanted to remember over material that I wanted to remember over time rather than reading it over and time rather than reading it over and time rather than reading it over and over. I had this elaborate process for over. I had this elaborate process for over. I had this elaborate process for studying that I used all through college studying that I used all through college studying that I used all through college and graduate school, and it worked and graduate school, and it worked and graduate school, and it worked pretty well for me, where I'd read and pretty well for me, where I'd read and pretty well for me, where I'd read and highlight, then I'd write out my notes, highlight, then I'd write out my notes, highlight, then I'd write out my notes, then I would write little paragraphs then I would write little paragraphs then I would write little paragraphs about that stuff. Now, some of that about that stuff. Now, some of that about that stuff. Now, some of that probably mimicked self-testing. Indeed, probably mimicked self-testing. Indeed, probably mimicked self-testing. Indeed, it had to have. And then, of course, I it had to have. And then, of course, I it had to have. And then, of course, I would take the quizzes, and I would go would take the quizzes, and I would go would take the quizzes, and I would go to office hours. You know, once I got to office hours. You know, once I got to office hours. You know, once I got serious about school, I got really serious about school, I got really serious about school, I got really serious about school. And of course, I serious about school. And of course, I serious about school. And of course, I still forget things. I've made errors on still forget things. I've made errors on still forget things. I've made errors on this podcast before, in part from going this podcast before, in part from going this podcast before, in part from going too fast or making a joke that people too fast or making a joke that people too fast or making a joke that people didn't perceive as a joke. So, the whole didn't perceive as a joke. So, the whole didn't perceive as a joke. So, the whole story there, but in any case, of course story there, but in any case, of course story there, but in any case, of course I make errors. Of course, I've forgotten I make errors. Of course, I've forgotten I make errors. Of course, I've forgotten certain things and sometimes I misspeak. certain things and sometimes I misspeak. certain things and sometimes I misspeak. I always strive to get things I always strive to get things I always strive to get things accurately. We correct things in the accurately. We correct things in the accurately. We correct things in the show note captions if they're called out show note captions if they're called out show note captions if they're called out to us. We're now using AI to review to us. We're now using AI to review to us. We're now using AI to review the podcast and adjust anywhere using the podcast and adjust anywhere using the podcast and adjust anywhere using insertions. So, we're actually replacing insertions. So, we're actually replacing insertions. So, we're actually replacing those words if we need to and so on and those words if we need to and so on and those words if we need to and so on and so forth. But, yes, we all forget so forth. But, yes, we all forget so forth. But, yes, we all forget things. We all make errors. things. We all make errors. things. We all make errors. But, if I had just known But, if I had just known But, if I had just known that testing myself on material while that testing myself on material while that testing myself on material while walking out of class or soon after walking out of class or soon after walking out of class or soon after getting home or later that evening or getting home or later that evening or getting home or later that evening or the next day would allow me to perform the next day would allow me to perform the next day would allow me to perform so much better so much better so much better on an exam, a midterm, or a final exam. on an exam, a midterm, or a final exam. on an exam, a midterm, or a final exam. And of course, I still would have And of course, I still would have And of course, I still would have studied because I was committed and you studied because I was committed and you studied because I was committed and you should still study as much as you feel should still study as much as you feel should still study as much as you feel is necessary to get mastery of the is necessary to get mastery of the is necessary to get mastery of the material for you. material for you. material for you. However, if I had known that testing However, if I had known that testing However, if I had known that testing oneself or being tested soon after oneself or being tested soon after oneself or being tested soon after exposure to material would halve the exposure to material would halve the exposure to material would halve the amount of forgetting even out to a year amount of forgetting even out to a year amount of forgetting even out to a year later, I definitely would have saved myself a I definitely would have saved myself a I definitely would have saved myself a lot of time. Let's talk about some lot of time. Let's talk about some lot of time. Let's talk about some specifics of ways that you can self-test specifics of ways that you can self-test specifics of ways that you can self-test or if you're a teacher or if you have or if you're a teacher or if you have or if you're a teacher or if you have good dialogue with your teacher and they good dialogue with your teacher and they good dialogue with your teacher and they are open-minded, perhaps they are open are open-minded, perhaps they are open are open-minded, perhaps they are open to hearing about what are the best forms to hearing about what are the best forms to hearing about what are the best forms of testing oneself as a tool for of testing oneself as a tool for of testing oneself as a tool for learning. The best tests The best tests The best tests are open-ended, are open-ended, are open-ended, short answer, short answer, short answer, very minimal prompt tests, not unlike very minimal prompt tests, not unlike very minimal prompt tests, not unlike the type that we've taken today during the type that we've taken today during the type that we've taken today during this podcast. this podcast. this podcast. As compared to multiple-choice tests. As compared to multiple-choice tests. As compared to multiple-choice tests. Multiple-choice questions allow for Multiple-choice questions allow for Multiple-choice questions allow for familiarity of names, of facts, you familiarity of names, of facts, you familiarity of names, of facts, you know, it's going to be A, B, C, D and know, it's going to be A, B, C, D and know, it's going to be A, B, C, D and sometimes E is, you know, A and C and so sometimes E is, you know, A and C and so sometimes E is, you know, A and C and so on and so forth. And within each of on and so forth. And within each of on and so forth. And within each of those A, B, C, D, E answers and you're those A, B, C, D, E answers and you're those A, B, C, D, E answers and you're looking for the right answer, you're looking for the right answer, you're looking for the right answer, you're looking for the familiarity, the looking for the familiarity, the looking for the familiarity, the recognition of something. Yes, this, not recognition of something. Yes, this, not recognition of something. Yes, this, not that. Okay, that's the best answer. You that. Okay, that's the best answer. You that. Okay, that's the best answer. You circle C. Okay? This kind of thing. As circle C. Okay? This kind of thing. As circle C. Okay? This kind of thing. As opposed to an open-ended question where opposed to an open-ended question where opposed to an open-ended question where you have to write out your answer, you have to write out your answer, you have to write out your answer, you have to have to have to recall the information, right? It recall the information, right? It recall the information, right? It requires a much greater degree of requires a much greater degree of requires a much greater degree of mastery of the information than does mastery of the information than does mastery of the information than does familiarity or recognition of the familiarity or recognition of the familiarity or recognition of the material. So, the best tests as study material. So, the best tests as study material. So, the best tests as study tools are going to be open-ended, short tools are going to be open-ended, short tools are going to be open-ended, short answer questions or even long answer questions or even long answer questions or even long answer questions. Now, there's one exception to this Now, there's one exception to this Now, there's one exception to this which are multiple choice tests that which are multiple choice tests that which are multiple choice tests that include tricks. Okay? If you've ever include tricks. Okay? If you've ever include tricks. Okay? If you've ever taken the GRE, the graduate school taken the GRE, the graduate school taken the GRE, the graduate school entrance exam, or the LSAT, or the MCAT, entrance exam, or the LSAT, or the MCAT, entrance exam, or the LSAT, or the MCAT, there are some questions in there that there are some questions in there that there are some questions in there that are very straightforward, but in those are very straightforward, but in those are very straightforward, but in those standardized tests, they tend to include standardized tests, they tend to include standardized tests, they tend to include some {quote} {unquote} trick questions some {quote} {unquote} trick questions some {quote} {unquote} trick questions in which those questions don't allow you in which those questions don't allow you in which those questions don't allow you to just recognize the correct answer and to just recognize the correct answer and to just recognize the correct answer and distinguish it from the other incorrect distinguish it from the other incorrect distinguish it from the other incorrect answers, but rather answers, but rather answers, but rather they have answers in there that they have answers in there that they have answers in there that on first blush look like the right on first blush look like the right on first blush look like the right answer, and people have a tendency to answer, and people have a tendency to answer, and people have a tendency to circle those and move on, circle those and move on, circle those and move on, or to select those and move on, or to select those and move on, or to select those and move on, but if you think about the material a but if you think about the material a but if you think about the material a little more deeply, turns out those little more deeply, turns out those little more deeply, turns out those {quote} {unquote} obvious answers are {quote} {unquote} obvious answers are {quote} {unquote} obvious answers are actually the incorrect answers. So, actually the incorrect answers. So, actually the incorrect answers. So, there are versions of multiple choice there are versions of multiple choice there are versions of multiple choice tests where it requires a tests where it requires a tests where it requires a greater degree of mastery of the greater degree of mastery of the greater degree of mastery of the material, where simple familiarity won't material, where simple familiarity won't material, where simple familiarity won't serve you, and you actually have to be serve you, and you actually have to be serve you, and you actually have to be able to recall the different components able to recall the different components able to recall the different components of information leading into that, but of information leading into that, but of information leading into that, but those are a bit more rare, certainly in those are a bit more rare, certainly in those are a bit more rare, certainly in the context of other kinds of learning, the context of other kinds of learning, the context of other kinds of learning, like musical learning. Although, I like musical learning. Although, I like musical learning. Although, I suppose for music theory, that could be suppose for music theory, that could be suppose for music theory, that could be relevant. But when I say music learning, relevant. But when I say music learning, relevant. But when I say music learning, I'm just kind of defaulting to the idea I'm just kind of defaulting to the idea I'm just kind of defaulting to the idea of the mechanics of musical learning. of the mechanics of musical learning. of the mechanics of musical learning. But of course, there's music theory, et But of course, there's music theory, et But of course, there's music theory, et cetera. So, what I'm effectively saying is the So, what I'm effectively saying is the So, what I'm effectively saying is the ultimate exam, the final exam, the ultimate exam, the final exam, the ultimate exam, the final exam, the midterm exam, the exam that's midterm exam, the exam that's midterm exam, the exam that's administered to you, rarely do you have administered to you, rarely do you have administered to you, rarely do you have control over the format of that exam. control over the format of that exam. control over the format of that exam. Sometimes it's mixed format. But, the Sometimes it's mixed format. But, the Sometimes it's mixed format. But, the different ways in which you self-test as different ways in which you self-test as different ways in which you self-test as a form of studying a form of studying a form of studying are really key. And ideally, you would are really key. And ideally, you would are really key. And ideally, you would make these open-ended. In other words, make these open-ended. In other words, make these open-ended. In other words, you would not simply rely on you would not simply rely on you would not simply rely on multiple-choice. You would rely on a multiple-choice. You would rely on a multiple-choice. You would rely on a form of self-testing or that you give form of self-testing or that you give form of self-testing or that you give your students or that your teacher gives your students or that your teacher gives your students or that your teacher gives you that requires you to think about the you that requires you to think about the you that requires you to think about the material with some degree of depth, with material with some degree of depth, with material with some degree of depth, with some degree of effort. And of course, some degree of effort. And of course, some degree of effort. And of course, you're going to get certain things you're going to get certain things you're going to get certain things wrong. Now, I would hope that if testing wrong. Now, I would hope that if testing wrong. Now, I would hope that if testing is being used as a learning tool, as is being used as a learning tool, as is being used as a learning tool, as opposed to just for evaluation, but here opposed to just for evaluation, but here opposed to just for evaluation, but here we're talking about using testing as a we're talking about using testing as a we're talking about using testing as a learning tool, that it wouldn't impact learning tool, that it wouldn't impact learning tool, that it wouldn't impact at least not at that moment, your final at least not at that moment, your final at least not at that moment, your final performance in the course or whatever it performance in the course or whatever it performance in the course or whatever it is. Rather, it is testing for sake of is. Rather, it is testing for sake of is. Rather, it is testing for sake of learning. Now, we know from the learning. Now, we know from the learning. Now, we know from the literature that students don't like pop quizzes. I that students don't like pop quizzes. I that students don't like pop quizzes. I gave you a few today and forgive me. gave you a few today and forgive me. gave you a few today and forgive me. They don't like pop quizzes. And we know They don't like pop quizzes. And we know They don't like pop quizzes. And we know this in the form of this in the form of this in the form of the reduction in teaching evaluation the reduction in teaching evaluation the reduction in teaching evaluation scores, okay? Uh having received scores, okay? Uh having received scores, okay? Uh having received teaching evaluation scores of teaching evaluation scores of teaching evaluation scores of different uh let's say values over the different uh let's say values over the different uh let's say values over the years, and I always take the feedback years, and I always take the feedback years, and I always take the feedback seriously. One salient comment that just leapt into One salient comment that just leapt into One salient comment that just leapt into my mind was the fact that I end up my mind was the fact that I end up my mind was the fact that I end up mentioning my bulldog Costello too often mentioning my bulldog Costello too often mentioning my bulldog Costello too often in class. So, here I'm mentioning him in class. So, here I'm mentioning him in class. So, here I'm mentioning him again just to get back at that one again just to get back at that one again just to get back at that one student that said I mention him too student that said I mention him too student that said I mention him too much. I'll mention him as much as I much. I'll mention him as much as I much. I'll mention him as much as I want. The point here is that want. The point here is that want. The point here is that when students evaluate their teachers, when students evaluate their teachers, when students evaluate their teachers, they tend to punish their teachers for they tend to punish their teachers for they tend to punish their teachers for pop quizzes. pop quizzes. pop quizzes. Does that mean pop quizzes aren't Does that mean pop quizzes aren't Does that mean pop quizzes aren't effective? No, but you know what's more effective? No, but you know what's more effective? No, but you know what's more effective? Telling students at the effective? Telling students at the effective? Telling students at the outset of class or telling yourself at outset of class or telling yourself at outset of class or telling yourself at the outset of any kind of learning the outset of any kind of learning the outset of any kind of learning expedition, cuz this isn't just about expedition, cuz this isn't just about expedition, cuz this isn't just about the classroom, that you're going to take the classroom, that you're going to take the classroom, that you're going to take a bunch of exams, that you're going to a bunch of exams, that you're going to a bunch of exams, that you're going to use testing use testing use testing or quizzes, whatever you want to call or quizzes, whatever you want to call or quizzes, whatever you want to call them, as a form of teaching and them, as a form of teaching and them, as a form of teaching and learning. And that you can expect five tests or And that you can expect five tests or And that you can expect five tests or five quizzes five quizzes five quizzes during the course of being presented the during the course of being presented the during the course of being presented the material. Or that you are going to test material. Or that you are going to test material. Or that you are going to test yourself every day after the material. yourself every day after the material. yourself every day after the material. Now, sometimes you have to go from one Now, sometimes you have to go from one Now, sometimes you have to go from one class to the next class, there isn't an class to the next class, there isn't an class to the next class, there isn't an opportunity to test yourself. But guess opportunity to test yourself. But guess opportunity to test yourself. But guess what's not going to be helpful? Walking what's not going to be helpful? Walking what's not going to be helpful? Walking out of class and getting immediately out of class and getting immediately out of class and getting immediately onto your phone. We know that onto your phone. We know that onto your phone. We know that probably inhibits your ability to probably inhibits your ability to probably inhibits your ability to remember the material because it's going remember the material because it's going remember the material because it's going to enhance forgetting because you do to enhance forgetting because you do to enhance forgetting because you do have this key opportunity have this key opportunity have this key opportunity right after being exposed to new right after being exposed to new right after being exposed to new material to help offset the forgetting material to help offset the forgetting material to help offset the forgetting by testing yourself on that material as by testing yourself on that material as by testing yourself on that material as soon as possible after being exposed to soon as possible after being exposed to soon as possible after being exposed to it. So again, it. So again, it. So again, even though I would did not attend even though I would did not attend even though I would did not attend school in an era where we had school in an era where we had school in an era where we had smartphones and texting, I recall smartphones and texting, I recall smartphones and texting, I recall walking out of class and just walking out of class and just walking out of class and just walking out of class and going to my out of class and going to my out of class and going to my bicycle. But of course there were people to talk to, of course there were people to talk to, of course there were people to talk to, there were other things to attend to. If there were other things to attend to. If there were other things to attend to. If you're really serious about learning you're really serious about learning you're really serious about learning material, take a few seconds, maybe even material, take a few seconds, maybe even material, take a few seconds, maybe even a few minutes after being exposed to a few minutes after being exposed to a few minutes after being exposed to that material and think about that material and think about that material and think about that material. Test yourself on it. And if material. Test yourself on it. And if material. Test yourself on it. And if you find that you don't know the you find that you don't know the you find that you don't know the material, you're confused by it or material, you're confused by it or material, you're confused by it or overwhelmed by it, great. You just overwhelmed by it, great. You just overwhelmed by it, great. You just accomplished the first step in cueing accomplished the first step in cueing accomplished the first step in cueing your nervous system to the fact that it your nervous system to the fact that it your nervous system to the fact that it needs to learn that material and you've needs to learn that material and you've needs to learn that material and you've created an opportunity for enhanced created an opportunity for enhanced created an opportunity for enhanced neuroplasticity, which is really what neuroplasticity, which is really what neuroplasticity, which is really what all of this stuff about testing as a all of this stuff about testing as a all of this stuff about testing as a form of studying is about. You're going form of studying is about. You're going form of studying is about. You're going to test yourself so that you figure out to test yourself so that you figure out to test yourself so that you figure out what you don't know, so that you then what you don't know, so that you then what you don't know, so that you then look up that material, test yourself on look up that material, test yourself on look up that material, test yourself on it again, so that ultimately you forget it again, so that ultimately you forget it again, so that ultimately you forget very little of it, if any. Now, there very little of it, if any. Now, there very little of it, if any. Now, there are other components to learning and are other components to learning and are other components to learning and neuroplasticity that I've talked about neuroplasticity that I've talked about neuroplasticity that I've talked about on previous podcasts that are just too on previous podcasts that are just too on previous podcasts that are just too interesting not to mention, but I'm just interesting not to mention, but I'm just interesting not to mention, but I'm just going to mention them in brief. Things going to mention them in brief. Things going to mention them in brief. Things like gap effects. Gap effects are oh so like gap effects. Gap effects are oh so like gap effects. Gap effects are oh so cool and they've been demonstrated for cool and they've been demonstrated for cool and they've been demonstrated for lots of different forms of learning. Gap lots of different forms of learning. Gap lots of different forms of learning. Gap effects are effects are effects are what I just did, which is to take what I just did, which is to take what I just did, which is to take periodic pauses periodic pauses periodic pauses in the learning of material as short as in the learning of material as short as in the learning of material as short as 5 to 10 seconds, but even as long as 30 5 to 10 seconds, but even as long as 30 5 to 10 seconds, but even as long as 30 seconds during which guess what your seconds during which guess what your seconds during which guess what your hippocampus, the neurons in your hippocampus, the neurons in your hippocampus, the neurons in your hippocampus, repeat information that hippocampus, repeat information that hippocampus, repeat information that you've been exposed to for the first you've been exposed to for the first you've been exposed to for the first time at a rate 20 to 30 times faster than at a rate 20 to 30 times faster than at a rate 20 to 30 times faster than typical just as it does during rapid eye just as it does during rapid eye just as it does during rapid eye movement sleep. So, if you are a teacher movement sleep. So, if you are a teacher movement sleep. So, if you are a teacher and or if you are a learner and or if you are a learner and or if you are a learner periodically throughout an episode a periodically throughout an episode a periodically throughout an episode a class or whatever of trying to learn new class or whatever of trying to learn new class or whatever of trying to learn new motor skills or music skills or whatever motor skills or music skills or whatever motor skills or music skills or whatever kind of learning kind of learning kind of learning pause and let your hippocampus generate pause and let your hippocampus generate pause and let your hippocampus generate more repetitions of that material than more repetitions of that material than more repetitions of that material than it would otherwise if you just tried to it would otherwise if you just tried to it would otherwise if you just tried to barrel through. So, I realize as we've barrel through. So, I realize as we've barrel through. So, I realize as we've gone through today's discussion that gone through today's discussion that gone through today's discussion that words like test and quiz, evaluation words like test and quiz, evaluation words like test and quiz, evaluation offsetting forgetting, all of that stuff offsetting forgetting, all of that stuff offsetting forgetting, all of that stuff can, you know, spike people's cortisol. can, you know, spike people's cortisol. can, you know, spike people's cortisol. It can It can It can give us flashbacks to uncomfortable give us flashbacks to uncomfortable give us flashbacks to uncomfortable classroom experiences related to being classroom experiences related to being classroom experiences related to being called on cold called for the answer. called on cold called for the answer. called on cold called for the answer. A vicious trick that instructors play. A vicious trick that instructors play. A vicious trick that instructors play. Keep in mind that testing as a form of Keep in mind that testing as a form of Keep in mind that testing as a form of studying whether or not self-directed or studying whether or not self-directed or studying whether or not self-directed or given to you by a teacher is not for given to you by a teacher is not for given to you by a teacher is not for sake of evaluation at the level of okay, sake of evaluation at the level of okay, sake of evaluation at the level of okay, you know, you know, you know, you get an exam at the end of a lecture and get an exam at the end of a lecture and get an exam at the end of a lecture and then you do your best to answer those then you do your best to answer those then you do your best to answer those questions and then you turn it in and it questions and then you turn it in and it questions and then you turn it in and it impacts your grade. No, this is about impacts your grade. No, this is about impacts your grade. No, this is about being told or revealing to yourself how being told or revealing to yourself how being told or revealing to yourself how much you know and don't know and then of much you know and don't know and then of much you know and don't know and then of course being told the correct answers so course being told the correct answers so course being told the correct answers so that you can compare your answers to the that you can compare your answers to the that you can compare your answers to the correct answers and doing this correct answers and doing this correct answers and doing this frequently and ideally very soon after frequently and ideally very soon after frequently and ideally very soon after being exposed to the material. That's being exposed to the material. That's being exposed to the material. That's one of the key things that I keep coming one of the key things that I keep coming one of the key things that I keep coming back to again and again here back to again and again here back to again and again here um because it's something that frankly um because it's something that frankly um because it's something that frankly was not done while I was in school um was not done while I was in school um was not done while I was in school um for whatever reason and I think that's for whatever reason and I think that's for whatever reason and I think that's largely because when people hear the largely because when people hear the largely because when people hear the word testing they think of evaluation word testing they think of evaluation word testing they think of evaluation and if anything, at least in the in the and if anything, at least in the in the and if anything, at least in the in the States over the last 30 years, but in States over the last 30 years, but in States over the last 30 years, but in particular over the last 15 years, particular over the last 15 years, particular over the last 15 years, there's been this tendency to shift away there's been this tendency to shift away there's been this tendency to shift away from formal evaluation. You know, I from formal evaluation. You know, I from formal evaluation. You know, I personally believe that one can learn in personally believe that one can learn in personally believe that one can learn in many different styles and many different many different styles and many different many different styles and many different contexts. I, of course, as a university contexts. I, of course, as a university contexts. I, of course, as a university professor, believe that for certain topics, in believe that for certain topics, in believe that for certain topics, in particular science and medicine and particular science and medicine and particular science and medicine and health, but other topics as well, of health, but other topics as well, of health, but other topics as well, of course, that formal rigorous coursework course, that formal rigorous coursework course, that formal rigorous coursework is by far the best way to learn is by far the best way to learn is by far the best way to learn information for me. information for me. information for me. But that regardless of whether or not But that regardless of whether or not But that regardless of whether or not you're learning just from YouTube or you're learning just from YouTube or you're learning just from YouTube or you're learning from podcasts or you're learning from podcasts or you're learning from podcasts or you're learning from books or you're learning from books or you're learning from books or you're learning from the school of life, as it were, from the school of life, as it were, from the school of life, as it were, from experience, that from experience, that from experience, that testing as a form of studying is testing as a form of studying is testing as a form of studying is absolutely key. And gosh, there's such a absolutely key. And gosh, there's such a absolutely key. And gosh, there's such a beautiful body of research. In fact, beautiful body of research. In fact, beautiful body of research. In fact, I'll link to several studies, including I'll link to several studies, including I'll link to several studies, including a review entitled Testing Enhances a review entitled Testing Enhances a review entitled Testing Enhances Learning: A Review of the Literature, Learning: A Review of the Literature, Learning: A Review of the Literature, as well as a beautiful article, as well as a beautiful article, as well as a beautiful article, Test-Enhanced Learning, which gets into Test-Enhanced Learning, which gets into Test-Enhanced Learning, which gets into this. And there's a wonderful book about this. And there's a wonderful book about this. And there's a wonderful book about this that I'll also provide a link to in this that I'll also provide a link to in this that I'll also provide a link to in the show note captions. the show note captions. the show note captions. All, of course, authored by researchers All, of course, authored by researchers All, of course, authored by researchers who have worked squarely in this field who have worked squarely in this field who have worked squarely in this field and compare the data on testing as a and compare the data on testing as a and compare the data on testing as a studying tool to other forms of studying tool to other forms of studying tool to other forms of studying and learning. So, it's a really and learning. So, it's a really and learning. So, it's a really impressive literature that I do believe impressive literature that I do believe impressive literature that I do believe we all should have known about, and we all should have known about, and we all should have known about, and that's why I'm passing it on to you now. that's why I'm passing it on to you now. that's why I'm passing it on to you now. Now, before we wrap up, I want to make Now, before we wrap up, I want to make Now, before we wrap up, I want to make sure that I emphasize some of the other sure that I emphasize some of the other sure that I emphasize some of the other key components to studying and learning key components to studying and learning key components to studying and learning that have nothing to do with testing as that have nothing to do with testing as that have nothing to do with testing as a studying tool. a studying tool. a studying tool. And those are the role of emotion, And those are the role of emotion, And those are the role of emotion, the role of story, the role of story, the role of story, and the role of what's called interleaving. the role of what's called interleaving. the role of what's called interleaving. Now, in terms of emotion, I think we all Now, in terms of emotion, I think we all Now, in terms of emotion, I think we all inherently understand that more inherently understand that more inherently understand that more emotionally laden experiences emotionally laden experiences emotionally laden experiences are remembered more durably. We tend not are remembered more durably. We tend not are remembered more durably. We tend not to forget them. In fact, this is the to forget them. In fact, this is the to forget them. In fact, this is the basis of things like PTSD, basis of things like PTSD, basis of things like PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder. It is post-traumatic stress disorder. It is post-traumatic stress disorder. It is the reality that one-trial learning, the reality that one-trial learning, the reality that one-trial learning, that is, exposure to something and never that is, exposure to something and never that is, exposure to something and never forgetting it occurs very readily when forgetting it occurs very readily when forgetting it occurs very readily when the thing that we're exposed to is the thing that we're exposed to is the thing that we're exposed to is negative or has a very heavy negative emotional or has a very heavy negative emotional or has a very heavy negative emotional salience. So it could be something we salience. So it could be something we salience. So it could be something we read or something we see. read or something we see. read or something we see. Sometimes it's something that happens to Sometimes it's something that happens to Sometimes it's something that happens to us. You know, I don't like the idea of us. You know, I don't like the idea of us. You know, I don't like the idea of that, but this is true. that, but this is true. that, but this is true. Your nervous system is wired such Your nervous system is wired such Your nervous system is wired such neuroplasticity is such that neuroplasticity is such that neuroplasticity is such that stressful experiences because they stressful experiences because they stressful experiences because they deploy such massive amounts of deploy such massive amounts of deploy such massive amounts of adrenaline, epinephrine, as well as adrenaline, epinephrine, as well as adrenaline, epinephrine, as well as other neuromodulators other neuromodulators other neuromodulators allow very quickly for the milieu, the allow very quickly for the milieu, the allow very quickly for the milieu, the environment of the neural circuits that environment of the neural circuits that environment of the neural circuits that led up to that experience to strengthen led up to that experience to strengthen led up to that experience to strengthen their connections with one trial, their connections with one trial, their connections with one trial, so-called one-trial learning. This is so-called one-trial learning. This is so-called one-trial learning. This is why sadly although at the same time from an although at the same time from an although at the same time from an adaptive perspective, we say fortunately adaptive perspective, we say fortunately adaptive perspective, we say fortunately if you were to step outside today and if you were to step outside today and if you were to step outside today and God forbid see somebody get hit by a car God forbid see somebody get hit by a car God forbid see somebody get hit by a car you would remember that. Chances are you would remember that. Chances are you would remember that. Chances are you would remember that forever. Now, that would remember that forever. Now, that would remember that forever. Now, that does not mean that the emotional does not mean that the emotional does not mean that the emotional components of that memory components of that memory components of that memory are necessarily going to stay within are necessarily going to stay within are necessarily going to stay within you. There are tools for the treatment you. There are tools for the treatment you. There are tools for the treatment of PTSD such as the different ones that come to such as the different ones that come to such as the different ones that come to mind are, you know mind are, you know mind are, you know systematic exposure therapy where you're systematic exposure therapy where you're systematic exposure therapy where you're re-exposed to that idea or memory re-exposed to that idea or memory re-exposed to that idea or memory sometimes even circumstance sometimes even circumstance sometimes even circumstance with of course the support of a trained with of course the support of a trained with of course the support of a trained professional, typically a psychiatrist professional, typically a psychiatrist professional, typically a psychiatrist or psychologist or psychologist or psychologist and the emotional load of that and the emotional load of that and the emotional load of that experience is gradually experience is gradually experience is gradually uncoupled from your memory of the uncoupled from your memory of the uncoupled from your memory of the experience. There's things like EMDR. experience. There's things like EMDR. experience. There's things like EMDR. There are pharmacological approaches. There are pharmacological approaches. There are pharmacological approaches. Some of these are combined with the Some of these are combined with the Some of these are combined with the sorts of things I've described. I've sorts of things I've described. I've sorts of things I've described. I've done entire episodes about stress and done entire episodes about stress and done entire episodes about stress and PTSD. Again, you can find those at PTSD. Again, you can find those at PTSD. Again, you can find those at hubermanlab.com by putting stress PTSD hubermanlab.com by putting stress PTSD hubermanlab.com by putting stress PTSD into the search function. into the search function. into the search function. However we know that it is the same we know that it is the same we know that it is the same neuromodulators, mainly epinephrine and neuromodulators, mainly epinephrine and neuromodulators, mainly epinephrine and norepinephrine, deployed at massive norepinephrine, deployed at massive norepinephrine, deployed at massive amounts in those moments where something amounts in those moments where something amounts in those moments where something very stressful happens, that allows the very stressful happens, that allows the very stressful happens, that allows the neural circuits that led up to the neural circuits that led up to the neural circuits that led up to the circumstance, as well as the neural circumstance, as well as the neural circumstance, as well as the neural circuits that encode that visual scene circuits that encode that visual scene circuits that encode that visual scene and scenes like it or sounds like it to and scenes like it or sounds like it to and scenes like it or sounds like it to be locked in and linked to the stress be locked in and linked to the stress be locked in and linked to the stress response. Now, what this is really all saying is Now, what this is really all saying is Now, what this is really all saying is that negative stuff is remembered that negative stuff is remembered that negative stuff is remembered typically the first time and every time typically the first time and every time typically the first time and every time and very durably over time. and very durably over time. and very durably over time. As compared to positive experiences, As compared to positive experiences, As compared to positive experiences, which, as far as peak experiences go, which, as far as peak experiences go, which, as far as peak experiences go, right, birth of your first child, a right, birth of your first child, a right, birth of your first child, a wedding, a wonderful wedding, a wonderful wedding, a wonderful um professional or personal experience, um professional or personal experience, um professional or personal experience, those two can be one-trial learning and those two can be one-trial learning and those two can be one-trial learning and memory. But most things that we are exposed to But most things that we are exposed to But most things that we are exposed to are not at those extremes, either are not at those extremes, either are not at those extremes, either negative or positive. negative or positive. negative or positive. However, we know that any kind of story, However, we know that any kind of story, However, we know that any kind of story, any kind of emotional emphasis on any kind of emotional emphasis on any kind of emotional emphasis on material, either in the delivery of that material, either in the delivery of that material, either in the delivery of that material, but certainly in the way that material, but certainly in the way that material, but certainly in the way that material that material that material is perceived by you, like getting really is perceived by you, like getting really is perceived by you, like getting really excited about something you want to excited about something you want to excited about something you want to learn, or thinking something's really learn, or thinking something's really learn, or thinking something's really awful, is likely to be more readily and awful, is likely to be more readily and awful, is likely to be more readily and stably committed to your memory. And stably committed to your memory. And stably committed to your memory. And that's because of these neuromodulators that's because of these neuromodulators that's because of these neuromodulators like epinephrine and norepinephrine, but like epinephrine and norepinephrine, but like epinephrine and norepinephrine, but other neuromodulators as well, that wire other neuromodulators as well, that wire other neuromodulators as well, that wire those experiences into your neural those experiences into your neural those experiences into your neural circuits. Again, these neuromodulators, circuits. Again, these neuromodulators, circuits. Again, these neuromodulators, epinephrine, norepinephrine, we also epinephrine, norepinephrine, we also epinephrine, norepinephrine, we also hear about acetylcholine, dopamine, hear about acetylcholine, dopamine, hear about acetylcholine, dopamine, etc., they can operate at low levels, at sort they can operate at low levels, at sort they can operate at low levels, at sort of background levels, of background levels, of background levels, they can create subtle fluctuations in they can create subtle fluctuations in they can create subtle fluctuations in mood, focus, and attention, or they can mood, focus, and attention, or they can mood, focus, and attention, or they can create massive shifts in mood, focus, create massive shifts in mood, focus, create massive shifts in mood, focus, and attention, depending on their and attention, depending on their and attention, depending on their levels, their timing, and much, much levels, their timing, and much, much levels, their timing, and much, much more. Point here is that if you're a teacher Point here is that if you're a teacher Point here is that if you're a teacher and or if you are a learner, and or if you are a learner, and or if you are a learner, paying attention to your internal state paying attention to your internal state paying attention to your internal state as you're trying to learn is very key. as you're trying to learn is very key. as you're trying to learn is very key. We've all had that teacher, that We've all had that teacher, that We've all had that teacher, that lecturer that just kind of drones things lecturer that just kind of drones things lecturer that just kind of drones things out in monotone. If you need to learn out in monotone. If you need to learn out in monotone. If you need to learn the material coming out of a source like the material coming out of a source like the material coming out of a source like that, person or otherwise, you're going that, person or otherwise, you're going that, person or otherwise, you're going to have to ramp up your level of to have to ramp up your level of to have to ramp up your level of internal attention consciously in order internal attention consciously in order internal attention consciously in order to bring about some emotional salience, to bring about some emotional salience, to bring about some emotional salience, some intensity to the way it's some intensity to the way it's some intensity to the way it's perceived. And you can do that just perceived. And you can do that just perceived. And you can do that just through your own thinking. As opposed to through your own thinking. As opposed to through your own thinking. As opposed to the situation where that you have a the situation where that you have a the situation where that you have a super dynamic teacher who's telling you super dynamic teacher who's telling you super dynamic teacher who's telling you things with wide eyes and perhaps even things with wide eyes and perhaps even things with wide eyes and perhaps even cracking jokes. By the way, the teachers cracking jokes. By the way, the teachers cracking jokes. By the way, the teachers that crack jokes get lower teacher that crack jokes get lower teacher that crack jokes get lower teacher evaluations than those that don't crack evaluations than those that don't crack evaluations than those that don't crack jokes or swear. Did you know that? The jokes or swear. Did you know that? The jokes or swear. Did you know that? The teachers that crack jokes and swear, teachers that crack jokes and swear, teachers that crack jokes and swear, they're perceived as more likable, but they're perceived as more likable, but they're perceived as more likable, but they get lower overall evaluations they get lower overall evaluations they get lower overall evaluations typically. They're seen as less typically. They're seen as less typically. They're seen as less professional and therefore less good professional and therefore less good professional and therefore less good teachers by their students. teachers by their students. teachers by their students. So, I try not to make too many jokes or So, I try not to make too many jokes or So, I try not to make too many jokes or swear in my lectures. swear in my lectures. swear in my lectures. The point being that The point being that The point being that we all have those really wonderful we all have those really wonderful we all have those really wonderful dynamic teachers. Yes, it's much easier dynamic teachers. Yes, it's much easier dynamic teachers. Yes, it's much easier to learn and remember that material. You to learn and remember that material. You to learn and remember that material. You still need to test yourself on it, but still need to test yourself on it, but still need to test yourself on it, but it's much easier to learn that material it's much easier to learn that material it's much easier to learn that material for the very reasons I stated before. for the very reasons I stated before. for the very reasons I stated before. It's a lesser example of more deployment It's a lesser example of more deployment It's a lesser example of more deployment of the neuromodulators in you, the of the neuromodulators in you, the of the neuromodulators in you, the learner, that is exposed to that learner, that is exposed to that learner, that is exposed to that material. Okay? So, emotion matters. So material. Okay? So, emotion matters. So material. Okay? So, emotion matters. So much so that in a beautiful review about much so that in a beautiful review about much so that in a beautiful review about learning and memory from the great James learning and memory from the great James learning and memory from the great James McGaugh, one of the luminaries in modern McGaugh, one of the luminaries in modern McGaugh, one of the luminaries in modern neuroscience and psychology of memory, neuroscience and psychology of memory, neuroscience and psychology of memory, he talked about a medieval practice. he talked about a medieval practice. he talked about a medieval practice. This is pretty wild. Whereby This is pretty wild. Whereby This is pretty wild. Whereby people and kids Kids are people, of people and kids Kids are people, of people and kids Kids are people, of course, but adults and kids were taught course, but adults and kids were taught course, but adults and kids were taught information and then thrown literally information and then thrown literally information and then thrown literally thrown into cold water. Why? To deploy thrown into cold water. Why? To deploy thrown into cold water. Why? To deploy adrenaline and consolidate memory of the adrenaline and consolidate memory of the adrenaline and consolidate memory of the material they were exposed to. Now, I material they were exposed to. Now, I material they were exposed to. Now, I know we've covered deliberate cold know we've covered deliberate cold know we've covered deliberate cold exposure on this podcast before. exposure on this podcast before. exposure on this podcast before. No, I'm not saying you need to do a cold No, I'm not saying you need to do a cold No, I'm not saying you need to do a cold plunge after being exposed to new plunge after being exposed to new plunge after being exposed to new material, but guess what? They were material, but guess what? They were material, but guess what? They were doing that many hundreds of years ago, doing that many hundreds of years ago, doing that many hundreds of years ago, and it makes sense logically based on and it makes sense logically based on and it makes sense logically based on all our understanding of the all our understanding of the all our understanding of the neurobiology underlying things like neurobiology underlying things like neurobiology underlying things like PTSD, underlying emotion-laden memory PTSD, underlying emotion-laden memory PTSD, underlying emotion-laden memory formation and consolidation, and formation and consolidation, and formation and consolidation, and our ability to remember things that were our ability to remember things that were our ability to remember things that were emotionally laden much better than emotionally laden much better than emotionally laden much better than things that were less emotionally laden. things that were less emotionally laden. things that were less emotionally laden. So, if you want to take a cold shower So, if you want to take a cold shower So, if you want to take a cold shower after learning some material, or even after learning some material, or even after learning some material, or even better, testing yourself mentally on better, testing yourself mentally on better, testing yourself mentally on that material that material that material while in a cold shower or cold plunge, while in a cold shower or cold plunge, while in a cold shower or cold plunge, you certainly can. Just don't stay in you certainly can. Just don't stay in you certainly can. Just don't stay in there too long. there too long. there too long. Use best practices. If you want to know Use best practices. If you want to know Use best practices. If you want to know what those best practices are for what those best practices are for what those best practices are for deliberate cold exposure, you can check deliberate cold exposure, you can check deliberate cold exposure, you can check out our deliberate cold exposure out our deliberate cold exposure out our deliberate cold exposure newsletter at hubermanlab.com. It's newsletter at hubermanlab.com. It's newsletter at hubermanlab.com. It's completely zero cost. You don't even completely zero cost. You don't even completely zero cost. You don't even need to sign up. You simply go to need to sign up. You simply go to need to sign up. You simply go to newsletter in the menu tab, and you can newsletter in the menu tab, and you can newsletter in the menu tab, and you can find that PDF. And now, because you are find that PDF. And now, because you are find that PDF. And now, because you are becoming proficient in an understanding becoming proficient in an understanding becoming proficient in an understanding of neuroplasticity and learning and of neuroplasticity and learning and of neuroplasticity and learning and testing and neuromodulators like testing and neuromodulators like testing and neuromodulators like epinephrine, yes, drinking caffeine will epinephrine, yes, drinking caffeine will epinephrine, yes, drinking caffeine will increase your levels of epinephrine. increase your levels of epinephrine. increase your levels of epinephrine. Not strikingly so, but enough that it Not strikingly so, but enough that it Not strikingly so, but enough that it probably helps you learn things a little probably helps you learn things a little probably helps you learn things a little bit better. Should I drink the coffee bit better. Should I drink the coffee bit better. Should I drink the coffee after? Listen, that's getting a little after? Listen, that's getting a little after? Listen, that's getting a little bit too down in the details. The most bit too down in the details. The most bit too down in the details. The most important components to learning are important components to learning are important components to learning are that you be alert so that you can that you be alert so that you can that you be alert so that you can attend, so you can pay attention to the attend, so you can pay attention to the attend, so you can pay attention to the material you're trying to learn, and material you're trying to learn, and material you're trying to learn, and then testing yourself later, and of then testing yourself later, and of then testing yourself later, and of course, the other component, which is getting the other component, which is getting the other component, which is getting sufficient amounts of great sleep each sufficient amounts of great sleep each sufficient amounts of great sleep each night. And I highly recommend doing night. And I highly recommend doing night. And I highly recommend doing NSDR. I mentioned gap effects before. NSDR. I mentioned gap effects before. NSDR. I mentioned gap effects before. Those are very, very cool. Those are very, very cool. Those are very, very cool. I just used another one now. And the I just used another one now. And the I just used another one now. And the final tool for studying that I believe final tool for studying that I believe final tool for studying that I believe is not discussed enough and is a bit is not discussed enough and is a bit is not discussed enough and is a bit counterintuitive, so it's a fun one to counterintuitive, so it's a fun one to counterintuitive, so it's a fun one to just mention, and that perhaps you can just mention, and that perhaps you can just mention, and that perhaps you can explore in your own studying and explore in your own studying and explore in your own studying and learning adventures, is interleaving of learning adventures, is interleaving of learning adventures, is interleaving of information. This one's kind of wild, information. This one's kind of wild, information. This one's kind of wild, actually. Turns out that if your instructor or you Turns out that if your instructor or you Turns out that if your instructor or you takes information about something that takes information about something that takes information about something that they're trying to teach you or you're they're trying to teach you or you're they're trying to teach you or you're trying to learn, maybe it's piano, maybe trying to learn, maybe it's piano, maybe trying to learn, maybe it's piano, maybe it's neuroscience, maybe it's how to it's neuroscience, maybe it's how to it's neuroscience, maybe it's how to learn better, and every once in a while learn better, and every once in a while learn better, and every once in a while throws in a little anecdote about throws in a little anecdote about throws in a little anecdote about something. Let's just say, or mention something Let's just say, or mention something Let's just say, or mention something about the Olympics, the Olympics, the Olympics, or incorporate something that seems pseudo incorporate something that seems pseudo incorporate something that seems pseudo random because it's not actually related random because it's not actually related random because it's not actually related to the material you're trying to learn. to the material you're trying to learn. to the material you're trying to learn. Turns out that acts not as a gap in Turns out that acts not as a gap in Turns out that acts not as a gap in the same sense that gap effects, which the same sense that gap effects, which the same sense that gap effects, which are times in which you do nothing, are times in which you do nothing, are times in which you do nothing, in order to get more repetitions of the in order to get more repetitions of the in order to get more repetitions of the material you just heard in your material you just heard in your material you just heard in your hippocampus, but rather but rather but rather those breaks of interleaving those breaks of interleaving those breaks of interleaving information, not just getting a steady information, not just getting a steady information, not just getting a steady barrage like drinking from a fire hose barrage like drinking from a fire hose barrage like drinking from a fire hose of new information from start to finish, of new information from start to finish, of new information from start to finish, turn out to enhance overall learning turn out to enhance overall learning turn out to enhance overall learning ability, probably, we think, ability, probably, we think, ability, probably, we think, at a mechanistic level, at a mechanistic level, at a mechanistic level, because the neural circuits are able to because the neural circuits are able to because the neural circuits are able to generate more repetitions similar to gap generate more repetitions similar to gap generate more repetitions similar to gap effects, but actually, in a very interesting way, but actually, in a very interesting way, but actually, in a very interesting way, also because by injecting other information that by injecting other information that by injecting other information that seems totally unrelated, seems totally unrelated, seems totally unrelated, random or pseudo random, random or pseudo random, random or pseudo random, it allows the brain areas that are it allows the brain areas that are it allows the brain areas that are responsible for encoding information to responsible for encoding information to responsible for encoding information to take whatever new information you're take whatever new information you're take whatever new information you're learning and to incorporate it with learning and to incorporate it with learning and to incorporate it with existing knowledge or even distantly existing knowledge or even distantly existing knowledge or even distantly related knowledge. So, does this mean related knowledge. So, does this mean related knowledge. So, does this mean that you should learn math and history that you should learn math and history that you should learn math and history in the same lecture? Well, I think that in the same lecture? Well, I think that in the same lecture? Well, I think that might be a bit overwhelming, kind of might be a bit overwhelming, kind of might be a bit overwhelming, kind of like drinking from two fire hoses. Here like drinking from two fire hoses. Here like drinking from two fire hoses. Here we're talking about interleaving we're talking about interleaving we're talking about interleaving challenging information that's new to challenging information that's new to challenging information that's new to you with little anecdotes, little bits of little anecdotes, little bits of little anecdotes, little bits of information that perhaps are new to you, information that perhaps are new to you, information that perhaps are new to you, but don't require a lot of challenge, but don't require a lot of challenge, but don't require a lot of challenge, which is of course why every once in a which is of course why every once in a which is of course why every once in a while I throw in a little anecdote about while I throw in a little anecdote about while I throw in a little anecdote about my bulldog or learning neuroanatomy or my bulldog or learning neuroanatomy or my bulldog or learning neuroanatomy or something of that sort. something of that sort. something of that sort. It's not just to provide a break, it's It's not just to provide a break, it's It's not just to provide a break, it's to provide examples that are related but to provide examples that are related but to provide examples that are related but not central to the material that we've not central to the material that we've not central to the material that we've been talking about today, which is all been talking about today, which is all been talking about today, which is all about how to study and learn optimally. about how to study and learn optimally. about how to study and learn optimally. Okay, so I realize that many of you are Okay, so I realize that many of you are Okay, so I realize that many of you are not students any longer, although some not students any longer, although some not students any longer, although some of you are, but in many ways we are all of you are, but in many ways we are all of you are, but in many ways we are all students. We are all constantly being students. We are all constantly being students. We are all constantly being exposed to all sorts of information out exposed to all sorts of information out exposed to all sorts of information out in the world and in the world and in the world and goodness knows um thank goodness we goodness knows um thank goodness we goodness knows um thank goodness we don't remember it all, but there is of don't remember it all, but there is of don't remember it all, but there is of course information that we would like to course information that we would like to course information that we would like to remember, that we would really like to remember, that we would really like to remember, that we would really like to consolidate in our memory and be able to consolidate in our memory and be able to consolidate in our memory and be able to have some mastery over. Earlier I said I have some mastery over. Earlier I said I have some mastery over. Earlier I said I would distinguish between unskilled, would distinguish between unskilled, would distinguish between unskilled, skilled, mastery, and virtuosity and skilled, mastery, and virtuosity and skilled, mastery, and virtuosity and I'll do that now. Unskilled of course I'll do that now. Unskilled of course I'll do that now. Unskilled of course means that we have limited understanding means that we have limited understanding means that we have limited understanding let alone um ability to use information. let alone um ability to use information. let alone um ability to use information. Skilled typically means we know and can Skilled typically means we know and can Skilled typically means we know and can recognize and use information in basic recognize and use information in basic recognize and use information in basic ways or even advanced ways. Mastery ways or even advanced ways. Mastery ways or even advanced ways. Mastery typically means that we have you know, typically means that we have you know, typically means that we have you know, close to the full depth of the knowledge close to the full depth of the knowledge close to the full depth of the knowledge in a given area and that we can use it in a given area and that we can use it in a given area and that we can use it pretty flexibly. And virtuosity, at pretty flexibly. And virtuosity, at pretty flexibly. And virtuosity, at least my definition of virtuosity is least my definition of virtuosity is least my definition of virtuosity is where we actually have such mastery of where we actually have such mastery of where we actually have such mastery of material that we can use it in ways that material that we can use it in ways that material that we can use it in ways that we still don't even know how we can use. we still don't even know how we can use. we still don't even know how we can use. Meaning that we can inject elements or Meaning that we can inject elements or Meaning that we can inject elements or we even invite elements of uncertainty we even invite elements of uncertainty we even invite elements of uncertainty and kind of spontaneity into the use of and kind of spontaneity into the use of and kind of spontaneity into the use of that material. Here I'm thinking of that material. Here I'm thinking of that material. Here I'm thinking of great musicians, I'm thinking of great musicians, I'm thinking of great musicians, I'm thinking of great athletes where athletes where athletes where they know all the plays, they know all they know all the plays, they know all they know all the plays, they know all the moves, it's all scripted into their the moves, it's all scripted into their the moves, it's all scripted into their nervous system and they can deploy those nervous system and they can deploy those nervous system and they can deploy those at any time, so they have real mastery, at any time, so they have real mastery, at any time, so they have real mastery, but in order to display their incredible but in order to display their incredible but in order to display their incredible abilities, their virtuosity, they abilities, their virtuosity, they abilities, their virtuosity, they actively invite in the X factor, the actively invite in the X factor, the actively invite in the X factor, the uncertainty, such that sometimes they uncertainty, such that sometimes they uncertainty, such that sometimes they find themselves playing their instrument find themselves playing their instrument find themselves playing their instrument or singing or performing athletically or singing or performing athletically or singing or performing athletically or mathematically or what have you in ways mathematically or what have you in ways mathematically or what have you in ways that even surprise them. And that of that even surprise them. And that of that even surprise them. And that of course is a lot to expect of ourselves. course is a lot to expect of ourselves. course is a lot to expect of ourselves. I think most of us would be I think most of us would be I think most of us would be content to have skill and mastery of the content to have skill and mastery of the content to have skill and mastery of the things that we care about and you know, things that we care about and you know, things that we care about and you know, should we achieve virtuosity then should we achieve virtuosity then should we achieve virtuosity then wonderful. But one of the main points of wonderful. But one of the main points of wonderful. But one of the main points of today's discussion was to arm you with today's discussion was to arm you with today's discussion was to arm you with an understanding of neuroplasticity in an understanding of neuroplasticity in an understanding of neuroplasticity in the context of studying and learning, to the context of studying and learning, to the context of studying and learning, to really understand that so much of really understand that so much of really understand that so much of learning stably and consolidating learning stably and consolidating learning stably and consolidating information over time is to offset the information over time is to offset the information over time is to offset the forgetting process and that testing is forgetting process and that testing is forgetting process and that testing is not just a tool for evaluating our not just a tool for evaluating our not just a tool for evaluating our knowledge but rather a tool for knowledge but rather a tool for knowledge but rather a tool for evaluating and reinforcing and building evaluating and reinforcing and building evaluating and reinforcing and building our knowledge. Put differently, that our knowledge. Put differently, that our knowledge. Put differently, that testing is an excellent tool if not the testing is an excellent tool if not the testing is an excellent tool if not the best tool for studying. And I think best tool for studying. And I think best tool for studying. And I think that's an important reframe that others that's an important reframe that others that's an important reframe that others have brought about and that I really have brought about and that I really have brought about and that I really want to highlight, underline, and want to highlight, underline, and want to highlight, underline, and boldface during today's discussion. boldface during today's discussion. boldface during today's discussion. It's one that I certainly wish I had It's one that I certainly wish I had It's one that I certainly wish I had applied more in my educational applied more in my educational applied more in my educational trajectory and it's one that I plan to trajectory and it's one that I plan to trajectory and it's one that I plan to deploy further in my seeking out of new deploy further in my seeking out of new deploy further in my seeking out of new knowledge in terms of the podcast and knowledge in terms of the podcast and knowledge in terms of the podcast and neuroscience but in other areas of my neuroscience but in other areas of my neuroscience but in other areas of my life as well because from the existing life as well because from the existing life as well because from the existing literature and hopefully from the way it literature and hopefully from the way it literature and hopefully from the way it was presented to you today, was presented to you today, was presented to you today, you probably realize that it is near you probably realize that it is near you probably realize that it is near infinite if not infinite if not infinite if not infinite that we can apply testing as a tool for that we can apply testing as a tool for that we can apply testing as a tool for studying, self-testing, testing of studying, self-testing, testing of studying, self-testing, testing of others, using testing as a way to really others, using testing as a way to really others, using testing as a way to really probe what we know and don't know and to probe what we know and don't know and to probe what we know and don't know and to really offset that forgetting process. really offset that forgetting process. really offset that forgetting process. And in that sense, it is really nicely And in that sense, it is really nicely And in that sense, it is really nicely aligned with what we know about aligned with what we know about aligned with what we know about neuroplasticity and it's also something neuroplasticity and it's also something neuroplasticity and it's also something that we can use freely and that you can that we can use freely and that you can that we can use freely and that you can use covertly, use covertly, use covertly, that you can apply in your own seeking that you can apply in your own seeking that you can apply in your own seeking out of knowledge and new skills of all out of knowledge and new skills of all out of knowledge and new skills of all kinds, classroom or otherwise. If you're kinds, classroom or otherwise. If you're kinds, classroom or otherwise. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. Another terrific to support us. Another terrific to support us. Another terrific zero-cost way to support us is to follow zero-cost way to support us is to follow zero-cost way to support us is to follow the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. leave us up to a five-star review. leave us up to a five-star review. Please check out the sponsors mentioned Please check out the sponsors mentioned Please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's at the beginning and throughout today's at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. this podcast. this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments If you have questions for me or comments If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guest or topics about the podcast or guest or topics about the podcast or guest or topics that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an Operating It's entitled Protocols, an Operating It's entitled Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to everything from sleep to exercise, to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to stress control, protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Protocols, an Operating Manual for the Human Body. Human Body. Human Body. If you're not already following me on If you're not already following me on If you're not already following me on social media, I'm Huberman Lab on all social media, I'm Huberman Lab on all social media, I'm Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's social media platforms. So that's social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X formerly known as Twitter, Instagram, X formerly known as Twitter, Instagram, X formerly known as Twitter, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I cover science and all those platforms, I cover science and all those platforms, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which science-related tools, some of which science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the is distinct from the content on the is distinct from the content on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media channels. If you haven't already channels. If you haven't already channels. If you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, our Neural Network Newsletter, our Neural Network Newsletter, our Neural Network Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly Newsletter is a zero-cost monthly newsletter that has protocols, which are that has protocols, which are that has protocols, which are one-to-three-page PDFs that describe one-to-three-page PDFs that describe one-to-three-page PDFs that describe things like optimizing your sleep, how things like optimizing your sleep, how things like optimizing your sleep, how to optimize your dopamine, deliberate to optimize your dopamine, deliberate to optimize your dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational cold exposure. We have a foundational cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that describes fitness protocol that describes fitness protocol that describes resistance training sets and reps and resistance training sets and reps and resistance training sets and reps and all of that, as well as cardiovascular all of that, as well as cardiovascular all of that, as well as cardiovascular training that's supported by the training that's supported by the training that's supported by the scientific research. And we have scientific research. And we have scientific research. And we have protocols related to neuroplasticity and protocols related to neuroplasticity and protocols related to neuroplasticity and learning. Again, you can find all that learning. Again, you can find all that learning. Again, you can find all that at completely zero cost by going to at completely zero cost by going to at completely zero cost by going to hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu tab in hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu tab in hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu tab in the right corner, scroll down to the right corner, scroll down to the right corner, scroll down to newsletter. You put in your email and we newsletter. You put in your email and we newsletter. You put in your email and we do not share your email with anybody. do not share your email with anybody. do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about how to today's discussion all about how to today's discussion all about how to study and learn. And last, but certainly study and learn. And last, but certainly study and learn. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest not least, thank you for your interest not least, thank you for your interest in science.