If any goal that you achieved, whatever If any goal that you achieved, whatever If any goal that you achieved, whatever it is, taking a drug, eating a food, u it is, taking a drug, eating a food, u it is, taking a drug, eating a food, u getting a partner or whatnot, um if getting a partner or whatnot, um if getting a partner or whatnot, um if that was enough for you, right, then you that was enough for you, right, then you that was enough for you, right, then you wouldn't keep living. You want that wouldn't keep living. You want that wouldn't keep living. You want that system to keep tracking and once it gets system to keep tracking and once it gets system to keep tracking and once it gets to one place, you want it to have to one place, you want it to have to one place, you want it to have another place to which it could go. another place to which it could go. another place to which it could go. Otherwise, you wouldn't live. Welcome to Otherwise, you wouldn't live. Welcome to Otherwise, you wouldn't live. Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we the Huberman Lab podcast where we the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools discuss science and science-based tools discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Reed Montigue. Dr. Reed today is Dr. Reed Montigue. Dr. Reed today is Dr. Reed Montigue. Dr. Reed Montigue is the director of the center Montigue is the director of the center Montigue is the director of the center for human neuroscience research at for human neuroscience research at for human neuroscience research at Virginia Tech. He is also an expert in Virginia Tech. He is also an expert in Virginia Tech. He is also an expert in the science of motivation, the science of motivation, the science of motivation, decision-making, and learning, and a decision-making, and learning, and a decision-making, and learning, and a pioneer in developing methods to pioneer in developing methods to pioneer in developing methods to directly measure levels of dopamine and directly measure levels of dopamine and directly measure levels of dopamine and other neurom modulators in humans in other neurom modulators in humans in other neurom modulators in humans in real time. Today, you'll learn how real time. Today, you'll learn how real time. Today, you'll learn how dopamine really works. Not just to dopamine really works. Not just to dopamine really works. Not just to regulate your levels of motivation. regulate your levels of motivation. regulate your levels of motivation. We've all heard that before. But also to We've all heard that before. But also to We've all heard that before. But also to teach you things. Dopamine is involved teach you things. Dopamine is involved teach you things. Dopamine is involved in learning as well as persistence or in learning as well as persistence or in learning as well as persistence or lack of persistence. As Reed will teach lack of persistence. As Reed will teach lack of persistence. As Reed will teach you, most of what we hear and know about you, most of what we hear and know about you, most of what we hear and know about dopamine is based on the idea that dopamine is based on the idea that dopamine is based on the idea that dopamine levels go up or down depending dopamine levels go up or down depending dopamine levels go up or down depending on our levels of expectations and then on our levels of expectations and then on our levels of expectations and then what happens. But as he explains, most what happens. But as he explains, most what happens. But as he explains, most aspects of life, work, school, aspects of life, work, school, aspects of life, work, school, relationships, our pursuit of money, relationships, our pursuit of money, relationships, our pursuit of money, etc. involve multiple milestones. We etc. involve multiple milestones. We etc. involve multiple milestones. We work, we wait, then we get an outcome work, we wait, then we get an outcome work, we wait, then we get an outcome that in turn informs the thing we do that in turn informs the thing we do that in turn informs the thing we do next. Or maybe dopamine arrives suddenly next. Or maybe dopamine arrives suddenly next. Or maybe dopamine arrives suddenly with no work involved at all. In other with no work involved at all. In other with no work involved at all. In other words, dopamine levels are constantly words, dopamine levels are constantly words, dopamine levels are constantly changing and that shapes not just what changing and that shapes not just what changing and that shapes not just what you do now, but how you think about your you do now, but how you think about your you do now, but how you think about your recent past and what you will do next. recent past and what you will do next. recent past and what you will do next. So when we say dopamine is involved in So when we say dopamine is involved in So when we say dopamine is involved in learning, today you are going to realize learning, today you are going to realize learning, today you are going to realize that dopamine is teaching you how to that dopamine is teaching you how to that dopamine is teaching you how to adjust your behavior. We of course adjust your behavior. We of course adjust your behavior. We of course discuss how this knowledge can be discuss how this knowledge can be discuss how this knowledge can be leveraged for better motivation and leveraged for better motivation and leveraged for better motivation and decision-making, even better social decision-making, even better social decision-making, even better social interactions. And we also discuss interactions. And we also discuss interactions. And we also discuss serotonin and how dopamine and serotonin and how dopamine and serotonin and how dopamine and serotonin work in sort of seessaw fashion and how work in sort of seessaw fashion and how work in sort of seessaw fashion and how serotonin in particular teaches you serotonin in particular teaches you serotonin in particular teaches you about unwanted outcomes. We also have a about unwanted outcomes. We also have a about unwanted outcomes. We also have a discussion about SSRIs that you're going discussion about SSRIs that you're going discussion about SSRIs that you're going to find fascinating. As Reed points out, to find fascinating. As Reed points out, to find fascinating. As Reed points out, SSRIs increase levels of serotonin, but SSRIs increase levels of serotonin, but SSRIs increase levels of serotonin, but often that serotonin gets used at the often that serotonin gets used at the often that serotonin gets used at the dopamine synapses to reduce the dopamine synapses to reduce the dopamine synapses to reduce the rewarding properties of dopamine. So rewarding properties of dopamine. So rewarding properties of dopamine. So today's discussion about dopamine and today's discussion about dopamine and today's discussion about dopamine and serotonin is going to be vastly serotonin is going to be vastly serotonin is going to be vastly different than any that you've heard or different than any that you've heard or different than any that you've heard or read about elsewhere. You're going to read about elsewhere. You're going to read about elsewhere. You're going to learn how those neurom modulators work, learn how those neurom modulators work, learn how those neurom modulators work, and you're going to learn how they and you're going to learn how they and you're going to learn how they impact your everyday life and impact your everyday life and impact your everyday life and decision-making. As we all know, decision-making. As we all know, decision-making. As we all know, discussions about dopamine and serotonin discussions about dopamine and serotonin discussions about dopamine and serotonin are everywhere nowadays. But in today's are everywhere nowadays. But in today's are everywhere nowadays. But in today's episode, you're going to learn from a episode, you're going to learn from a episode, you're going to learn from a top expert in the field what these top expert in the field what these top expert in the field what these molecules truly do. And that's going to molecules truly do. And that's going to molecules truly do. And that's going to help you better leverage your efforts, help you better leverage your efforts, help you better leverage your efforts, introduce what we call deliberate introduce what we call deliberate introduce what we call deliberate delays, and how to use tools like AI to delays, and how to use tools like AI to delays, and how to use tools like AI to improve your levels of motivation and improve your levels of motivation and improve your levels of motivation and your ability to learn through your ability to learn through your ability to learn through neuroplasticity. Before we begin, I'd neuroplasticity. Before we begin, I'd neuroplasticity. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost my desire and effort to bring zerocost my desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer information about science to consumer information about science to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Dr. for And now for my discussion with Dr. for And now for my discussion with Dr. for Reed Montigue. Dr. Reed Montigue, great Reed Montigue. Dr. Reed Montigue, great Reed Montigue. Dr. Reed Montigue, great to see you after all these 15 years. to see you after all these 15 years. to see you after all these 15 years. &gt;&gt; 15 years. Um, you turned us down for a &gt;&gt; 15 years. Um, you turned us down for a &gt;&gt; 15 years. Um, you turned us down for a job offer then. job offer then. job offer then. &gt;&gt; I did. Um, but we both turned out okay. &gt;&gt; I did. Um, but we both turned out okay. &gt;&gt; I did. Um, but we both turned out okay. So, &gt;&gt; well, I hope so. We'll see. &gt;&gt; well, I hope so. We'll see. &gt;&gt; well, I hope so. We'll see. &gt;&gt; Well, you certainly turned out okay and &gt;&gt; Well, you certainly turned out okay and &gt;&gt; Well, you certainly turned out okay and uh you look great. It's always great to uh you look great. It's always great to uh you look great. It's always great to see a colleague looking so fit and see a colleague looking so fit and see a colleague looking so fit and healthy who also raised five children healthy who also raised five children healthy who also raised five children successfully and uh all those things. successfully and uh all those things. successfully and uh all those things. We'll talk a little bit about your life We'll talk a little bit about your life We'll talk a little bit about your life and maybe uh your athletic life a little and maybe uh your athletic life a little and maybe uh your athletic life a little bit later, but I want to talk about bit later, but I want to talk about bit later, but I want to talk about dopamine. The world is obsessed with dopamine. The world is obsessed with dopamine. The world is obsessed with dopamine. Now, dopamine. Now, dopamine. Now, until very recently, people thought until very recently, people thought until very recently, people thought about dopamine as a reward. Now, slowly, about dopamine as a reward. Now, slowly, about dopamine as a reward. Now, slowly, people are starting to understand that people are starting to understand that people are starting to understand that dopamine is involved with things other dopamine is involved with things other dopamine is involved with things other than feeling good um such as motivation, than feeling good um such as motivation, than feeling good um such as motivation, movement, etc. How do you think about movement, etc. How do you think about movement, etc. How do you think about dopamine the neurom modulator and then dopamine the neurom modulator and then dopamine the neurom modulator and then we'll move into the context in which you we'll move into the context in which you we'll move into the context in which you study dopamine but when somebody says study dopamine but when somebody says study dopamine but when somebody says what does dopamine do how do you think what does dopamine do how do you think what does dopamine do how do you think and respond to that question and respond to that question and respond to that question &gt;&gt; well it used to be that dopamine was &gt;&gt; well it used to be that dopamine was &gt;&gt; well it used to be that dopamine was thought to equal pleasure dopamine goes thought to equal pleasure dopamine goes thought to equal pleasure dopamine goes up you feel good dopamine goes down you up you feel good dopamine goes down you up you feel good dopamine goes down you feel less good okay there's been an feel less good okay there's been an feel less good okay there's been an explosion of work on it most of the new explosion of work on it most of the new explosion of work on it most of the new work that's not psychological has been work that's not psychological has been work that's not psychological has been out of the artificial intelligence world out of the artificial intelligence world out of the artificial intelligence world what's now called artificial what's now called artificial what's now called artificial intelligence. Um it's very clearly a intelligence. Um it's very clearly a intelligence. Um it's very clearly a learning signal number one. So dopamine learning signal number one. So dopamine learning signal number one. So dopamine fluctuations high and low control fluctuations high and low control fluctuations high and low control learning. It's also playing multiple learning. It's also playing multiple learning. It's also playing multiple roles. It plays a role in motivation and roles. It plays a role in motivation and roles. It plays a role in motivation and it may also play a role in the way you it may also play a role in the way you it may also play a role in the way you feel. Okay. It's it's less well feel. Okay. It's it's less well feel. Okay. It's it's less well understood how the sort of mechanics of understood how the sort of mechanics of understood how the sort of mechanics of what dopamine does for changing your what dopamine does for changing your what dopamine does for changing your nervous system relates to your feeling nervous system relates to your feeling nervous system relates to your feeling state. you can have a feeling state state. you can have a feeling state state. you can have a feeling state that's good and see things um that don't that's good and see things um that don't that's good and see things um that don't correlate with dopamine being the cause correlate with dopamine being the cause correlate with dopamine being the cause of it. of it. of it. &gt;&gt; Uh let's talk about dopamine in the &gt;&gt; Uh let's talk about dopamine in the &gt;&gt; Uh let's talk about dopamine in the context of learning because that's context of learning because that's context of learning because that's something that I think most people don't something that I think most people don't something that I think most people don't associate with dopamine. Um what are a associate with dopamine. Um what are a associate with dopamine. Um what are a few examples of what we know about few examples of what we know about few examples of what we know about dopamine and its role in learning? dopamine and its role in learning? dopamine and its role in learning? &gt;&gt; That's a world I can't even summarize in &gt;&gt; That's a world I can't even summarize in &gt;&gt; That's a world I can't even summarize in a quick way. Uh people that work on a quick way. Uh people that work on a quick way. Uh people that work on rodents now will um take a genetically rodents now will um take a genetically rodents now will um take a genetically modified rodent and they will study the modified rodent and they will study the modified rodent and they will study the way in which dopamine release correlates way in which dopamine release correlates way in which dopamine release correlates with something the animal is learning. with something the animal is learning. with something the animal is learning. The animal may learn to turn left when The animal may learn to turn left when The animal may learn to turn left when it sees a light. It may learn to run it sees a light. It may learn to run it sees a light. It may learn to run toward food. It may learn to run down a toward food. It may learn to run down a toward food. It may learn to run down a maze. All kinds of learning tasks maze. All kinds of learning tasks maze. All kinds of learning tasks associated with the animal are associated with the animal are associated with the animal are associated with dopamine fluctuations in associated with dopamine fluctuations in associated with dopamine fluctuations in your brain. Now these aren't your brain. Now these aren't your brain. Now these aren't global. They're all over the place, but global. They're all over the place, but global. They're all over the place, but there are different kinds of signals there are different kinds of signals there are different kinds of signals that you can find in different spots in that you can find in different spots in that you can find in different spots in your brain. Um, and we've begun to your brain. Um, and we've begun to your brain. Um, and we've begun to understand dopamine as a central player understand dopamine as a central player understand dopamine as a central player in the algorithms that your brain runs. in the algorithms that your brain runs. in the algorithms that your brain runs. And that's where people like me, um, and And that's where people like me, um, and And that's where people like me, um, and people like me, computational people like me, computational people like me, computational neuroscientists, have made a connection. neuroscientists, have made a connection. neuroscientists, have made a connection. And that's the connection between the And that's the connection between the And that's the connection between the kinds of learning rules and learning kinds of learning rules and learning kinds of learning rules and learning procedures that are installed in your procedures that are installed in your procedures that are installed in your brain and installed in the brain of brain and installed in the brain of brain and installed in the brain of every mobile creature on the planet and every mobile creature on the planet and every mobile creature on the planet and dopamine fluctuations. So that's a dopamine fluctuations. So that's a dopamine fluctuations. So that's a that's a strong connection that has been that's a strong connection that has been that's a strong connection that has been worked out over the last 30 years. The worked out over the last 30 years. The worked out over the last 30 years. The algorithms are well understood. What algorithms are well understood. What algorithms are well understood. What wasn't well understood 30 years ago was wasn't well understood 30 years ago was wasn't well understood 30 years ago was the kind of remarkable things those same the kind of remarkable things those same the kind of remarkable things those same algorithms can learn. I'll come back algorithms can learn. I'll come back algorithms can learn. I'll come back &gt;&gt; to that. I mean, there have been a bunch &gt;&gt; to that. I mean, there have been a bunch &gt;&gt; to that. I mean, there have been a bunch of modern breakthroughs in what's called of modern breakthroughs in what's called of modern breakthroughs in what's called reinforcement learning. And reinforcement learning. And reinforcement learning. And reinforcement learning's main biology reinforcement learning's main biology reinforcement learning's main biology partner is dopamine. It's the first big partner is dopamine. It's the first big partner is dopamine. It's the first big hit. Now, you know, it's a area of hit. Now, you know, it's a area of hit. Now, you know, it's a area of science. And so, what happens when you science. And so, what happens when you science. And so, what happens when you have a big finding that looks like it have a big finding that looks like it have a big finding that looks like it explains a lot of things? Well, you explains a lot of things? Well, you explains a lot of things? Well, you know, people come rushing in to sort of know, people come rushing in to sort of know, people come rushing in to sort of beat it up. That's their job. That's beat it up. That's their job. That's beat it up. That's their job. That's their job to hack away. Oh, is it really their job to hack away. Oh, is it really their job to hack away. Oh, is it really this? Does it work the same in this this? Does it work the same in this this? Does it work the same in this context and that context? Um but I think context and that context? Um but I think context and that context? Um but I think the um description of what dopamine does the um description of what dopamine does the um description of what dopamine does as a learning rule is pretty much true. as a learning rule is pretty much true. as a learning rule is pretty much true. Let me give you an example. Um so Let me give you an example. Um so Let me give you an example. Um so psychologists since the time of Pavlov psychologists since the time of Pavlov psychologists since the time of Pavlov have understood what it means for an have understood what it means for an have understood what it means for an animal to generate a prediction and to animal to generate a prediction and to animal to generate a prediction and to compare it to an outcome. Okay, let compare it to an outcome. Okay, let compare it to an outcome. Okay, let me the example is so today's Wednesday. me the example is so today's Wednesday. me the example is so today's Wednesday. Suppose and this is Rich Sutton's Suppose and this is Rich Sutton's Suppose and this is Rich Sutton's example. Suppose I make a prediction example. Suppose I make a prediction example. Suppose I make a prediction today that it's going to rain two inches today that it's going to rain two inches today that it's going to rain two inches on Saturday. Okay. Now, we're going to on Saturday. Okay. Now, we're going to on Saturday. Okay. Now, we're going to fast forward to tomorrow and I'm going fast forward to tomorrow and I'm going fast forward to tomorrow and I'm going to update my prediction because I have to update my prediction because I have to update my prediction because I have new knowledge and it's going to say I'm new knowledge and it's going to say I'm new knowledge and it's going to say I'm it's going to rain 10 inches on it's going to rain 10 inches on it's going to rain 10 inches on Saturday. Okay. There's been no Saturday. Okay. There's been no Saturday. Okay. There's been no reinforcing feedback. It hasn't rained reinforcing feedback. It hasn't rained reinforcing feedback. It hasn't rained yet because it's now Saturday yet. I'm yet because it's now Saturday yet. I'm yet because it's now Saturday yet. I'm making a prediction about Saturday. But making a prediction about Saturday. But making a prediction about Saturday. But there's a difference between this there's a difference between this there's a difference between this expectation and that expectation. expectation and that expectation. expectation and that expectation. Those differences Those differences Those differences are encoded by dopamine. It's called a are encoded by dopamine. It's called a are encoded by dopamine. It's called a the temporal difference error. Um, and the temporal difference error. Um, and the temporal difference error. Um, and dopamine seems to code that before you dopamine seems to code that before you dopamine seems to code that before you ever get to the terminal return. Imagine ever get to the terminal return. Imagine ever get to the terminal return. Imagine that you were playing a game like that you were playing a game like that you were playing a game like checkers. You make a move in the game checkers. You make a move in the game checkers. You make a move in the game and you might make, I don't know, 40 and you might make, I don't know, 40 and you might make, I don't know, 40 moves before you win the game. And moves before you win the game. And moves before you win the game. And suppose winning the game is the reward. suppose winning the game is the reward. suppose winning the game is the reward. Well, you may have some prediction. Your Well, you may have some prediction. Your Well, you may have some prediction. Your brain makes a prediction when you play brain makes a prediction when you play brain makes a prediction when you play board position to board position that board position to board position that board position to board position that you're going to win the game. And that's you're going to win the game. And that's you're going to win the game. And that's a fluctuating quantity. That's a fluctuating quantity. That's a fluctuating quantity. That's a different kind of learning rule. The different kind of learning rule. The different kind of learning rule. The kind of learning rule that psychologists kind of learning rule that psychologists kind of learning rule that psychologists talk about that you think about in your talk about that you think about in your talk about that you think about in your everyday life is it's going to rain two everyday life is it's going to rain two everyday life is it's going to rain two inches today. Okay, how much did it inches today. Okay, how much did it inches today. Okay, how much did it rain? Okay, so that's a comparison rain? Okay, so that's a comparison rain? Okay, so that's a comparison between an outcome and your expectation. between an outcome and your expectation. between an outcome and your expectation. What Rich Sutton and Andy Barto did was What Rich Sutton and Andy Barto did was What Rich Sutton and Andy Barto did was said, well, what you really want to do said, well, what you really want to do said, well, what you really want to do is you want to stick between there your is you want to stick between there your is you want to stick between there your next prediction. So you want successive next prediction. So you want successive next prediction. So you want successive predictions. Okay. And why is that a predictions. Okay. And why is that a predictions. Okay. And why is that a good model for animals? Well, because if good model for animals? Well, because if good model for animals? Well, because if you're an animal and you're wandering you're an animal and you're wandering you're an animal and you're wandering around foraging, around foraging, around foraging, um, mainly you're not finding anything. um, mainly you're not finding anything. um, mainly you're not finding anything. You're going from position to position You're going from position to position You're going from position to position to position to position position, but to position to position position, but to position to position position, but you're learning and dopamine is encoding you're learning and dopamine is encoding you're learning and dopamine is encoding those signals. I'm so glad you said the those signals. I'm so glad you said the those signals. I'm so glad you said the word foraging because I want to hover on word foraging because I want to hover on word foraging because I want to hover on the theme of foraging uh, in the context the theme of foraging uh, in the context the theme of foraging uh, in the context of human decision-m and learning and of human decision-m and learning and of human decision-m and learning and behavior. So to stay with uh your behavior. So to stay with uh your behavior. So to stay with uh your description, Saturday rolls around. description, Saturday rolls around. description, Saturday rolls around. Let's say it doesn't rain. Let's say the Let's say it doesn't rain. Let's say the Let's say it doesn't rain. Let's say the person doesn't want it to rain. They're person doesn't want it to rain. They're person doesn't want it to rain. They're not a farmer. Uh they want to go to the not a farmer. Uh they want to go to the not a farmer. Uh they want to go to the beach on Saturday. beach on Saturday. beach on Saturday. &gt;&gt; Now we can talk about reward prediction &gt;&gt; Now we can talk about reward prediction &gt;&gt; Now we can talk about reward prediction error, right? The difference between the error, right? The difference between the error, right? The difference between the expectation when it actually happens. expectation when it actually happens. expectation when it actually happens. &gt;&gt; Okay, let me let me interrupt and &gt;&gt; Okay, let me let me interrupt and &gt;&gt; Okay, let me let me interrupt and correct that a bit. The reward correct that a bit. The reward correct that a bit. The reward prediction error that people talk about prediction error that people talk about prediction error that people talk about dopamine representing is the prediction dopamine representing is the prediction dopamine representing is the prediction error that you get for every single step error that you get for every single step error that you get for every single step whether or not you've received reward. whether or not you've received reward. whether or not you've received reward. That's kind of diffused out in the That's kind of diffused out in the That's kind of diffused out in the psychology literature as you have an psychology literature as you have an psychology literature as you have an expectation and you have a reward. expectation and you have a reward. expectation and you have a reward. &gt;&gt; It may be positive, negative or zero. &gt;&gt; It may be positive, negative or zero. &gt;&gt; It may be positive, negative or zero. &gt;&gt; And what you do is you make an error &gt;&gt; And what you do is you make an error &gt;&gt; And what you do is you make an error there. &gt;&gt; That was understood in the 60s and 70s. &gt;&gt; That was understood in the 60s and 70s. &gt;&gt; That was understood in the 60s and 70s. It's called the Rcoro Wagner rule um It's called the Rcoro Wagner rule um It's called the Rcoro Wagner rule um 1972. That's how the system should learn. The That's how the system should learn. The That's how the system should learn. The fact is though that doesn't model fact is though that doesn't model fact is though that doesn't model reality very well. Reality doesn't give reality very well. Reality doesn't give reality very well. Reality doesn't give you feedback like that every time. you feedback like that every time. you feedback like that every time. Reality often gives you long stretches Reality often gives you long stretches Reality often gives you long stretches of nothing. The insight I think of nothing. The insight I think of nothing. The insight I think of Sutton and Barto in their algorithm was Sutton and Barto in their algorithm was Sutton and Barto in their algorithm was well a better algorithm for learning well a better algorithm for learning well a better algorithm for learning continuously is to take successive continuously is to take successive continuously is to take successive predictions and to say that's a learning predictions and to say that's a learning predictions and to say that's a learning rule. Obviously it's a learning rule of rule. Obviously it's a learning rule of rule. Obviously it's a learning rule of the outcome when you get an outcome when the outcome when you get an outcome when the outcome when you get an outcome when it's not zero. But it's successive it's not zero. But it's successive it's not zero. But it's successive predictions. It's like why that should predictions. It's like why that should predictions. It's like why that should be such a deep idea is not clear to me. be such a deep idea is not clear to me. be such a deep idea is not clear to me. What is clear to me from data is an What is clear to me from data is an What is clear to me from data is an algorithm based on that is installed in algorithm based on that is installed in algorithm based on that is installed in Bbrains, C slug brains all the way up to human C slug brains all the way up to human C slug brains all the way up to human brains. There are these temporal brains. There are these temporal brains. There are these temporal difference reward prediction errors. And um so I reward prediction errors. And um so I reward prediction errors. And um so I guess I'm sitting here trying to guess I'm sitting here trying to guess I'm sitting here trying to backwash the old version of it which is backwash the old version of it which is backwash the old version of it which is people say in a kind of uh vernacular people say in a kind of uh vernacular people say in a kind of uh vernacular way oh it's the difference between your way oh it's the difference between your way oh it's the difference between your expectations and the reward. Um expectations and the reward. Um expectations and the reward. Um yes when that happens but most of the yes when that happens but most of the yes when that happens but most of the time that's not happening in which case time that's not happening in which case time that's not happening in which case it's the it's the ongoing difference it's the it's the ongoing difference it's the it's the ongoing difference between your expectation and your next between your expectation and your next between your expectation and your next expectation. So it's fluctuations in expectation. So it's fluctuations in expectation. So it's fluctuations in your expectation as you move through the your expectation as you move through the your expectation as you move through the world. the Deep Mind guys in London who beat the Deep Mind guys in London who beat the Deep Mind guys in London who beat the world go playing champion and made the world go playing champion and made the world go playing champion and made Alpha Fold and won Nobel prizes and I Alpha Fold and won Nobel prizes and I Alpha Fold and won Nobel prizes and I mean they're starting in 2015 they just mean they're starting in 2015 they just mean they're starting in 2015 they just had this unbelievable series of hits. had this unbelievable series of hits. had this unbelievable series of hits. They used the Sutton and Barto They used the Sutton and Barto They used the Sutton and Barto algorithm. They trained those systems algorithm. They trained those systems algorithm. They trained those systems where uh people would make the players where uh people would make the players where uh people would make the players computer players would make hundreds of computer players would make hundreds of computer players would make hundreds of board position changes before you ever board position changes before you ever board position changes before you ever got to the end of the game. and update got to the end of the game. and update got to the end of the game. and update and learn based on that. They threw and learn based on that. They threw and learn based on that. They threw other tricks into I'm not going to get other tricks into I'm not going to get other tricks into I'm not going to get technical about it. So there's a technical about it. So there's a technical about it. So there's a difference. It's not just expectation difference. It's not just expectation difference. It's not just expectation and outcome. It's expectation next and outcome. It's expectation next and outcome. It's expectation next expectation current outcome current outcome current outcome &gt;&gt; and that is what rolls through and that &gt;&gt; and that is what rolls through and that &gt;&gt; and that is what rolls through and that is what we see installed in we have a is what we see installed in we have a is what we see installed in we have a paper uh this week coming out on paper uh this week coming out on paper uh this week coming out on honeybee brains where you can show the honeybee brains where you can show the honeybee brains where you can show the same sorts of learning rules in honeybee same sorts of learning rules in honeybee same sorts of learning rules in honeybee brains. uh in honeybee brains it's brains. uh in honeybee brains it's brains. uh in honeybee brains it's probably octopamine not dopamine. Um but probably octopamine not dopamine. Um but probably octopamine not dopamine. Um but the other thing to say about dopamine is the other thing to say about dopamine is the other thing to say about dopamine is it's not just dopamine. It's very clear it's not just dopamine. It's very clear it's not just dopamine. It's very clear that lots of neurom modulators like that lots of neurom modulators like that lots of neurom modulators like that are fluctuating with learning and are fluctuating with learning and are fluctuating with learning and motivation and probably the whole motivation and probably the whole motivation and probably the whole symphony of them that creates motivation symphony of them that creates motivation symphony of them that creates motivation states and things like that. states and things like that. states and things like that. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break to acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. acknowledge one of our sponsors, David. David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any David makes protein bars unlike any other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, other. Their newest bar, the Bronze Bar, has 20 grams of protein, only 150 has 20 grams of protein, only 150 has 20 grams of protein, only 150 calories, and zero grams of sugar. I calories, and zero grams of sugar. I calories, and zero grams of sugar. I have to say, these are the best tasting have to say, these are the best tasting have to say, these are the best tasting protein bars I've ever had, and I've protein bars I've ever had, and I've protein bars I've ever had, and I've tried a lot of protein bars over the tried a lot of protein bars over the tried a lot of protein bars over the years. These new David bars have a years. These new David bars have a years. These new David bars have a marshmallow base and they're covered in marshmallow base and they're covered in marshmallow base and they're covered in chocolate coating and they're absolutely chocolate coating and they're absolutely chocolate coating and they're absolutely incredible. I of course eat regular incredible. I of course eat regular incredible. I of course eat regular whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, whole foods. I eat meat, chicken, fish, eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I eggs, fruits, vegetables, etc. But I also make it a point to eat one or two also make it a point to eat one or two also make it a point to eat one or two David bars per day as a snack, which David bars per day as a snack, which David bars per day as a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goal of makes it easy to hit my protein goal of makes it easy to hit my protein goal of 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight. And that allows me to take in weight. And that allows me to take in weight. And that allows me to take in the protein I need without consuming the protein I need without consuming the protein I need without consuming excess calories. I love all the David excess calories. I love all the David excess calories. I love all the David Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie Bronze Bar flavors, including cookie dough, caramel chocolate, double dough, caramel chocolate, double dough, caramel chocolate, double chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They chocolate, peanut butter chocolate. They all actually taste like candy bars. all actually taste like candy bars. all actually taste like candy bars. Again, they're amazing. But again, they Again, they're amazing. But again, they Again, they're amazing. But again, they have no sugar and they have 20 gram of have no sugar and they have 20 gram of have no sugar and they have 20 gram of protein with just 150 calories. If you'd protein with just 150 calories. If you'd protein with just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to like to try David, you can go to like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal Right now, David is offering a deal where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get where if you buy four cartons, you get the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also the fifth carton for free. You can also find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such find David on Amazon or in stores such as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, as Target, Walmart, and Kroger. Again, to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to get the fifth carton for free, go to davidproin.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by Today's episode is also brought to us by JWV. JWV makes medical grade red light JWV. JWV makes medical grade red light JWV. JWV makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near infrared sunlight, red light and near infrared sunlight, red light and near infrared light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellar and organ health, aspects of cellar and organ health, aspects of cellar and organ health, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. function, and improving vision itself. What sets tube lights apart and why What sets tube lights apart and why What sets tube lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and near wavelengths of red light and near wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to trigger infrared light in combination to trigger infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. the optimal cellar adaptations. the optimal cellar adaptations. Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body Personally, I use the JWV whole body panel about three to four times a week panel about three to four times a week panel about three to four times a week and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at and I use the JWV handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to home and when I travel. If you'd like to try JWV, you can go to JV spelled try JWV, you can go to JV spelled try JWV, you can go to JV spelled jvv.com/huberman. JWV is offering an exclusive discount to JWV is offering an exclusive discount to JWV is offering an exclusive discount to all Hubberman Lab listeners with up to all Hubberman Lab listeners with up to all Hubberman Lab listeners with up to $400 off JW products. Again, that's JWV $400 off JW products. Again, that's JWV $400 off JW products. Again, that's JWV spelled JV.com/huberman spelled JV.com/huberman spelled JV.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. Okay. So, I want to get up to $400 off. Okay. So, I want to get up to $400 off. Okay. So, I want to pin up a few rules uh so that um to pin up a few rules uh so that um to pin up a few rules uh so that um people can move along this because I people can move along this because I people can move along this because I think um most people and including me think um most people and including me think um most people and including me who learned about dopamine through you who learned about dopamine through you who learned about dopamine through you know neuroscience textbooks and lectures know neuroscience textbooks and lectures know neuroscience textbooks and lectures and um papers and so forth um have been and um papers and so forth um have been and um papers and so forth um have been fed this overly simplistic model of fed this overly simplistic model of fed this overly simplistic model of expectation versus reward or lack of expectation versus reward or lack of expectation versus reward or lack of reward expectation outcome. So, just to reward expectation outcome. So, just to reward expectation outcome. So, just to remind people, dopamine reward remind people, dopamine reward remind people, dopamine reward prediction error. If you, you know, the prediction error. If you, you know, the prediction error. If you, you know, the dopamine system loves novelty, dopamine system loves novelty, dopamine system loves novelty, especially positive novelty, right? You especially positive novelty, right? You especially positive novelty, right? You don't think you're going to have a great don't think you're going to have a great don't think you're going to have a great meal someplace that turns out to be meal someplace that turns out to be meal someplace that turns out to be spectacular versus you're really spectacular versus you're really spectacular versus you're really expecting a place to be great. Your expecting a place to be great. Your expecting a place to be great. Your friend says it's terrific and then it's friend says it's terrific and then it's friend says it's terrific and then it's okay. And you get dopamine um codes for okay. And you get dopamine um codes for okay. And you get dopamine um codes for a lot of the expectation reward a lot of the expectation reward a lot of the expectation reward relationship. What you're telling us is relationship. What you're telling us is relationship. What you're telling us is that in most scenarios, it's more that in most scenarios, it's more that in most scenarios, it's more interesting than that. there's an interesting than that. there's an interesting than that. there's an updating of expectation before the final updating of expectation before the final updating of expectation before the final answer comes in and dopamine is coding answer comes in and dopamine is coding answer comes in and dopamine is coding for that. I'd like to um take this word for that. I'd like to um take this word for that. I'd like to um take this word foraging and apply it to a real world foraging and apply it to a real world foraging and apply it to a real world scenario in humans and then maybe we can scenario in humans and then maybe we can scenario in humans and then maybe we can uh use a combination of what's known and uh use a combination of what's known and uh use a combination of what's known and you'll also tell us where uh it might be you'll also tell us where uh it might be you'll also tell us where uh it might be conjecture to kind of paint this picture conjecture to kind of paint this picture conjecture to kind of paint this picture uh in an intuitive way for people. I uh in an intuitive way for people. I uh in an intuitive way for people. I have a friend um and she's on the dating have a friend um and she's on the dating have a friend um and she's on the dating market now. She will occasionally call market now. She will occasionally call market now. She will occasionally call me and ask me, you know, like, "How do I me and ask me, you know, like, "How do I me and ask me, you know, like, "How do I decode this text message or this decode this text message or this decode this text message or this interaction?" I try and offer my interaction?" I try and offer my interaction?" I try and offer my support, uh, where I can. Um, but the support, uh, where I can. Um, but the support, uh, where I can. Um, but the conversations often go something like conversations often go something like conversations often go something like this. Met so- and so. Uh, they seem this. Met so- and so. Uh, they seem this. Met so- and so. Uh, they seem really great. They seem really busy and really great. They seem really busy and really great. They seem really busy and they set a plan for like a month from they set a plan for like a month from they set a plan for like a month from now. Is that weird? You're like, "All now. Is that weird? You're like, "All now. Is that weird? You're like, "All right. Well, you know," and I give my right. Well, you know," and I give my right. Well, you know," and I give my interpretation. I say, "Well, you know, interpretation. I say, "Well, you know, interpretation. I say, "Well, you know, he's nice. They've set a concrete plan. he's nice. They've set a concrete plan. he's nice. They've set a concrete plan. You know, this and that. Like person's You know, this and that. Like person's You know, this and that. Like person's busy, you know, this and that." Um, I busy, you know, this and that." Um, I busy, you know, this and that." Um, I also hear the, "Hey, you know, met also hear the, "Hey, you know, met also hear the, "Hey, you know, met someone, they're really, really someone, they're really, really someone, they're really, really terrific." And I say, "Hey, listen. The terrific." And I say, "Hey, listen. The terrific." And I say, "Hey, listen. The last time you said this, like two weeks last time you said this, like two weeks last time you said this, like two weeks later, it was how do I get out of seeing later, it was how do I get out of seeing later, it was how do I get out of seeing this person again?" So, like, go slow. this person again?" So, like, go slow. this person again?" So, like, go slow. Like, collect data slowly. And I'm not Like, collect data slowly. And I'm not Like, collect data slowly. And I'm not going to say I'm always right, but going to say I'm always right, but going to say I'm always right, but almost inevitably it's three days later almost inevitably it's three days later almost inevitably it's three days later or 3 weeks later it's like, "Oh my or 3 weeks later it's like, "Oh my or 3 weeks later it's like, "Oh my goodness, how do I get out of this goodness, how do I get out of this goodness, how do I get out of this thing?" Right? So, in some sense, it's thing?" Right? So, in some sense, it's thing?" Right? So, in some sense, it's what you're saying, right? There's a what you're saying, right? There's a what you're saying, right? There's a foraging for a healthy thing in life, a foraging for a healthy thing in life, a foraging for a healthy thing in life, a mate. This has happened since the mate. This has happened since the mate. This has happened since the beginning of time, although not with beginning of time, although not with beginning of time, although not with apps. Um there's updating of expectation apps. Um there's updating of expectation apps. Um there's updating of expectation based on experience and communication. based on experience and communication. based on experience and communication. And I think this is a really beautiful And I think this is a really beautiful And I think this is a really beautiful example of foraging in the context of example of foraging in the context of example of foraging in the context of updating expectations because and one updating expectations because and one updating expectations because and one could argue what is the final reward. Is could argue what is the final reward. Is could argue what is the final reward. Is it marriage? Is it whatever? Okay, it marriage? Is it whatever? Okay, it marriage? Is it whatever? Okay, that's subjective. But I think we that's subjective. But I think we that's subjective. But I think we all can intuitively understand this all can intuitively understand this all can intuitively understand this example &gt;&gt; um either by experience or by &gt;&gt; um either by experience or by &gt;&gt; um either by experience or by observation. So for someone, this person who gets So for someone, this person who gets So for someone, this person who gets excited about someone they just met, excited about someone they just met, excited about someone they just met, right? Then meets them and is right? Then meets them and is right? Then meets them and is increasingly excited, but it's unclear increasingly excited, but it's unclear increasingly excited, but it's unclear where it's going to go, then finds out where it's going to go, then finds out where it's going to go, then finds out as life goes that, oh, they're not as life goes that, oh, they're not as life goes that, oh, they're not perfect. There's this thing. Can I live perfect. There's this thing. Can I live perfect. There's this thing. Can I live with that? So there the I think of this with that? So there the I think of this with that? So there the I think of this as like a sawtooth of dopamine going as like a sawtooth of dopamine going as like a sawtooth of dopamine going through their system. Is that statement through their system. Is that statement through their system. Is that statement accurate that dopamine and other neurom accurate that dopamine and other neurom accurate that dopamine and other neurom modulators are encoding the sort of modulators are encoding the sort of modulators are encoding the sort of expectation of success or lack of expectation of success or lack of expectation of success or lack of success without actually knowing what success without actually knowing what success without actually knowing what the final end point is? Exactly that and the final end point is? Exactly that and the final end point is? Exactly that and that's the insight of Sutton and Barto that's the insight of Sutton and Barto that's the insight of Sutton and Barto and when I first heard about this I and when I first heard about this I and when I first heard about this I learned about it from Peter Diane when I learned about it from Peter Diane when I learned about it from Peter Diane when I was a posttock and we both arrived at was a posttock and we both arrived at was a posttock and we both arrived at the Sulk Institute together something the Sulk Institute together something the Sulk Institute together something about it captured me because all of a about it captured me because all of a about it captured me because all of a sudden it's not this um okay you sudden it's not this um okay you sudden it's not this um okay you understand expectation and outcome I understand expectation and outcome I understand expectation and outcome I mean businesses understand that yeah mean businesses understand that yeah mean businesses understand that yeah you're disappointed you expected to have you're disappointed you expected to have you're disappointed you expected to have a quarterly return of X and you had Why? a quarterly return of X and you had Why? a quarterly return of X and you had Why? That's less. You expected it to be low. That's less. You expected it to be low. That's less. You expected it to be low. It was more. That's But that's really It was more. That's But that's really It was more. That's But that's really rare. I studied hard. I wanted an A. I rare. I studied hard. I wanted an A. I rare. I studied hard. I wanted an A. I got an A minus. got an A minus. got an A minus. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But the reality is embedded in &gt;&gt; Yeah. But the reality is embedded in &gt;&gt; Yeah. But the reality is embedded in this little simple continuous learning this little simple continuous learning this little simple continuous learning update rule. Um uh it's called temporal update rule. Um uh it's called temporal update rule. Um uh it's called temporal difference reinforcement learning. Um is difference reinforcement learning. Um is difference reinforcement learning. Um is the fact that in the world these the fact that in the world these the fact that in the world these expectations are going through their own expectations are going through their own expectations are going through their own trajectory. All right. And that's what trajectory. All right. And that's what trajectory. All right. And that's what dopamine is coding for. Any learning dopamine is coding for. Any learning dopamine is coding for. Any learning rule should code for the surprising rule should code for the surprising rule should code for the surprising outcome. &gt;&gt; You you have an expectation for an &gt;&gt; You you have an expectation for an &gt;&gt; You you have an expectation for an outcome and either high or low of that. outcome and either high or low of that. outcome and either high or low of that. Every learning rule should do that. And Every learning rule should do that. And Every learning rule should do that. And the psychologist had that kind of the psychologist had that kind of the psychologist had that kind of figured out 40 years ago, 50 years ago. figured out 40 years ago, 50 years ago. figured out 40 years ago, 50 years ago. But it doesn't quite work because it But it doesn't quite work because it But it doesn't quite work because it won't account for the way animals learn. won't account for the way animals learn. won't account for the way animals learn. It won't let you chain events. So for It won't let you chain events. So for It won't let you chain events. So for example, if I show a light and go to and example, if I show a light and go to and example, if I show a light and go to and train on a reward with an outcome and I train on a reward with an outcome and I train on a reward with an outcome and I use that expectation outcome learning use that expectation outcome learning use that expectation outcome learning rule, it won't chain back to something rule, it won't chain back to something rule, it won't chain back to something that predicts a light. Suppose a sound that predicts a light. Suppose a sound that predicts a light. Suppose a sound predicts a light and we know the light predicts a light and we know the light predicts a light and we know the light predicted the outcome. Now I ask the predicted the outcome. Now I ask the predicted the outcome. Now I ask the question, well, what happens to the question, well, what happens to the question, well, what happens to the sound? Well, we know people learn. sound? Well, we know people learn. sound? Well, we know people learn. They'll they'll associate the sound with They'll they'll associate the sound with They'll they'll associate the sound with the outcome. It's Pavlovian. Yeah. But the outcome. It's Pavlovian. Yeah. But the outcome. It's Pavlovian. Yeah. But those learning rules won't do that. They those learning rules won't do that. They those learning rules won't do that. They learn the wrong thing. They just do. learn the wrong thing. They just do. learn the wrong thing. They just do. It's just not well appreciated. Now, It's just not well appreciated. Now, It's just not well appreciated. Now, &gt;&gt; back when we were trying to associate &gt;&gt; back when we were trying to associate &gt;&gt; back when we were trying to associate that learning rule with dopamine, there that learning rule with dopamine, there that learning rule with dopamine, there was we were mainly working on it in a in was we were mainly working on it in a in was we were mainly working on it in a in a kind of theoretical way, like if you a kind of theoretical way, like if you a kind of theoretical way, like if you had a signal, what would it need to look had a signal, what would it need to look had a signal, what would it need to look like? Where might you find this in like? Where might you find this in like? Where might you find this in biology? I remember my our adviser, biology? I remember my our adviser, biology? I remember my our adviser, Terry Sonowski, who's been on your show, Terry Sonowski, who's been on your show, Terry Sonowski, who's been on your show, I think he said something like, "There I think he said something like, "There I think he said something like, "There are these diffuse ascending systems. are these diffuse ascending systems. are these diffuse ascending systems. They deliver these transmitters. you They deliver these transmitters. you They deliver these transmitters. you guys go work on that. guys go work on that. guys go work on that. &gt;&gt; Sounds like &gt;&gt; Sounds like &gt;&gt; Sounds like his episode was spectacularly received. his episode was spectacularly received. his episode was spectacularly received. &gt;&gt; Oh, great. Well, I mean, and he was it &gt;&gt; Oh, great. Well, I mean, and he was it &gt;&gt; Oh, great. Well, I mean, and he was it was the most open, was the most open, was the most open, &gt;&gt; inviting environment, but of course, all &gt;&gt; inviting environment, but of course, all &gt;&gt; inviting environment, but of course, all the problems given out were impossible the problems given out were impossible the problems given out were impossible to solve. And I remember just to solve. And I remember just to solve. And I remember just thinking, what? But um the first um thinking, what? But um the first um thinking, what? But um the first um inroad was realizing that it matched uh inroad was realizing that it matched uh inroad was realizing that it matched uh what Sutton had written down not so many what Sutton had written down not so many what Sutton had written down not so many years before. Sutton got his PhD I think years before. Sutton got his PhD I think years before. Sutton got his PhD I think in ' 84. I think he published the paper in ' 84. I think he published the paper in ' 84. I think he published the paper in ' 88. Um I was we were doing this in ' 88. Um I was we were doing this in ' 88. Um I was we were doing this in and we ran into a guy's data on dopamine and we ran into a guy's data on dopamine and we ran into a guy's data on dopamine signaling bull from Schultz. We didn't signaling bull from Schultz. We didn't signaling bull from Schultz. We didn't know him. We ran and we could explain know him. We ran and we could explain know him. We ran and we could explain every figure in every paper he published every figure in every paper he published every figure in every paper he published and we just thought, okay, that's not an and we just thought, okay, that's not an and we just thought, okay, that's not an accident. Okay, fast forward. We're in accident. Okay, fast forward. We're in accident. Okay, fast forward. We're in generation three now. We're going to generation three now. We're going to generation three now. We're going to come all the way forward. um people come all the way forward. um people come all the way forward. um people doing very fancy, very detailed doing very fancy, very detailed doing very fancy, very detailed experiments in rodents where you can experiments in rodents where you can experiments in rodents where you can control where you um where dopamine control where you um where dopamine control where you um where dopamine neurons are going to fire, when they're neurons are going to fire, when they're neurons are going to fire, when they're going to fire. You can control reward, going to fire. You can control reward, going to fire. You can control reward, okay? You can just control a lot of okay? You can just control a lot of okay? You can just control a lot of things. And so, uh it's clearly more things. And so, uh it's clearly more things. And so, uh it's clearly more than that. It's that and some other than that. It's that and some other than that. It's that and some other stuff, but that's central core. I stuff, but that's central core. I stuff, but that's central core. I don't see any good reason to throw away don't see any good reason to throw away don't see any good reason to throw away that little explanation there. Back in that little explanation there. Back in that little explanation there. Back in 1990, the complaint was, "Well, that's 1990, the complaint was, "Well, that's 1990, the complaint was, "Well, that's really cool. It matches these traces in really cool. It matches these traces in really cool. It matches these traces in a arcane um journal of physiology paper. a arcane um journal of physiology paper. a arcane um journal of physiology paper. What good is that? Reinforcement What good is that? Reinforcement What good is that? Reinforcement learning like that can't learn anything. learning like that can't learn anything. learning like that can't learn anything. The problem with that was at the time it The problem with that was at the time it The problem with that was at the time it was right. Like there were no systems was right. Like there were no systems was right. Like there were no systems that had done anything amazing. Now that had done anything amazing. Now that had done anything amazing. Now they've done everything and it's they've done everything and it's they've done everything and it's insane how good it was. insane how good it was. insane how good it was. &gt;&gt; You're talking about the AI. That &gt;&gt; You're talking about the AI. That &gt;&gt; You're talking about the AI. That algorithm that I just described with my algorithm that I just described with my algorithm that I just described with my hands waving is the same thing that hands waving is the same thing that hands waving is the same thing that David Silver and the Deep Mind Guys did David Silver and the Deep Mind Guys did David Silver and the Deep Mind Guys did when they made the world champion when they made the world champion when they made the world champion GoPlaying program and it beat the world GoPlaying program and it beat the world GoPlaying program and it beat the world champion and that particular game had uh champion and that particular game had uh champion and that particular game had uh expert advice built into it. Okay. And expert advice built into it. Okay. And expert advice built into it. Okay. And they removed all that and then they removed all that and then they removed all that and then they trained it from scratch. It's called trained it from scratch. It's called trained it from scratch. It's called Alph Go Zero. And then that game was Alph Go Zero. And then that game was Alph Go Zero. And then that game was amazing. this item. It's never been amazing. this item. It's never been amazing. this item. It's never been beaten. It basically beats the history beaten. It basically beats the history beaten. It basically beats the history of Go. And so that as an example, of Go. And so that as an example, of Go. And so that as an example, it's such an amazing that's a it's such an amazing that's a it's such an amazing that's a breakthrough. Anybody that knows that breakthrough. Anybody that knows that breakthrough. Anybody that knows that side now, that's the side now, that's the side now, that's the &gt;&gt; that's the AI side. That's the &gt;&gt; that's the AI side. That's the &gt;&gt; that's the AI side. That's the algorithm. But that same algorithm is algorithm. But that same algorithm is algorithm. But that same algorithm is installed in your head. installed in your head. installed in your head. &gt;&gt; It's installed in the head of a song &gt;&gt; It's installed in the head of a song &gt;&gt; It's installed in the head of a song bird. &gt;&gt; The interesting thing that's going on &gt;&gt; The interesting thing that's going on &gt;&gt; The interesting thing that's going on now is this kind of convergence, right? now is this kind of convergence, right? now is this kind of convergence, right? They're these they're these little They're these they're these little They're these they're these little gremlins in your brain stem that run gremlins in your brain stem that run gremlins in your brain stem that run that algorithm. Okay, that algorithm. Okay, that algorithm. Okay, they've now been externalized and put they've now been externalized and put they've now been externalized and put into a computer program that now does into a computer program that now does into a computer program that now does things that supersede us. It's a little things that supersede us. It's a little things that supersede us. It's a little interesting convergence. It's the only interesting convergence. It's the only interesting convergence. It's the only thing I know of that's sort of crawled thing I know of that's sort of crawled thing I know of that's sort of crawled out of your mind into a program and now out of your mind into a program and now out of your mind into a program and now the program is doing things that we the program is doing things that we the program is doing things that we couldn't imagine before. And it matches couldn't imagine before. And it matches couldn't imagine before. And it matches the biology. I mean, you can see this in the biology. I mean, you can see this in the biology. I mean, you can see this in creatures as old as honeybees and creatures as old as honeybees and creatures as old as honeybees and drosopha and whatnot. So, drosopha and whatnot. So, drosopha and whatnot. So, &gt;&gt; okay. So, a couple of things. Uh, one &gt;&gt; okay. So, a couple of things. Uh, one &gt;&gt; okay. So, a couple of things. Uh, one comment and a couple questions. Uh, comment and a couple questions. Uh, comment and a couple questions. Uh, first comment, um, I'm just going to first comment, um, I'm just going to first comment, um, I'm just going to say, uh, so that you don't feel you have say, uh, so that you don't feel you have say, uh, so that you don't feel you have to. Um, everyone should know that when to. Um, everyone should know that when to. Um, everyone should know that when Reed says dopamine is responsible for X, Reed says dopamine is responsible for X, Reed says dopamine is responsible for X, Y, and Z, there are many other chemicals Y, and Z, there are many other chemicals Y, and Z, there are many other chemicals in the brain likely involved as well. in the brain likely involved as well. in the brain likely involved as well. &gt;&gt; Other chemicals. And dopamine has &gt;&gt; Other chemicals. And dopamine has &gt;&gt; Other chemicals. And dopamine has multiple functions. multiple functions. multiple functions. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I just &gt;&gt; Yeah. I just &gt;&gt; Yeah. I just &gt;&gt; like anything in biology. &gt;&gt; like anything in biology. &gt;&gt; like anything in biology. &gt;&gt; Yeah. We should just embed that's up on &gt;&gt; Yeah. We should just embed that's up on &gt;&gt; Yeah. We should just embed that's up on the chalkboard now so that if you want the chalkboard now so that if you want the chalkboard now so that if you want to mention it again, you can, but don't to mention it again, you can, but don't to mention it again, you can, but don't feel obligated to. People, we're talking feel obligated to. People, we're talking feel obligated to. People, we're talking about dopamine through a narrow cone about dopamine through a narrow cone about dopamine through a narrow cone here, but certainly serotonin, here, but certainly serotonin, here, but certainly serotonin, acetylcholine, norepinephrine, peptides acetylcholine, norepinephrine, peptides acetylcholine, norepinephrine, peptides we haven't even discovered or understand we haven't even discovered or understand we haven't even discovered or understand yet are contributing. Dopamine is yet are contributing. Dopamine is yet are contributing. Dopamine is clearly a major player. I want to step clearly a major player. I want to step clearly a major player. I want to step back to a um a human example, a non-AII back to a um a human example, a non-AII back to a um a human example, a non-AII example with the understanding of what example with the understanding of what example with the understanding of what you just said, which is that the you just said, which is that the you just said, which is that the algorithms that AI is running are based algorithms that AI is running are based algorithms that AI is running are based on the same algorithms that neurons in on the same algorithms that neurons in on the same algorithms that neurons in our brain stem are using to deploy our brain stem are using to deploy our brain stem are using to deploy dopamine, which I don't know of an dopamine, which I don't know of an dopamine, which I don't know of an example like that in the world. Do you? example like that in the world. Do you? example like that in the world. Do you? &gt;&gt; I don't. I mean &gt;&gt; I don't. I mean &gt;&gt; I don't. I mean &gt;&gt; where we've discovered the nature of an &gt;&gt; where we've discovered the nature of an &gt;&gt; where we've discovered the nature of an algorithm once we externalize it algorithm once we externalize it algorithm once we externalize it &gt;&gt; we write in code and then it takes a few &gt;&gt; we write in code and then it takes a few &gt;&gt; we write in code and then it takes a few very special groups to all of a sudden very special groups to all of a sudden very special groups to all of a sudden have giant breakthroughs using that same have giant breakthroughs using that same have giant breakthroughs using that same algorithm &gt;&gt; and those breakthroughs are going to end &gt;&gt; and those breakthroughs are going to end &gt;&gt; and those breakthroughs are going to end up pumping information back into our up pumping information back into our up pumping information back into our head and so we live in an it's an head and so we live in an it's an head and so we live in an it's an interesting recursion there interesting recursion there interesting recursion there &gt;&gt; um I don't know what will come about &gt;&gt; um I don't know what will come about &gt;&gt; um I don't know what will come about &gt;&gt; yeah the fact that we took biological &gt;&gt; yeah the fact that we took biological &gt;&gt; yeah the fact that we took biological learning rules and gave them to a learning rules and gave them to a learning rules and gave them to a computer essentially um and the computer essentially um and the computer essentially um and the computer then can beat our own use of the then can beat our own use of the then can beat our own use of the biological learning rules um is pretty biological learning rules um is pretty biological learning rules um is pretty spectacular and I think it's a little spectacular and I think it's a little spectacular and I think it's a little scary but I want to shove that for scary but I want to shove that for scary but I want to shove that for it is a little scary it is a little scary it is a little scary &gt;&gt; later in the discussion I want to &gt;&gt; later in the discussion I want to &gt;&gt; later in the discussion I want to return to um the dating example return to um the dating example return to um the dating example &gt;&gt; you're going to hang this dating example &gt;&gt; you're going to hang this dating example &gt;&gt; you're going to hang this dating example around my neck around my neck around my neck &gt;&gt; I think that um and we can partner &gt;&gt; I think that um and we can partner &gt;&gt; I think that um and we can partner it with another example which it with another example which it with another example which &gt;&gt; dating example is good you go &gt;&gt; dating example is good you go &gt;&gt; dating example is good you go along in an interaction with somebody along in an interaction with somebody along in an interaction with somebody you pick up new knowledge about them on you pick up new knowledge about them on you pick up new knowledge about them on Thursday you don't necessarily even see Thursday you don't necessarily even see Thursday you don't necessarily even see them. It changes your expectations of them. It changes your expectations of them. It changes your expectations of them. You pick up some new knowledge on them. You pick up some new knowledge on them. You pick up some new knowledge on Saturday. You run into a co-orker of Saturday. You run into a co-orker of Saturday. You run into a co-orker of theirs. They say, "Oh, I hear you're theirs. They say, "Oh, I hear you're theirs. They say, "Oh, I hear you're seeing so and so. Did you know blah seeing so and so. Did you know blah seeing so and so. Did you know blah blah?" You get a new changes blah blah?" You get a new changes blah blah?" You get a new changes your view. So, what I want to changes your view. So, what I want to changes your view. So, what I want to know is what is dopamine doing in the know is what is dopamine doing in the know is what is dopamine doing in the context of the constantly updated context of the constantly updated context of the constantly updated expectations? We know that dopamine is involved in We know that dopamine is involved in We know that dopamine is involved in motivation. Are the changes in expectation Are the changes in expectation Are the changes in expectation modifying motivation to either move modifying motivation to either move modifying motivation to either move forward um become more pessimistic, forward um become more pessimistic, forward um become more pessimistic, more optimistic or stay neutral? more optimistic or stay neutral? more optimistic or stay neutral? &gt;&gt; That's a great question. So, uh &gt;&gt; That's a great question. So, uh &gt;&gt; That's a great question. So, uh expectations change. Those changes in expectations change. Those changes in expectations change. Those changes in expectation encoded by positive and expectation encoded by positive and expectation encoded by positive and negative fluctuations in dopamine. Where negative fluctuations in dopamine. Where negative fluctuations in dopamine. Where does motivation come in? Uh Todd Braver does motivation come in? Uh Todd Braver does motivation come in? Uh Todd Braver and John Cohen had an idea about that and John Cohen had an idea about that and John Cohen had an idea about that and I think Matt Botven Venick too and I think Matt Botven Venick too and I think Matt Botven Venick too and that is those prediction errors are that is those prediction errors are that is those prediction errors are perfect signals for deciding how perfect signals for deciding how perfect signals for deciding how motivated you should be. How much should motivated you should be. How much should motivated you should be. How much should you want a thing by measuring uh AC you want a thing by measuring uh AC you want a thing by measuring uh AC across those kinds of signals. And if across those kinds of signals. And if across those kinds of signals. And if you were doing an experiment, you were you were doing an experiment, you were you were doing an experiment, you were trying to look at dopamine. Depending on trying to look at dopamine. Depending on trying to look at dopamine. Depending on the time scale you looked at, the time scale you looked at, the time scale you looked at, &gt;&gt; you might see little changes in it that &gt;&gt; you might see little changes in it that &gt;&gt; you might see little changes in it that correlated with fluctuating correlated with fluctuating correlated with fluctuating expectations. And you might see expectations. And you might see expectations. And you might see something as a kind of an envelope, a something as a kind of an envelope, a something as a kind of an envelope, a slower changing thing, which is the kind slower changing thing, which is the kind slower changing thing, which is the kind of experiment you might do in a of experiment you might do in a of experiment you might do in a experimental psychology setup. And that experimental psychology setup. And that experimental psychology setup. And that would look like it correlated with would look like it correlated with would look like it correlated with motivation with all these little motivation with all these little motivation with all these little &gt;&gt; wandering things going on underneath. &gt;&gt; wandering things going on underneath. &gt;&gt; wandering things going on underneath. That's the sense in which it could do That's the sense in which it could do That's the sense in which it could do both functions. We are told that both functions. We are told that both functions. We are told that dopamine is what we're seeking as we go dopamine is what we're seeking as we go dopamine is what we're seeking as we go through a social media environment or we through a social media environment or we through a social media environment or we go through a dating environment or we go through a dating environment or we go through a dating environment or we go through a financial environment that through a financial environment that through a financial environment that we're investing or investing time in. we're investing or investing time in. we're investing or investing time in. But as you mentioned, dopamine is But as you mentioned, dopamine is But as you mentioned, dopamine is not just that, you know, at the finish not just that, you know, at the finish not just that, you know, at the finish line. We've known this for a while now. line. We've known this for a while now. line. We've known this for a while now. It's part of the neural circuitry uh It's part of the neural circuitry uh It's part of the neural circuitry uh algorithm that's driving us forward or algorithm that's driving us forward or algorithm that's driving us forward or causing us to pause. But is it fair to causing us to pause. But is it fair to causing us to pause. But is it fair to say that any system, whether say that any system, whether say that any system, whether it's a social media platform or it's um it's a social media platform or it's um it's a social media platform or it's um another form of business, whether they another form of business, whether they another form of business, whether they consciously realize it or not, and they consciously realize it or not, and they consciously realize it or not, and they probably do, it's built on trying to probably do, it's built on trying to probably do, it's built on trying to constantly update our expectations so constantly update our expectations so constantly update our expectations so that we keep playing the game, so that we keep playing the game, so that we keep playing the game, so that we stay in the forging mode. Because if we stay in the forging mode. Because if we stay in the forging mode. Because if you think about it, it's an infinite you think about it, it's an infinite you think about it, it's an infinite scroll. There is no final outcome. If scroll. There is no final outcome. If scroll. There is no final outcome. If there was a final outcome, you wouldn't there was a final outcome, you wouldn't there was a final outcome, you wouldn't keep living. You want that system to keep living. You want that system to keep living. You want that system to keep tracking and once it gets to one keep tracking and once it gets to one keep tracking and once it gets to one place, you want it to have another place place, you want it to have another place place, you want it to have another place to which it could go. Otherwise, you to which it could go. Otherwise, you to which it could go. Otherwise, you wouldn't live. wouldn't live. wouldn't live. &gt;&gt; Probably one insight into why it's in &gt;&gt; Probably one insight into why it's in &gt;&gt; Probably one insight into why it's in every mobile creature's brain on the every mobile creature's brain on the every mobile creature's brain on the planet. So if any goal that you planet. So if any goal that you planet. So if any goal that you achieved, whatever it is, taking a drug, achieved, whatever it is, taking a drug, achieved, whatever it is, taking a drug, eating a food, u getting a partner or eating a food, u getting a partner or eating a food, u getting a partner or whatnot, um if that was enough for you, whatnot, um if that was enough for you, whatnot, um if that was enough for you, right, then probably be a hard, you right, then probably be a hard, you right, then probably be a hard, you know, that's not the way your nervous know, that's not the way your nervous know, that's not the way your nervous system works. Your nervous system keeps system works. Your nervous system keeps system works. Your nervous system keeps pushing you forward. That's what you're pushing you forward. That's what you're pushing you forward. That's what you're working for. You're working for this working for. You're working for this working for. You're working for this push forward drive. push forward drive. push forward drive. the mapping that onto dopamine hits um the mapping that onto dopamine hits um the mapping that onto dopamine hits um is um it's not wrong, it's just blunt. is um it's not wrong, it's just blunt. is um it's not wrong, it's just blunt. It's just a blunt way to say it. It's just a blunt way to say it. It's just a blunt way to say it. It's not wrong, but it is blunt. It's a blunt not wrong, but it is blunt. It's a blunt not wrong, but it is blunt. It's a blunt way to say it. You you move around way to say it. You you move around way to say it. You you move around with expectations before you get any with expectations before you get any with expectations before you get any sort of big unexpected hit. sort of big unexpected hit. sort of big unexpected hit. &gt;&gt; This is why I don't like the phrase or &gt;&gt; This is why I don't like the phrase or &gt;&gt; This is why I don't like the phrase or the words dopamine hits because it the words dopamine hits because it the words dopamine hits because it implies it's like a reward that gets implies it's like a reward that gets implies it's like a reward that gets trickled into you. trickled into you. trickled into you. &gt;&gt; But it is true you get a hit. Mhm. &gt;&gt; But it is true you get a hit. Mhm. &gt;&gt; But it is true you get a hit. Mhm. &gt;&gt; It is true that there's this unexpected &gt;&gt; It is true that there's this unexpected &gt;&gt; It is true that there's this unexpected reward &gt;&gt; that you that your expectations, your &gt;&gt; that you that your expectations, your &gt;&gt; that you that your expectations, your series of expectations did not series of expectations did not series of expectations did not anticipate and that augments that is the anticipate and that augments that is the anticipate and that augments that is the learning rule. That's that's what we learning rule. That's that's what we learning rule. That's that's what we think uh the dopamine fluctuations think uh the dopamine fluctuations think uh the dopamine fluctuations are encoding. And so it does both jobs. are encoding. And so it does both jobs. are encoding. And so it does both jobs. It it lets you update and learn and it It it lets you update and learn and it It it lets you update and learn and it codes for the kind of motivation you codes for the kind of motivation you codes for the kind of motivation you should have. And when you're surprised, should have. And when you're surprised, should have. And when you're surprised, those are extra hits. So it it's not those are extra hits. So it it's not those are extra hits. So it it's not wrong to say that. It's just incomplete. wrong to say that. It's just incomplete. wrong to say that. It's just incomplete. &gt;&gt; I'm going to ask you to speculate a &gt;&gt; I'm going to ask you to speculate a &gt;&gt; I'm going to ask you to speculate a little bit here, but speculate within little bit here, but speculate within little bit here, but speculate within the context of what you know about the context of what you know about the context of what you know about dopamine, which is a lot. Um, let's take dopamine, which is a lot. Um, let's take dopamine, which is a lot. Um, let's take any of the different examples that I any of the different examples that I any of the different examples that I threw out on the table for us, and we threw out on the table for us, and we threw out on the table for us, and we artificially ramp up levels of dopamine artificially ramp up levels of dopamine artificially ramp up levels of dopamine with, let's not say, a drug of abuse with, let's not say, a drug of abuse with, let's not say, a drug of abuse like methamphetamine or something, but like methamphetamine or something, but like methamphetamine or something, but you know, we throw a little bit of a you know, we throw a little bit of a you know, we throw a little bit of a dopamineergic stimulant into the dopamineergic stimulant into the dopamineergic stimulant into the picture. Does that just raise the picture. Does that just raise the picture. Does that just raise the kind of the height of the saw tooth? Uh kind of the height of the saw tooth? Uh kind of the height of the saw tooth? Uh does it change any of this? For does it change any of this? For does it change any of this? For instance, if um uh this person who goes instance, if um uh this person who goes instance, if um uh this person who goes out on a date on the second or third out on a date on the second or third out on a date on the second or third date, they go to something that like date, they go to something that like date, they go to something that like maybe a show that's spectacularly good. maybe a show that's spectacularly good. maybe a show that's spectacularly good. Okay. How does that change the dynamics Okay. How does that change the dynamics Okay. How does that change the dynamics when you know it's now it's now there's when you know it's now it's now there's when you know it's now it's now there's an association with this person, an association with this person, an association with this person, an event, but let's say that they're event, but let's say that they're event, but let's say that they're flooded with dopamine. Let's take a drug flooded with dopamine. Let's take a drug flooded with dopamine. Let's take a drug out of the picture. the out of the picture. the out of the picture. the experience generated more dopamine. Does experience generated more dopamine. Does experience generated more dopamine. Does it shape their expectation and it shape their expectation and it shape their expectation and motivation around that person? If you motivation around that person? If you motivation around that person? If you raise expectations and these code these raise expectations and these code these raise expectations and these code these are coded by changes in dopamine, then are coded by changes in dopamine, then are coded by changes in dopamine, then in fact that's sort of a tonic in fact that's sort of a tonic in fact that's sort of a tonic question. That's sort of a tonic phase. question. That's sort of a tonic phase. question. That's sort of a tonic phase. &gt;&gt; You explain tonic. Most people are think &gt;&gt; You explain tonic. Most people are think &gt;&gt; You explain tonic. Most people are think tonic. &gt;&gt; Well, so slower changing. Okay. So I see &gt;&gt; Well, so slower changing. Okay. So I see &gt;&gt; Well, so slower changing. Okay. So I see a show. It makes me very excited. Uh I a show. It makes me very excited. Uh I a show. It makes me very excited. Uh I have the well fills up with a little have the well fills up with a little have the well fills up with a little more water. Okay. And it's sitting here. more water. Okay. And it's sitting here. more water. Okay. And it's sitting here. So now the little hits on are on top of So now the little hits on are on top of So now the little hits on are on top of that. Or I see something that depletes that. Or I see something that depletes that. Or I see something that depletes it. I take a drug and some drugs deplete it. I take a drug and some drugs deplete it. I take a drug and some drugs deplete dopamine. &gt;&gt; Or they went to a play and it sucked. &gt;&gt; Or they went to a play and it sucked. &gt;&gt; Or they went to a play and it sucked. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's disappointing or it's sad. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's disappointing or it's sad. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's disappointing or it's sad. &gt;&gt; He's got bad taste. &gt;&gt; He's got bad taste. &gt;&gt; He's got bad taste. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It just runs in your mind. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It just runs in your mind. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It just runs in your mind. So that can lower the levels and that So that can lower the levels and that So that can lower the levels and that changes the way in which um the changes the way in which um the changes the way in which um the fluctuations have an impact on learning. fluctuations have an impact on learning. fluctuations have an impact on learning. Okay. Parkinson's disease is a condition Okay. Parkinson's disease is a condition Okay. Parkinson's disease is a condition where by the time you show up with where by the time you show up with where by the time you show up with symptoms in the doctor's office, you've symptoms in the doctor's office, you've symptoms in the doctor's office, you've lost 70 to 75% of your dopamine neurons lost 70 to 75% of your dopamine neurons lost 70 to 75% of your dopamine neurons in your brain stem. Those are the only in your brain stem. Those are the only in your brain stem. Those are the only source of dopamine in your brain except source of dopamine in your brain except source of dopamine in your brain except for a tiny pathway in your hypothalamus for a tiny pathway in your hypothalamus for a tiny pathway in your hypothalamus and pituitary. and pituitary. and pituitary. &gt;&gt; Well, there's sorry retinal biologist in &gt;&gt; Well, there's sorry retinal biologist in &gt;&gt; Well, there's sorry retinal biologist in me. They're doing things totally me. They're doing things totally me. They're doing things totally unrelated to any of this. They're unrelated to any of this. They're unrelated to any of this. They're controlling adapt adaptation of light controlling adapt adaptation of light controlling adapt adaptation of light levels. &gt;&gt; Yeah, light level adaptations and um &gt;&gt; Yeah, light level adaptations and um &gt;&gt; Yeah, light level adaptations and um certainly in goldfish. Uh um yeah, those certainly in goldfish. Uh um yeah, those certainly in goldfish. Uh um yeah, those are actually very interesting. I won't are actually very interesting. I won't are actually very interesting. I won't talk I won't talk about them. talk I won't talk about them. talk I won't talk about them. &gt;&gt; So you got the dopamineergic brain &gt;&gt; So you got the dopamineergic brain &gt;&gt; So you got the dopamineergic brain stem neurons that degenerate in uh stem neurons that degenerate in uh stem neurons that degenerate in uh &gt;&gt; by the time you're feeling so stiff uh &gt;&gt; by the time you're feeling so stiff uh &gt;&gt; by the time you're feeling so stiff uh starting to have tremors all the parts starting to have tremors all the parts starting to have tremors all the parts of the flat facy flat affect and um and of the flat facy flat affect and um and of the flat facy flat affect and um and somebody's gets you to a doctor you're somebody's gets you to a doctor you're somebody's gets you to a doctor you're in the 70 to 75% you're in the 70 to 75% you're in the 70 to 75% loss. Okay. So what does that mean? Now loss. Okay. So what does that mean? Now loss. Okay. So what does that mean? Now all of a sudden these and dopamine all of a sudden these and dopamine all of a sudden these and dopamine neurons in your brain stem or maybe neurons in your brain stem or maybe neurons in your brain stem or maybe 80,000 neurons per side, 160,000 80,000 neurons per side, 160,000 80,000 neurons per side, 160,000 neurons, that's like nothing. They send neurons, that's like nothing. They send neurons, that's like nothing. They send dopamine delivering wires, biological dopamine delivering wires, biological dopamine delivering wires, biological wires throughout your entire brain and wires throughout your entire brain and wires throughout your entire brain and down your spinal cord making hundreds of down your spinal cord making hundreds of down your spinal cord making hundreds of millions of connections. But now you've millions of connections. But now you've millions of connections. But now you've shrunk those down. And so the one thing shrunk those down. And so the one thing shrunk those down. And so the one thing that happens is it's very noisy. there's that happens is it's very noisy. there's that happens is it's very noisy. there's not so many neurons to code for it. not so many neurons to code for it. not so many neurons to code for it. There's no smooth changes in it and the There's no smooth changes in it and the There's no smooth changes in it and the no the noise floor relative to what you no the noise floor relative to what you no the noise floor relative to what you could generate as a signal gets really could generate as a signal gets really could generate as a signal gets really high. really high. really high. Well, one of the things that we think Well, one of the things that we think Well, one of the things that we think dopamine is involved in terms of dopamine is involved in terms of dopamine is involved in terms of information processing is valuing the information processing is valuing the information processing is valuing the world computing if you will the value of world computing if you will the value of world computing if you will the value of taking this action or that action, the taking this action or that action, the taking this action or that action, the value of grabbing this and putting it in value of grabbing this and putting it in value of grabbing this and putting it in my mouth and drinking water etc. Okay? my mouth and drinking water etc. Okay? my mouth and drinking water etc. Okay? And the Parkinson state is sort of like And the Parkinson state is sort of like And the Parkinson state is sort of like a flat value function. You can't really a flat value function. You can't really a flat value function. You can't really see differential value in things. As you see differential value in things. As you see differential value in things. As you look around the world, you expect the look around the world, you expect the look around the world, you expect the system to fluctuate for you to tell you system to fluctuate for you to tell you system to fluctuate for you to tell you if I were to do this stuff or if I were if I were to do this stuff or if I were if I were to do this stuff or if I were to do that stuff, if I were to look at to do that stuff, if I were to look at to do that stuff, if I were to look at that, etc. It gives you a fluctuation, that, etc. It gives you a fluctuation, that, etc. It gives you a fluctuation, but you can't read it. The downstream, but you can't read it. The downstream, but you can't read it. The downstream, &gt;&gt; it's too noisy. &gt;&gt; it's too noisy. &gt;&gt; it's too noisy. &gt;&gt; It's too noisy. You can't read it. &gt;&gt; It's too noisy. You can't read it. &gt;&gt; It's too noisy. You can't read it. &gt;&gt; The downstream system just has to act as &gt;&gt; The downstream system just has to act as &gt;&gt; The downstream system just has to act as it did before. It says, "Oh, it did before. It says, "Oh, it did before. It says, "Oh, everything's of equal value. Just stay everything's of equal value. Just stay everything's of equal value. Just stay put." stay put." stay put." So I've always thought about Parkinson's So I've always thought about Parkinson's So I've always thought about Parkinson's as an active freezing disease that the as an active freezing disease that the as an active freezing disease that the nervous system is doing exactly what it nervous system is doing exactly what it nervous system is doing exactly what it would do if because it takes energy to would do if because it takes energy to would do if because it takes energy to transition from where you are to doing transition from where you are to doing transition from where you are to doing the next thing. Why do that if it's the next thing. Why do that if it's the next thing. Why do that if it's there's nothing more valuable there. there's nothing more valuable there. there's nothing more valuable there. This comes back to the idea of it This comes back to the idea of it This comes back to the idea of it pushing you through the world. It pushing you through the world. It pushing you through the world. It doesn't habituate because it has to keep doesn't habituate because it has to keep doesn't habituate because it has to keep your behavior going or else you're going your behavior going or else you're going your behavior going or else you're going to die. I don't think it's a to die. I don't think it's a to die. I don't think it's a coincidence. In fact, I know it's not. coincidence. In fact, I know it's not. coincidence. In fact, I know it's not. That dopamine is involved in learning, That dopamine is involved in learning, That dopamine is involved in learning, motivation, feelings, and movement motivation, feelings, and movement motivation, feelings, and movement among a few other more minor roles. Uh, among a few other more minor roles. Uh, among a few other more minor roles. Uh, everything about physical movement is everything about physical movement is everything about physical movement is intuitive to us. You move forward, you intuitive to us. You move forward, you intuitive to us. You move forward, you move back, you move side to side, you move back, you move side to side, you move back, you move side to side, you stay put. Okay? like movement, the idea stay put. Okay? like movement, the idea stay put. Okay? like movement, the idea that levels of dopamine in a that levels of dopamine in a that levels of dopamine in a moment and what you're referring to as moment and what you're referring to as moment and what you're referring to as the tonic kind of um baseline, what I the tonic kind of um baseline, what I the tonic kind of um baseline, what I call baseline levels of dopamine call baseline levels of dopamine call baseline levels of dopamine &gt;&gt; as opposed to spikes on top of that um &gt;&gt; as opposed to spikes on top of that um &gt;&gt; as opposed to spikes on top of that um predict whether or not you'll move predict whether or not you'll move predict whether or not you'll move forward, how much resistance there is to forward, how much resistance there is to forward, how much resistance there is to moving forward, these kinds of things. moving forward, these kinds of things. moving forward, these kinds of things. But I think for a lot of people it might But I think for a lot of people it might But I think for a lot of people it might be useful to think about dopamine in the be useful to think about dopamine in the be useful to think about dopamine in the context of thought movement, right? And context of thought movement, right? And context of thought movement, right? And motivation is sort of a version motivation is sort of a version motivation is sort of a version of forward movement. You know, in if I of forward movement. You know, in if I of forward movement. You know, in if I think about am I motivated to do think about am I motivated to do think about am I motivated to do something? I don't I no longer like the something? I don't I no longer like the something? I don't I no longer like the word motivated. I decided I like the word motivated. I decided I like the word motivated. I decided I like the word a sense of urgency. You could have word a sense of urgency. You could have word a sense of urgency. You could have a low level of urgency, moderate or high a low level of urgency, moderate or high a low level of urgency, moderate or high level of urgency. Urgency I define as um level of urgency. Urgency I define as um level of urgency. Urgency I define as um sort of a persistent resilient sort of a persistent resilient sort of a persistent resilient motivation, right? And the reason I motivation, right? And the reason I motivation, right? And the reason I prefer urgency to motivation is that a prefer urgency to motivation is that a prefer urgency to motivation is that a sense of urgency is more intuitive I sense of urgency is more intuitive I sense of urgency is more intuitive I think to most people. we kind of know think to most people. we kind of know think to most people. we kind of know when we feel we have to do something, we when we feel we have to do something, we when we feel we have to do something, we really want to do it or like it's we really want to do it or like it's we really want to do it or like it's we don't really want to do it or we're don't really want to do it or we're don't really want to do it or we're procrastinating. Whereas motivation is procrastinating. Whereas motivation is procrastinating. Whereas motivation is this just kind of like catchall term for this just kind of like catchall term for this just kind of like catchall term for how motivated are you? They think how motivated are you? They think how motivated are you? They think intrinsic motivation, extrinsic intrinsic motivation, extrinsic intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation. So when I think about a motivation. So when I think about a motivation. So when I think about a sense of urgency, I think about a sense of urgency, I think about a sense of urgency, I think about a sense of a need and readiness to move the body of a need and readiness to move the body of a need and readiness to move the body and or move thoughts in a particular and or move thoughts in a particular and or move thoughts in a particular direction. Do we think that dopamine is direction. Do we think that dopamine is direction. Do we think that dopamine is involved in moving thoughts and involved in moving thoughts and involved in moving thoughts and decision-m in a particular direction? decision-m in a particular direction? decision-m in a particular direction? &gt;&gt; We exactly think that. &gt;&gt; We exactly think that. &gt;&gt; We exactly think that. &gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you. I wasn't asking you to &gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you. I wasn't asking you to &gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you. I wasn't asking you to validate my non- theory theory. I validate my non- theory theory. I validate my non- theory theory. I just I want I think that dopamine is just I want I think that dopamine is just I want I think that dopamine is thrown around so much nowadays that we thrown around so much nowadays that we thrown around so much nowadays that we don't even really understand what don't even really understand what don't even really understand what motivation is, let alone how dopamine motivation is, let alone how dopamine motivation is, let alone how dopamine would be playing this would be playing this would be playing this &gt;&gt; it's very clear dopamine and the other &gt;&gt; it's very clear dopamine and the other &gt;&gt; it's very clear dopamine and the other neurom modulators are involved in um neurom modulators are involved in um neurom modulators are involved in um stabilizing and sustaining brain states. stabilizing and sustaining brain states. stabilizing and sustaining brain states. Okay, that's why they're thought to be Okay, that's why they're thought to be Okay, that's why they're thought to be involved in seizures, right? One thing involved in seizures, right? One thing involved in seizures, right? One thing you have to do with the brain state is you have to do with the brain state is you have to do with the brain state is kind of hold on to it a bit. It's got to kind of hold on to it a bit. It's got to kind of hold on to it a bit. It's got to have a dwell time, right? Let's call have a dwell time, right? Let's call have a dwell time, right? Let's call that a thought. Boom. Okay. Uh and then that a thought. Boom. Okay. Uh and then that a thought. Boom. Okay. Uh and then it goes forward or changes and then it goes forward or changes and then it goes forward or changes and then it may come back to that. Okay? So it may come back to that. Okay? So it may come back to that. Okay? So thinking and sequencing through what you thinking and sequencing through what you thinking and sequencing through what you would call thoughts is something that would call thoughts is something that would call thoughts is something that these systems are clearly intimately these systems are clearly intimately these systems are clearly intimately related to. And there are a lot of great related to. And there are a lot of great related to. And there are a lot of great groups now that are exploring this in groups now that are exploring this in groups now that are exploring this in mice models and theoretical models as mice models and theoretical models as mice models and theoretical models as well. Um so I think you tie the words well. Um so I think you tie the words well. Um so I think you tie the words together pretty well. Um in an animal together pretty well. Um in an animal together pretty well. Um in an animal that has to keep moving to stay alive that has to keep moving to stay alive that has to keep moving to stay alive and that's all animals. Um it has to and that's all animals. Um it has to and that's all animals. Um it has to know how valuable is it? How motivated know how valuable is it? How motivated know how valuable is it? How motivated should I be? How much should I want a should I be? How much should I want a should I be? How much should I want a thing? Right? um the calculations that thing? Right? um the calculations that thing? Right? um the calculations that we think the algorithms are affecting in we think the algorithms are affecting in we think the algorithms are affecting in your in your brain are exactly those. your in your brain are exactly those. your in your brain are exactly those. And so we can have these conversations And so we can have these conversations And so we can have these conversations at the level of these psychology words at the level of these psychology words at the level of these psychology words which are interesting and pertinent to which are interesting and pertinent to which are interesting and pertinent to the way looking at an animal behave. But the way looking at an animal behave. But the way looking at an animal behave. But now we're starting to pull it apart at now we're starting to pull it apart at now we're starting to pull it apart at the level of what is this computing? How the level of what is this computing? How the level of what is this computing? How fast is it computing it? How did it fast is it computing it? How did it fast is it computing it? How did it update it? And now we can build update it? And now we can build update it? And now we can build artificial systems based on that. Um and artificial systems based on that. Um and artificial systems based on that. Um and I think um there was a paper in 2004 by I think um there was a paper in 2004 by I think um there was a paper in 2004 by David Reddish talking about um addiction David Reddish talking about um addiction David Reddish talking about um addiction as a computational disease gone arai as a computational disease gone arai as a computational disease gone arai where you keep feeding system um a level where you keep feeding system um a level where you keep feeding system um a level of dopamine by putting a drug in that c of dopamine by putting a drug in that c of dopamine by putting a drug in that c blocks its re-uptake that it can't blocks its re-uptake that it can't blocks its re-uptake that it can't anticipate, right? And so it keeps anticipate, right? And so it keeps anticipate, right? And so it keeps chasing that and it never gets there. chasing that and it never gets there. chasing that and it never gets there. when people have ADHD, even low what when people have ADHD, even low what when people have ADHD, even low what low-level ADHD low-level ADHD low-level ADHD um or they take a drug that um increases um or they take a drug that um increases um or they take a drug that um increases dopamine, do you think that it makes dopamine, do you think that it makes dopamine, do you think that it makes more things in the world sticky, meaning more things in the world sticky, meaning more things in the world sticky, meaning uh mentally sticky, like we naturally uh mentally sticky, like we naturally uh mentally sticky, like we naturally just will latch on to more things when just will latch on to more things when just will latch on to more things when our levels of dopamine are elevated. our levels of dopamine are elevated. our levels of dopamine are elevated. We'll forage more randomly or do we We'll forage more randomly or do we We'll forage more randomly or do we forage more narrowly? Because the whole forage more narrowly? Because the whole forage more narrowly? Because the whole notion of ADHD is that they the notion of ADHD is that they the notion of ADHD is that they the whole like oh squirrel like that's the whole like oh squirrel like that's the whole like oh squirrel like that's the kind of generic example is that someone kind of generic example is that someone kind of generic example is that someone with ADHD um the theory is that their with ADHD um the theory is that their with ADHD um the theory is that their dopamineergic systems are disregulated. dopamineergic systems are disregulated. dopamineergic systems are disregulated. These drugs, almost all of them, right, These drugs, almost all of them, right, These drugs, almost all of them, right, whether or not it's rolin or aderall or whether or not it's rolin or aderall or whether or not it's rolin or aderall or these other drugs, they raise levels of these other drugs, they raise levels of these other drugs, they raise levels of dopamine and norepinephrine. Oh, yes. dopamine and norepinephrine. Oh, yes. dopamine and norepinephrine. Oh, yes. And somehow put people into a more And somehow put people into a more And somehow put people into a more narrow trench of focus or give them a narrow trench of focus or give them a narrow trench of focus or give them a little bit more selectivity in terms of little bit more selectivity in terms of little bit more selectivity in terms of what um what paths they decide to what um what paths they decide to what um what paths they decide to forage. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I suspect, if you made me guess, &gt;&gt; Yeah. I suspect, if you made me guess, &gt;&gt; Yeah. I suspect, if you made me guess, that it's stabilizing brain states and that it's stabilizing brain states and that it's stabilizing brain states and thought sequences in a way that's um thought sequences in a way that's um thought sequences in a way that's um narrow and it doesn't divert. Does that narrow and it doesn't divert. Does that narrow and it doesn't divert. Does that surprise you that increasing dopamine surprise you that increasing dopamine surprise you that increasing dopamine would do that? would do that? would do that? &gt;&gt; No. Bees do this. Okay. So, when you're &gt;&gt; No. Bees do this. Okay. So, when you're &gt;&gt; No. Bees do this. Okay. So, when you're a forager bee, uh you come back and you a forager bee, uh you come back and you a forager bee, uh you come back and you do a little dance in the hive and it do a little dance in the hive and it do a little dance in the hive and it tells the hive uh other foragers where tells the hive uh other foragers where tells the hive uh other foragers where to go find the nectar source. Okay. And to go find the nectar source. Okay. And to go find the nectar source. Okay. And it's a it's a whole language. People it's a it's a whole language. People it's a it's a whole language. People have worked that out. It tells you fly have worked that out. It tells you fly have worked that out. It tells you fly this far with the sun here and there's a this far with the sun here and there's a this far with the sun here and there's a polarization. &gt;&gt; It's an amazing phenomenon. &gt;&gt; It's an amazing phenomenon. &gt;&gt; It's an amazing phenomenon. &gt;&gt; Yeah. that the bees go back and &gt;&gt; Yeah. that the bees go back and &gt;&gt; Yeah. that the bees go back and they literally they do this dance the they literally they do this dance the they literally they do this dance the waggle &gt;&gt; and they feel the waggle dance &gt;&gt; and they feel the waggle dance &gt;&gt; and they feel the waggle dance on the bee and by feeling it they know on the bee and by feeling it they know on the bee and by feeling it they know where to go wild where to go wild where to go wild &gt;&gt; well it's a language you can decode I &gt;&gt; well it's a language you can decode I &gt;&gt; well it's a language you can decode I mean it's been decoded it's very to some mean it's been decoded it's very to some mean it's been decoded it's very to some degree &gt;&gt; when you look at bees I know this &gt;&gt; when you look at bees I know this &gt;&gt; when you look at bees I know this because I've been working with a bee guy because I've been working with a bee guy because I've been working with a bee guy Brian Smith at Arizona State University Brian Smith at Arizona State University Brian Smith at Arizona State University for the last few years I've known him my for the last few years I've known him my for the last few years I've known him my whole career but I've now has some whole career but I've now has some whole career but I've now has some methodology that lets him make methodology that lets him make methodology that lets him make measurements of dopamine and serotonin measurements of dopamine and serotonin measurements of dopamine and serotonin and norepinephrine in bees while they do and norepinephrine in bees while they do and norepinephrine in bees while they do odor learning. And um he has bees on an odor learning. And um he has bees on an odor learning. And um he has bees on an axis. Okay, way over here are the ADD axis. Okay, way over here are the ADD axis. Okay, way over here are the ADD bees, let's call them. And way over here bees, let's call them. And way over here bees, let's call them. And way over here are the concentration bees. are the concentration bees. are the concentration bees. &gt;&gt; Okay, and it relates to a chemical &gt;&gt; Okay, and it relates to a chemical &gt;&gt; Okay, and it relates to a chemical that's related to dopamine called that's related to dopamine called that's related to dopamine called octopamine, but it's a ratio of octopamine, but it's a ratio of octopamine, but it's a ratio of octopamine to it's called tyramine. octopamine to it's called tyramine. octopamine to it's called tyramine. That's like dopamine and serotonin if That's like dopamine and serotonin if That's like dopamine and serotonin if you were talking about primates. The you were talking about primates. The you were talking about primates. The ADDBs, they feel the waggle dance ADDBs, they feel the waggle dance ADDBs, they feel the waggle dance and they start, you know, they start and they start, you know, they start and they start, you know, they start running for the nectar and then they get running for the nectar and then they get running for the nectar and then they get distracted. You know, they're the distracted. You know, they're the distracted. You know, they're the four-year-old. &gt;&gt; A lot of adults like that nowadays, too. &gt;&gt; A lot of adults like that nowadays, too. &gt;&gt; A lot of adults like that nowadays, too. &gt;&gt; They and they can't. Of course, what &gt;&gt; They and they can't. Of course, what &gt;&gt; They and they can't. Of course, what they do by being distracted is they do by being distracted is they do by being distracted is they explore more. Okay. And then the ones on explore more. Okay. And then the ones on explore more. Okay. And then the ones on the far end over here, um, they fly the far end over here, um, they fly the far end over here, um, they fly right to the nectar source. right to the nectar source. right to the nectar source. &gt;&gt; Okay? So, you need both. you need. &gt;&gt; Okay? So, you need both. you need. &gt;&gt; Okay? So, you need both. you need. That's called exploitation. This one's That's called exploitation. This one's That's called exploitation. This one's exploiting where the nectar source is. exploiting where the nectar source is. exploiting where the nectar source is. It's going to get it. It's going to It's going to get it. It's going to It's going to get it. It's going to bring it back to the hive. And the bring it back to the hive. And the bring it back to the hive. And the sort of add guys are the um explorers. sort of add guys are the um explorers. sort of add guys are the um explorers. They're looking for new information, new They're looking for new information, new They're looking for new information, new nectar sources, etc. Well, your mind nectar sources, etc. Well, your mind nectar sources, etc. Well, your mind kind of, as blunt as that is, your kind of, as blunt as that is, your kind of, as blunt as that is, your mind plays this dichotomy mind plays this dichotomy mind plays this dichotomy &gt;&gt; in the same individual. You think that &gt;&gt; in the same individual. You think that &gt;&gt; in the same individual. You think that we have this ADHD like mode and a more we have this ADHD like mode and a more we have this ADHD like mode and a more focused mode. you've got multiple bees focused mode. you've got multiple bees focused mode. you've got multiple bees inside your head. inside your head. inside your head. &gt;&gt; One of them is making you into the &gt;&gt; One of them is making you into the &gt;&gt; One of them is making you into the explorer and that's really explorer and that's really explorer and that's really valuable sometimes. Okay. And companies valuable sometimes. Okay. And companies valuable sometimes. Okay. And companies they keep these people around. they keep these people around. they keep these people around. These are the uh lateral thinkers and These are the uh lateral thinkers and These are the uh lateral thinkers and you know you just have to you know feed you know you just have to you know feed you know you just have to you know feed them enough. Um and then you have the them enough. Um and then you have the them enough. Um and then you have the people that can really follow people that can really follow people that can really follow instructions and follow the best course instructions and follow the best course instructions and follow the best course of action and whatnot. And you need all of action and whatnot. And you need all of action and whatnot. And you need all that. &gt;&gt; Need all that. And this distribution of &gt;&gt; Need all that. And this distribution of &gt;&gt; Need all that. And this distribution of abilities is built into all of us, but abilities is built into all of us, but abilities is built into all of us, but it's different across us. You know, if I it's different across us. You know, if I it's different across us. You know, if I was looking at an oak leaf and I told was looking at an oak leaf and I told was looking at an oak leaf and I told you, what about this little wiggle? It's you, what about this little wiggle? It's you, what about this little wiggle? It's it's the wiggle in our software design it's the wiggle in our software design it's the wiggle in our software design for motivation and learning. Um, it's for motivation and learning. Um, it's for motivation and learning. Um, it's very effective to sometimes be the very effective to sometimes be the very effective to sometimes be the explorer and other times you have to be able to and other times you have to be able to and other times you have to be able to follow the chain of this is going to follow the chain of this is going to follow the chain of this is going to lead you to the thing that you want. lead you to the thing that you want. lead you to the thing that you want. Stay on course. Stay on course. Stay on course. If you're a regular listener of the If you're a regular listener of the If you're a regular listener of the Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt Huberman Lab podcast, you've no doubt heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral heard me talk about the vitamin mineral probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been probiotic drink AG1. And if you've been on the fence about it, now is an awesome on the fence about it, now is an awesome on the fence about it, now is an awesome time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few time to give it a try. For the next few weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full weeks, AG1 is giving away a full supplement package with your first supplement package with your first supplement package with your first subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away subscription to AG1. They're giving away a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2, a bottle of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a of omega-3 fish oil capsules, and a sample pack of the new sleep formula, sample pack of the new sleep formula, sample pack of the new sleep formula, AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only AGZ, which by the way is now the only sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. sleep supplement I take. It's fantastic. My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world My sleep on AGZ is out of this world good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates good. AGZ is a drink, so it eliminates the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It the need to take a lot of pills. It tastes great and like I said, it has me tastes great and like I said, it has me tastes great and like I said, it has me sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more sleeping incredibly well, waking up more refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love refreshed than ever. I absolutely love it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, it. Again, this is a limited time offer, so make sure to go to drink so make sure to go to drink so make sure to go to drink ag.com/huberman to get started today. What you're to get started today. What you're to get started today. What you're describing is a sort of ADHD like mode describing is a sort of ADHD like mode describing is a sort of ADHD like mode inside of all of us as well as a highly inside of all of us as well as a highly inside of all of us as well as a highly focused mode inside all of us. You're focused mode inside all of us. You're focused mode inside all of us. You're also I think I hear you correctly in also I think I hear you correctly in also I think I hear you correctly in um thinking that you're also describing um thinking that you're also describing um thinking that you're also describing the fact that some people are very the fact that some people are very the fact that some people are very strongly ADHD mode and other people are strongly ADHD mode and other people are strongly ADHD mode and other people are very strongly focused. Um they're very strongly focused. Um they're very strongly focused. Um they're very linear uh linear uh linear uh &gt;&gt; taskbased task. &gt;&gt; taskbased task. &gt;&gt; taskbased task. &gt;&gt; They can really uh form a task, hold it &gt;&gt; They can really uh form a task, hold it &gt;&gt; They can really uh form a task, hold it in mind, a task stays there. You know, in mind, a task stays there. You know, in mind, a task stays there. You know, lots of lots of athletes are that way. lots of lots of athletes are that way. lots of lots of athletes are that way. They set a goal um and they set multiple They set a goal um and they set multiple They set a goal um and they set multiple scales of goals. They set some goal, you scales of goals. They set some goal, you scales of goals. They set some goal, you know, this is where I want to be in two know, this is where I want to be in two know, this is where I want to be in two years. Okay, to get there, I'm going to years. Okay, to get there, I'm going to years. Okay, to get there, I'm going to have to do, you know, I'm going have to have to do, you know, I'm going have to have to do, you know, I'm going have to crawl through, you know, hell to get crawl through, you know, hell to get crawl through, you know, hell to get there in two years and I have to do there in two years and I have to do there in two years and I have to do these things and I'm going to wake up these things and I'm going to wake up these things and I'm going to wake up again tomorrow morning and again and again tomorrow morning and again and again tomorrow morning and again and again and again and these goals have to again and again and these goals have to again and again and these goals have to be reconstituted and pursued. Um, if be reconstituted and pursued. Um, if be reconstituted and pursued. Um, if you, you know, wanted to go play in the you, you know, wanted to go play in the you, you know, wanted to go play in the NBA and then all of a sudden six months NBA and then all of a sudden six months NBA and then all of a sudden six months into that you decided you want to go do into that you decided you want to go do into that you decided you want to go do ice hockey, well that's a problem. ice hockey, well that's a problem. ice hockey, well that's a problem. That's a person who can't That's a person who can't That's a person who can't &gt;&gt; can't focus. &gt;&gt; can't focus. &gt;&gt; can't focus. &gt;&gt; We all know these people. One question I &gt;&gt; We all know these people. One question I &gt;&gt; We all know these people. One question I have and we can only speculate here is have and we can only speculate here is have and we can only speculate here is you know there's a lot of uh ideas now you know there's a lot of uh ideas now you know there's a lot of uh ideas now that social media but when I say social that social media but when I say social that social media but when I say social media I don't want to knock on I teach media I don't want to knock on I teach media I don't want to knock on I teach and learn on social media. I what I and learn on social media. I what I and learn on social media. I what I mainly thinking about is um short very mainly thinking about is um short very mainly thinking about is um short very short form video. There's this idea out short form video. There's this idea out short form video. There's this idea out there that it's quote unquote giving there that it's quote unquote giving there that it's quote unquote giving everybody ADHD. Now, I don't actually everybody ADHD. Now, I don't actually everybody ADHD. Now, I don't actually think that's true, but I could imagine think that's true, but I could imagine think that's true, but I could imagine that if we have this continuum of that if we have this continuum of that if we have this continuum of honeybee like modes in our uh in our honeybee like modes in our uh in our honeybee like modes in our uh in our brains that if we repeatedly engage in a brains that if we repeatedly engage in a brains that if we repeatedly engage in a kind of rapid turnover of stimula like kind of rapid turnover of stimula like kind of rapid turnover of stimula like you get when you scroll a Tik Tok or a you get when you scroll a Tik Tok or a you get when you scroll a Tik Tok or a you know YouTube shorts or something you know YouTube shorts or something you know YouTube shorts or something like that, I mean there's a very like that, I mean there's a very like that, I mean there's a very frequent updating of lots of different frequent updating of lots of different frequent updating of lots of different contexts um and information that those contexts um and information that those contexts um and information that those circuits might get stronger And that the circuits might get stronger And that the circuits might get stronger And that the circuits that uh allow you to move from circuits that uh allow you to move from circuits that uh allow you to move from node to node and route to a goal, node to node and route to a goal, node to node and route to a goal, updating as necessary, understanding and updating as necessary, understanding and updating as necessary, understanding and integrating expectations and rewards and integrating expectations and rewards and integrating expectations and rewards and failures and all the above, right? The failures and all the above, right? The failures and all the above, right? The athlete example, the academic example, athlete example, the academic example, athlete example, the academic example, any life, navigating relation, all the any life, navigating relation, all the any life, navigating relation, all the stuff that we think of as building a the stuff that we think of as building a the stuff that we think of as building a solid life, right? You could imagine solid life, right? You could imagine solid life, right? You could imagine that some of that rapid updating and that some of that rapid updating and that some of that rapid updating and foraging could undermine the circuitry. foraging could undermine the circuitry. foraging could undermine the circuitry. &gt;&gt; No, you build your ADHD muscle. Is there &gt;&gt; No, you build your ADHD muscle. Is there &gt;&gt; No, you build your ADHD muscle. Is there any evidence maybe from related or any evidence maybe from related or any evidence maybe from related or other experiments entirely that show other experiments entirely that show other experiments entirely that show that if you give people a task where that if you give people a task where that if you give people a task where they have to update very quickly that they have to update very quickly that they have to update very quickly that you shift the sort of state of the you shift the sort of state of the you shift the sort of state of the brain toward seeking that more and brain toward seeking that more and brain toward seeking that more and doing that more easily than you do kind doing that more easily than you do kind doing that more easily than you do kind of like long haul uh distant reward of like long haul uh distant reward of like long haul uh distant reward type stuff. I don't know the answer to type stuff. I don't know the answer to type stuff. I don't know the answer to that in people, but I do know about that in people, but I do know about that in people, but I do know about training artificial systems to do it. training artificial systems to do it. training artificial systems to do it. And you have to be very careful to And you have to be very careful to And you have to be very careful to control the mix so that it doesn't control the mix so that it doesn't control the mix so that it doesn't overtrain on some on one of these two overtrain on some on one of these two overtrain on some on one of these two possibilities. If we're going to divide possibilities. If we're going to divide possibilities. If we're going to divide these two possibilities, chase a goal, these two possibilities, chase a goal, these two possibilities, chase a goal, chase everything that flies along, chase everything that flies along, chase everything that flies along, right? And you don't want to do either right? And you don't want to do either right? And you don't want to do either one of those things. You have to balance one of those things. You have to balance one of those things. You have to balance that. And sometimes you have to impose that. And sometimes you have to impose that. And sometimes you have to impose constraints to make that happen in an constraints to make that happen in an constraints to make that happen in an artificial network. It's a more artificial network. It's a more artificial network. It's a more complicated problem in people. I mean I complicated problem in people. I mean I complicated problem in people. I mean I can imagine I know lots of settings for can imagine I know lots of settings for can imagine I know lots of settings for being ADD is an absolute requirement. being ADD is an absolute requirement. being ADD is an absolute requirement. &gt;&gt; Can you give me a few examples? &gt;&gt; Can you give me a few examples? &gt;&gt; Can you give me a few examples? &gt;&gt; Combat &gt;&gt; Combat &gt;&gt; Combat &gt;&gt; combat rapid decision-making kind of the &gt;&gt; combat rapid decision-making kind of the &gt;&gt; combat rapid decision-making kind of the fighter pilot u situational knowledge. fighter pilot u situational knowledge. fighter pilot u situational knowledge. Now what do they do to prepare for that? Now what do they do to prepare for that? Now what do they do to prepare for that? By the way, my dad was a captain in the By the way, my dad was a captain in the By the way, my dad was a captain in the Navy and I have lots of combat examples Navy and I have lots of combat examples Navy and I have lots of combat examples in my head. Um well they practice in my head. Um well they practice in my head. Um well they practice they practice they practice being they practice they practice being they practice they practice being surprised. They practice being hungry surprised. They practice being hungry surprised. They practice being hungry and you know they put themselves and you know they put themselves and you know they put themselves under stress and all so that when that under stress and all so that when that under stress and all so that when that happens they don't have to run through happens they don't have to run through happens they don't have to run through every possibility and you're they're every possibility and you're they're every possibility and you're they're very effective but that requires very effective but that requires very effective but that requires training that requires an enormous training that requires an enormous training that requires an enormous amount of mental training. It's all it's amount of mental training. It's all it's amount of mental training. It's all it's all about the mental game. Yeah, it's all about the mental game. Yeah, it's all about the mental game. Yeah, it's a good example. Uh we've had a it's a good example. Uh we've had a it's a good example. Uh we've had a couple of experts in ADHD on here and um couple of experts in ADHD on here and um couple of experts in ADHD on here and um all of them have agreed that um children all of them have agreed that um children all of them have agreed that um children and adults with ADHD, mild or severe, and adults with ADHD, mild or severe, and adults with ADHD, mild or severe, can focus very intensely on things they can focus very intensely on things they can focus very intensely on things they really enjoy and are interested in. It's really enjoy and are interested in. It's really enjoy and are interested in. It's not a lack of ability to focus. It's not a lack of ability to focus. It's not a lack of ability to focus. It's that the um there's a lot of choppy that the um there's a lot of choppy that the um there's a lot of choppy terrain to get into that narrow mode of terrain to get into that narrow mode of terrain to get into that narrow mode of focus unless it's something they love. focus unless it's something they love. focus unless it's something they love. You give a kid with ADHD a video game You give a kid with ADHD a video game You give a kid with ADHD a video game they love, they'll drop right in as if they love, they'll drop right in as if they love, they'll drop right in as if it was, you know, the most focused it was, you know, the most focused it was, you know, the most focused you've ever seen them. you've ever seen them. you've ever seen them. &gt;&gt; Anytime you have to do rapid fire &gt;&gt; Anytime you have to do rapid fire &gt;&gt; Anytime you have to do rapid fire decision-m, I think you would want decision-m, I think you would want decision-m, I think you would want somebody who was able to at least train somebody who was able to at least train somebody who was able to at least train up to that level there. up to that level there. up to that level there. &gt;&gt; Do you worry about the overexposure to &gt;&gt; Do you worry about the overexposure to &gt;&gt; Do you worry about the overexposure to um you know um you know um you know &gt;&gt; frequent media? &gt;&gt; frequent media? &gt;&gt; frequent media? &gt;&gt; Yeah, these media. I have a lot of kids &gt;&gt; Yeah, these media. I have a lot of kids &gt;&gt; Yeah, these media. I have a lot of kids and so and so and so like every parent, my main nemesis is like every parent, my main nemesis is like every parent, my main nemesis is screen time. Okay, I'm trying to figure screen time. Okay, I'm trying to figure screen time. Okay, I'm trying to figure out how to monitor it, measure it, out how to monitor it, measure it, out how to monitor it, measure it, restrict it, and you know, and basically restrict it, and you know, and basically restrict it, and you know, and basically my kids are smarter than me and they're my kids are smarter than me and they're my kids are smarter than me and they're more nimble and they move they're more nimble and they move they're more nimble and they move faster than I mean, so it's a battle faster than I mean, so it's a battle faster than I mean, so it's a battle I'm losing. Um, so I've decided that the I'm losing. Um, so I've decided that the I'm losing. Um, so I've decided that the only way I can combat it is to lose it, only way I can combat it is to lose it, only way I can combat it is to lose it, but lose it a little more effectively but lose it a little more effectively but lose it a little more effectively toward my side. So, um, but I have to toward my side. So, um, but I have to toward my side. So, um, but I have to admit when I see YouTube shorts, admit when I see YouTube shorts, admit when I see YouTube shorts, &gt;&gt; these little, you know, like, oh, look &gt;&gt; these little, you know, like, oh, look &gt;&gt; these little, you know, like, oh, look at this person. He built a house out of at this person. He built a house out of at this person. He built a house out of Jell-O and it's falling over now. Okay, Jell-O and it's falling over now. Okay, Jell-O and it's falling over now. Okay, look at this other person. There's a look at this other person. There's a look at this other person. There's a parakeet poke poke. I mean, it it's parakeet poke poke. I mean, it it's parakeet poke poke. I mean, it it's mindnumbing to me, right? Well, there mindnumbing to me, right? Well, there mindnumbing to me, right? Well, there isn't a lot of long-term learning. I, isn't a lot of long-term learning. I, isn't a lot of long-term learning. I, you know, one of the things that I you know, one of the things that I you know, one of the things that I define learning by as uh useful learning define learning by as uh useful learning define learning by as uh useful learning is did I reflect on it again at a point is did I reflect on it again at a point is did I reflect on it again at a point later in time? You know, the other day I later in time? You know, the other day I later in time? You know, the other day I was on social media and I actually saw a was on social media and I actually saw a was on social media and I actually saw a clip. It was on a friend of mine who has clip. It was on a friend of mine who has clip. It was on a friend of mine who has a podcast um Steven Bartlett and he was a podcast um Steven Bartlett and he was a podcast um Steven Bartlett and he was interviewing a guest and um this speak interviewing a guest and um this speak interviewing a guest and um this speak gets right to the heart of this gets right to the heart of this gets right to the heart of this conversation. You know, a lot of stuff conversation. You know, a lot of stuff conversation. You know, a lot of stuff flies by a lot of wisdom type advice, flies by a lot of wisdom type advice, flies by a lot of wisdom type advice, you know, health advice, all the you know, health advice, all the you know, health advice, all the you know, it's constant barrage, but this know, it's constant barrage, but this know, it's constant barrage, but this one stuck with me. It's interesting. Um one stuck with me. It's interesting. Um one stuck with me. It's interesting. Um he asked the guy, "What's the meaning of he asked the guy, "What's the meaning of he asked the guy, "What's the meaning of life?" People ask this on podcasts. I life?" People ask this on podcasts. I life?" People ask this on podcasts. I won't ask you that today. That's that's won't ask you that today. That's that's won't ask you that today. That's that's a Lex Freedman question. When you go on a Lex Freedman question. When you go on a Lex Freedman question. When you go on Lex's podcast, he you can answer it to Lex's podcast, he you can answer it to Lex's podcast, he you can answer it to him, but I won't ask you that. But him, but I won't ask you that. But him, but I won't ask you that. But Stephen asked this guy, I forget who it Stephen asked this guy, I forget who it Stephen asked this guy, I forget who it was, so forgive me. You know, what do was, so forgive me. You know, what do was, so forgive me. You know, what do you think the point of life is? And the you think the point of life is? And the you think the point of life is? And the guy said, "It's to learn to enjoy the guy said, "It's to learn to enjoy the guy said, "It's to learn to enjoy the passage of time." And I thought, "That's passage of time." And I thought, "That's passage of time." And I thought, "That's pretty awesome. I would add to it and pretty awesome. I would add to it and pretty awesome. I would add to it and also engage in behaviors that buy you also engage in behaviors that buy you also engage in behaviors that buy you more time, you know, is it make sure you more time, you know, is it make sure you more time, you know, is it make sure you don't undermine your the time piece of don't undermine your the time piece of don't undermine your the time piece of it." But, you know, it was something it." But, you know, it was something it." But, you know, it was something that flew by on social media, but stuck that flew by on social media, but stuck that flew by on social media, but stuck with me. Mhm. with me. Mhm. with me. Mhm. &gt;&gt; It is exceedingly rare that a short clip &gt;&gt; It is exceedingly rare that a short clip &gt;&gt; It is exceedingly rare that a short clip provides entertainment or information provides entertainment or information provides entertainment or information that really stays with me that I reflect that really stays with me that I reflect that really stays with me that I reflect on it later. Whereas when I read a book, on it later. Whereas when I read a book, on it later. Whereas when I read a book, it's exceedingly rare that I don't have it's exceedingly rare that I don't have it's exceedingly rare that I don't have five or 10 things underlined per chapter five or 10 things underlined per chapter five or 10 things underlined per chapter that I go back to later. that I go back to later. that I go back to later. &gt;&gt; It takes a while to read a book. &gt;&gt; It takes a while to read a book. &gt;&gt; It takes a while to read a book. &gt;&gt; That's the thing. You it takes a &gt;&gt; That's the thing. You it takes a &gt;&gt; That's the thing. You it takes a deliberative set of intentional actions deliberative set of intentional actions deliberative set of intentional actions to read a book. That's the difference in to read a book. That's the difference in to read a book. That's the difference in the modality. So, one thing that uh this the modality. So, one thing that uh this the modality. So, one thing that uh this speaks to then is I've wondered whether speaks to then is I've wondered whether speaks to then is I've wondered whether activities that require effort that may activities that require effort that may activities that require effort that may or may not include reward but that or may not include reward but that or may not include reward but that include effort and that are a little bit include effort and that are a little bit include effort and that are a little bit slower and effort and slower tend to go slower and effort and slower tend to go slower and effort and slower tend to go hand in hand um not always. Uh whether hand in hand um not always. Uh whether hand in hand um not always. Uh whether or not that is part of the mechanism or not that is part of the mechanism or not that is part of the mechanism that strengthens a circuit. Does effort that strengthens a circuit. Does effort that strengthens a circuit. Does effort strengthen an algorithm? strengthen an algorithm? strengthen an algorithm? uh in other words um if I get on social uh in other words um if I get on social uh in other words um if I get on social media it's very easy to scroll media it's very easy to scroll media it's very easy to scroll short form video scroll short form video scroll short form video content doesn't take any effort um so content doesn't take any effort um so content doesn't take any effort um so and in fact there's no learning involved and in fact there's no learning involved and in fact there's no learning involved all you have to do is move your thumb all you have to do is move your thumb all you have to do is move your thumb but there's really no learning involved but there's really no learning involved but there's really no learning involved whereas if I have to do something if I whereas if I have to do something if I whereas if I have to do something if I have to puzzle into do a puzzle to get have to puzzle into do a puzzle to get have to puzzle into do a puzzle to get in or if I have to solve something or in or if I have to solve something or in or if I have to solve something or think about something or grapple with think about something or grapple with think about something or grapple with something that is where the learning something that is where the learning something that is where the learning occurs what's the relationship between occurs what's the relationship between occurs what's the relationship between if that we know between effort and if that we know between effort and if that we know between effort and dopamine. There is a good bit of work dopamine. There is a good bit of work dopamine. There is a good bit of work now where people look at the amount of now where people look at the amount of now where people look at the amount of effort an animal has to do to accomplish effort an animal has to do to accomplish effort an animal has to do to accomplish a task. Let me just go back to something a task. Let me just go back to something a task. Let me just go back to something you just said which was interesting. you just said which was interesting. you just said which was interesting. When you have to do effort um it's When you have to do effort um it's When you have to do effort um it's easier to learn something because it easier to learn something because it easier to learn something because it slows you down. I don't know whether slows you down. I don't know whether slows you down. I don't know whether effort is itself the cause or whether effort is itself the cause or whether effort is itself the cause or whether the fact that effort is slow the fact that effort is slow the fact that effort is slow &gt;&gt; and so it slows it down. Maybe we could &gt;&gt; and so it slows it down. Maybe we could &gt;&gt; and so it slows it down. Maybe we could design an experiment to design an experiment to design an experiment to &gt;&gt; maybe slowing it down. It immediately &gt;&gt; maybe slowing it down. It immediately &gt;&gt; maybe slowing it down. It immediately gave me this idea. Um, gave me this idea. Um, gave me this idea. Um, &gt;&gt; so that's true in simple experiments &gt;&gt; so that's true in simple experiments &gt;&gt; so that's true in simple experiments with rodents, but you know, rodents with rodents, but you know, rodents with rodents, but you know, rodents can't read very well. I've never seen a can't read very well. I've never seen a can't read very well. I've never seen a rodent that I admired that could manage rodent that I admired that could manage rodent that I admired that could manage a cell phone a cell phone a cell phone &gt;&gt; very well. And you know, even the &gt;&gt; very well. And you know, even the &gt;&gt; very well. And you know, even the rodents that can read are kind of flat rodents that can read are kind of flat rodents that can read are kind of flat effectively and all. I mean, rodent is a effectively and all. I mean, rodent is a effectively and all. I mean, rodent is a terrible model for this really. I terrible model for this really. I terrible model for this really. I wouldn't even do the experiment in wouldn't even do the experiment in wouldn't even do the experiment in rodent. to do the experiment in a human. rodent. to do the experiment in a human. rodent. to do the experiment in a human. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Where you can with a few words set a &gt;&gt; Where you can with a few words set a &gt;&gt; Where you can with a few words set a human in a certain state and you know go human in a certain state and you know go human in a certain state and you know go or you can make them hungry or you can or you can make them hungry or you can or you can make them hungry or you can you know you can put a human into a you know you can put a human into a you know you can put a human into a mental state by just asking them to mental state by just asking them to mental state by just asking them to think about X Y and Z and have various think about X Y and Z and have various think about X Y and Z and have various controls to account for that. I have to controls to account for that. I have to controls to account for that. I have to admit that when I look at admit that when I look at admit that when I look at the generation we're concerned about the generation we're concerned about the generation we're concerned about I've just read this book the anxious I've just read this book the anxious I've just read this book the anxious generation. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Jonathan was on this podcast &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Jonathan was on this podcast &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Jonathan was on this podcast &gt;&gt; and I was on a MacArthur network um &gt;&gt; and I was on a MacArthur network um &gt;&gt; and I was on a MacArthur network um neuroscience and law with him for a neuroscience and law with him for a neuroscience and law with him for a while and he he's just a extremely while and he he's just a extremely while and he he's just a extremely clearheaded person really um always made me think person really um always made me think person really um always made me think about things on the other hand I don't about things on the other hand I don't about things on the other hand I don't know um other than the comparison to know um other than the comparison to know um other than the comparison to others and the speed at which social others and the speed at which social others and the speed at which social media lets you do that and I have you media lets you do that and I have you media lets you do that and I have you know I have girls mainly four girls and know I have girls mainly four girls and know I have girls mainly four girls and one boy Um, one boy Um, one boy Um, I don't know what it's doing to him I don't know what it's doing to him I don't know what it's doing to him exactly. We all Okay. I don't think exactly. We all Okay. I don't think exactly. We all Okay. I don't think anybody does. I think we all suspect anybody does. I think we all suspect anybody does. I think we all suspect there's features of it that aren't good. there's features of it that aren't good. there's features of it that aren't good. And yet, it's like we're trying to hold And yet, it's like we're trying to hold And yet, it's like we're trying to hold back the tsunami. I mean, it's just the back the tsunami. I mean, it's just the back the tsunami. I mean, it's just the water's going past us. And so, I think water's going past us. And so, I think water's going past us. And so, I think the only way to the only way to the only way to uh deal with it is kind of fly by wire. uh deal with it is kind of fly by wire. uh deal with it is kind of fly by wire. um you know when a little fire starts um you know when a little fire starts um you know when a little fire starts over here and somebody says oh this over here and somebody says oh this over here and somebody says oh this really causes a depression in mood and really causes a depression in mood and really causes a depression in mood and it's these features of it then we can go it's these features of it then we can go it's these features of it then we can go react to that and all but it's very hard react to that and all but it's very hard react to that and all but it's very hard to know what it's going to do globally to know what it's going to do globally to know what it's going to do globally it's evolving with its it's evolving with its it's evolving with its own it feels like it's independent own it feels like it's independent own it feels like it's independent &gt;&gt; of anything we do and so I think &gt;&gt; of anything we do and so I think &gt;&gt; of anything we do and so I think it's going to have to be a re sort of a it's going to have to be a re sort of a it's going to have to be a re sort of a &gt;&gt; get in front of it reaction you can't &gt;&gt; get in front of it reaction you can't &gt;&gt; get in front of it reaction you can't for example my kid just got a cell for example my kid just got a cell for example my kid just got a cell phone. She's 13. She was the last, phone. She's 13. She was the last, phone. She's 13. She was the last, according to her, and she's the reporter according to her, and she's the reporter according to her, and she's the reporter here. She's the last seventh grader in here. She's the last seventh grader in here. She's the last seventh grader in her school to get a cell phone. And but her school to get a cell phone. And but her school to get a cell phone. And but the raw fact was she I'm being left the raw fact was she I'm being left the raw fact was she I'm being left out of all the discussions and whatnot. out of all the discussions and whatnot. out of all the discussions and whatnot. And the answer was that is true. And the answer was that is true. And the answer was that is true. She is being left out. Their their mode She is being left out. Their their mode She is being left out. Their their mode of choice is Snapchat now. of choice is Snapchat now. of choice is Snapchat now. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; Um well, there's a lot of downside to well, there's a lot of downside to well, there's a lot of downside to Snapchat. And um so now I'm the I my Snapchat. And um so now I'm the I my Snapchat. And um so now I'm the I my nervous system and my physiology is now nervous system and my physiology is now nervous system and my physiology is now hooked to her blizzard of time requests hooked to her blizzard of time requests hooked to her blizzard of time requests on my phone. It did, you know, I turned on my phone. It did, you know, I turned on my phone. It did, you know, I turned it off before I came in here. Um on the it off before I came in here. Um on the it off before I came in here. Um on the plane flying over the country, I'm plane flying over the country, I'm plane flying over the country, I'm denying things and giving 15 minutes and denying things and giving 15 minutes and denying things and giving 15 minutes and whatnot. So um Jonathan has real prescriptions for how Jonathan has real prescriptions for how Jonathan has real prescriptions for how to fix that. He has good suggestions for to fix that. He has good suggestions for to fix that. He has good suggestions for how to fix that. But how to fix that. But how to fix that. But the collective action thing is, you the collective action thing is, you the collective action thing is, you know, collective actions are hard know, collective actions are hard know, collective actions are hard because, you know, they're collections because, you know, they're collections because, you know, they're collections of humans and you just can't get people of humans and you just can't get people of humans and you just can't get people to all do something at once. There's to all do something at once. There's to all do something at once. There's always a defector. always a defector. always a defector. &gt;&gt; Well, I think as long as we're also &gt;&gt; Well, I think as long as we're also &gt;&gt; Well, I think as long as we're also training the other more slow, effortful training the other more slow, effortful training the other more slow, effortful type integration of knowledge. Um, I type integration of knowledge. Um, I type integration of knowledge. Um, I mean, it'd be wonderful if social media mean, it'd be wonderful if social media mean, it'd be wonderful if social media had settings where I could click had settings where I could click had settings where I could click entertainment. I would just get entertainment. I would just get entertainment. I would just get entertainment stuff and then I knew how entertainment stuff and then I knew how entertainment stuff and then I knew how long I was doing that versus educate me long I was doing that versus educate me long I was doing that versus educate me because I do learn a lot from social because I do learn a lot from social because I do learn a lot from social media and I certainly try and learn on media and I certainly try and learn on media and I certainly try and learn on social media. Um, and this what may social media. Um, and this what may social media. Um, and this what may sound like kind of a trivial statement sound like kind of a trivial statement sound like kind of a trivial statement the other day and learn to enjoy the other day and learn to enjoy the other day and learn to enjoy the passage of time was what sat with me in passage of time was what sat with me in passage of time was what sat with me in some way that felt important to me at some way that felt important to me at some way that felt important to me at that moment and um I've been reflecting that moment and um I've been reflecting that moment and um I've been reflecting on it through a couple of different on it through a couple of different on it through a couple of different lenses. We're obviously not going to lenses. We're obviously not going to lenses. We're obviously not going to solve this problem. I am curious about solve this problem. I am curious about solve this problem. I am curious about speed versus effort when foraging. Let's speed versus effort when foraging. Let's speed versus effort when foraging. Let's take it back to the dating example. This take it back to the dating example. This take it back to the dating example. This person's gonna kill me for I'm not going person's gonna kill me for I'm not going person's gonna kill me for I'm not going to reveal who she is, but you know, I to reveal who she is, but you know, I to reveal who she is, but you know, I said, listen, I've noticed this pattern said, listen, I've noticed this pattern said, listen, I've noticed this pattern over time. You discount people early or over time. You discount people early or over time. You discount people early or you get very excited and then it always you get very excited and then it always you get very excited and then it always kind of kind of ends up in the same kind of kind of ends up in the same kind of kind of ends up in the same place where you're like, uh, why did I place where you're like, uh, why did I place where you're like, uh, why did I do that? And I was like, well, let's, do that? And I was like, well, let's, do that? And I was like, well, let's, you know, so maybe run a different you know, so maybe run a different you know, so maybe run a different algorithm, maybe start to collect data a algorithm, maybe start to collect data a algorithm, maybe start to collect data a little bit more slowly or maybe, you little bit more slowly or maybe, you little bit more slowly or maybe, you know, see them more frequently for like know, see them more frequently for like know, see them more frequently for like two weeks and then make a decision so two weeks and then make a decision so two weeks and then make a decision so it's not you didn't waste so much time. it's not you didn't waste so much time. it's not you didn't waste so much time. Still more frequently means more time, Still more frequently means more time, Still more frequently means more time, but not overtime, you know. So, um, we but not overtime, you know. So, um, we but not overtime, you know. So, um, we can change our mode of foraging. I can change our mode of foraging. I can change our mode of foraging. I personally put social media on an old personally put social media on an old personally put social media on an old phone and it goes in a supermax prison phone and it goes in a supermax prison phone and it goes in a supermax prison uh lockbox that you can't code out of uh lockbox that you can't code out of uh lockbox that you can't code out of for 22 hours a day. You do that to for 22 hours a day. You do that to for 22 hours a day. You do that to yourself. &gt;&gt; I do. And not &gt;&gt; I do. And not &gt;&gt; I do. And not &gt;&gt; like the person that can't avoid eating &gt;&gt; like the person that can't avoid eating &gt;&gt; like the person that can't avoid eating chocolate. K, you lock the chocolate. K, you lock the chocolate. K, you lock the chocolate. &gt;&gt; It wasn't that. I just I'd read this &gt;&gt; It wasn't that. I just I'd read this &gt;&gt; It wasn't that. I just I'd read this paper that was published recently that paper that was published recently that paper that was published recently that said that if your phone is upside down said that if your phone is upside down said that if your phone is upside down on a table or in your bag in the same on a table or in your bag in the same on a table or in your bag in the same room, it lowers cognitive performance. room, it lowers cognitive performance. room, it lowers cognitive performance. Even if you're not aware of the phone, Even if you're not aware of the phone, Even if you're not aware of the phone, then you it's pulling resources. then you it's pulling resources. then you it's pulling resources. It's pulling resources to it's pulling It's pulling resources to it's pulling It's pulling resources to it's pulling resources. if it's in another room, it resources. if it's in another room, it resources. if it's in another room, it seems that your cognitive performance seems that your cognitive performance seems that your cognitive performance returns to its previously higher levels. returns to its previously higher levels. returns to its previously higher levels. So, I thought that's pretty good. So, I So, I thought that's pretty good. So, I So, I thought that's pretty good. So, I started keeping my phone in the other started keeping my phone in the other started keeping my phone in the other room. Um, and I thought, how much room. Um, and I thought, how much room. Um, and I thought, how much further can I take this? So, I think further can I take this? So, I think further can I take this? So, I think that the physical distance from things that the physical distance from things that the physical distance from things that's non-negotiable that's non-negotiable that's non-negotiable feels really good to somebody like me. feels really good to somebody like me. feels really good to somebody like me. &gt;&gt; Out of sight, out of mind, &gt;&gt; Out of sight, out of mind, &gt;&gt; Out of sight, out of mind, &gt;&gt; maybe. Although, I want to bring this &gt;&gt; maybe. Although, I want to bring this &gt;&gt; maybe. Although, I want to bring this back to dopamine. uh you know can the back to dopamine. uh you know can the back to dopamine. uh you know can the dopamine system learn to uh to get dopamine system learn to uh to get dopamine system learn to uh to get motivation states and pleasure from motivation states and pleasure from motivation states and pleasure from resisting things. I think of a resisting things. I think of a resisting things. I think of a pathologic version of this might be we pathologic version of this might be we pathologic version of this might be we did an episode on anorexia where food is did an episode on anorexia where food is did an episode on anorexia where food is rewarding for most people but for people rewarding for most people but for people rewarding for most people but for people who have true anorexia who have true anorexia who have true anorexia um the reward system seems to enter a um the reward system seems to enter a um the reward system seems to enter a state where uh resisting food becomes state where uh resisting food becomes state where uh resisting food becomes the reward. the reward. the reward. &gt;&gt; Control feels good. Yeah, control feels &gt;&gt; Control feels good. Yeah, control feels &gt;&gt; Control feels good. Yeah, control feels good and but there's po anorexia good and but there's po anorexia good and but there's po anorexia obviously the most dangerous and deadly obviously the most dangerous and deadly obviously the most dangerous and deadly psychiatric illness of all the psychiatric illness of all the psychiatric illness of all the psychiatric illnesses but resisting psychiatric illnesses but resisting psychiatric illnesses but resisting your phone um to get other work done and your phone um to get other work done and your phone um to get other work done and to be more present for people in my life to be more present for people in my life to be more present for people in my life including myself but you know that seems including myself but you know that seems including myself but you know that seems like a good thing. So can the dopamine like a good thing. So can the dopamine like a good thing. So can the dopamine system um encode reward for resisting system um encode reward for resisting system um encode reward for resisting behaviors as much as it can for behaviors as much as it can for behaviors as much as it can for indulging behaviors? indulging behaviors? indulging behaviors? &gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, I think anorexia is a good &gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, I think anorexia is a good &gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, I think anorexia is a good example of it. It feels good to resist example of it. It feels good to resist example of it. It feels good to resist and they do it pathologically. It's such and they do it pathologically. It's such and they do it pathologically. It's such a dangerous disorder. Um, a dangerous disorder. Um, a dangerous disorder. Um, &gt;&gt; but in a healthy sense, like I'll reveal &gt;&gt; but in a healthy sense, like I'll reveal &gt;&gt; but in a healthy sense, like I'll reveal now that you were a fairly now that you were a fairly now that you were a fairly accomplished dathlete. Um, so that meant accomplished dathlete. Um, so that meant accomplished dathlete. Um, so that meant getting to practice, doing things, but getting to practice, doing things, but getting to practice, doing things, but did you ever feel like I'm going to bed did you ever feel like I'm going to bed did you ever feel like I'm going to bed early when everybody else is staying up early when everybody else is staying up early when everybody else is staying up late? I'm getting stronger. Oh, I late? I'm getting stronger. Oh, I late? I'm getting stronger. Oh, I relished the whole I'm running this relished the whole I'm running this relished the whole I'm running this tennis court hill while all those other tennis court hill while all those other tennis court hill while all those other soft guys are, you know, asleep and I'm soft guys are, you know, asleep and I'm soft guys are, you know, asleep and I'm throwing up on top of the hill. Yeah, throwing up on top of the hill. Yeah, throwing up on top of the hill. Yeah, that was a that was a thing. And it that was a that was a thing. And it that was a that was a thing. And it meant when you got in a tough spot, um I meant when you got in a tough spot, um I meant when you got in a tough spot, um I was a wrestler all through high school. was a wrestler all through high school. was a wrestler all through high school. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're sickos. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're sickos. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're sickos. &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're sickos. Yeah. And but &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're sickos. Yeah. And but &gt;&gt; Yeah, they're sickos. Yeah. And but you're never in better shape than when you're never in better shape than when you're never in better shape than when you're active wrestler. um you you're active wrestler. um you you're active wrestler. um you have to put up with things that are have to put up with things that are have to put up with things that are really demanding on you like you like really demanding on you like you like really demanding on you like you like having your air cut off. So the main having your air cut off. So the main having your air cut off. So the main thing you do when your air is cut off is thing you do when your air is cut off is thing you do when your air is cut off is don't panic. Well, that's not you don't panic. Well, that's not you don't panic. Well, that's not you know you're not pre-built to not panic. know you're not pre-built to not panic. know you're not pre-built to not panic. So you have to learn how to do that. So you have to learn how to do that. So you have to learn how to do that. That was the most important thing I did That was the most important thing I did That was the most important thing I did in wrestling. Just learn to stay calm, in wrestling. Just learn to stay calm, in wrestling. Just learn to stay calm, think about where your weight was and think about where your weight was and think about where your weight was and all that. Um it's the same thing for all that. Um it's the same thing for all that. Um it's the same thing for people that study a lot. I think people that study a lot. I think people that study a lot. I think people that study a lot want to be better than that study a lot want to be better than that study a lot want to be better than the people that don't study a lot. I the people that don't study a lot. I the people that don't study a lot. I mean, they want the idea of achieving a mean, they want the idea of achieving a mean, they want the idea of achieving a goal. Um, that's hard for other people goal. Um, that's hard for other people goal. Um, that's hard for other people to do. And the most healthy version of to do. And the most healthy version of to do. And the most healthy version of that is without any regard to what that is without any regard to what that is without any regard to what anybody else is doing. The person who anybody else is doing. The person who anybody else is doing. The person who just this is the life I live and these just this is the life I live and these just this is the life I live and these are my standards and I'm quiet with them are my standards and I'm quiet with them are my standards and I'm quiet with them and I'm going to go do this thing and it and I'm going to go do this thing and it and I'm going to go do this thing and it doesn't matter what anybody else thinks. doesn't matter what anybody else thinks. doesn't matter what anybody else thinks. And you hope that for your children, you And you hope that for your children, you And you hope that for your children, you hope they get to be a person like that. hope they get to be a person like that. hope they get to be a person like that. Um, anyway, I can tell you my kids Um, anyway, I can tell you my kids Um, anyway, I can tell you my kids school, just to circle back, their school, just to circle back, their school, just to circle back, their collective action is to completely collective action is to completely collective action is to completely disallow phones during the school day disallow phones during the school day disallow phones during the school day &gt;&gt; is junior high school. &gt;&gt; is junior high school. &gt;&gt; is junior high school. &gt;&gt; They go to a school that's K through 12. &gt;&gt; They go to a school that's K through 12. &gt;&gt; They go to a school that's K through 12. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Um you have put it up when you get there &gt;&gt; Um you have put it up when you get there &gt;&gt; Um you have put it up when you get there and I think 3:30 is when you can and I think 3:30 is when you can and I think 3:30 is when you can activate to call for a ride or whatever. activate to call for a ride or whatever. activate to call for a ride or whatever. &gt;&gt; Um and it's off. It's off. It's a f the &gt;&gt; Um and it's off. It's off. It's a f the &gt;&gt; Um and it's off. It's off. It's a f the Well, I like the head of school. Well, I like the head of school. Well, I like the head of school. &gt;&gt; Uh but her that's the best decision &gt;&gt; Uh but her that's the best decision &gt;&gt; Uh but her that's the best decision she's ever made. I mean that that's a she's ever made. I mean that that's a she's ever made. I mean that that's a great decision. Um and now they're great decision. Um and now they're great decision. Um and now they're wrestling with what do we do with AI in wrestling with what do we do with AI in wrestling with what do we do with AI in the school? How are we going to let the school? How are we going to let the school? How are we going to let these kids interface with these systems these kids interface with these systems these kids interface with these systems that are smarter than us? More that are smarter than us? More that are smarter than us? More interesting, no less. I want to talk interesting, no less. I want to talk interesting, no less. I want to talk about AI. Um but before we go there um I about AI. Um but before we go there um I about AI. Um but before we go there um I think you've painted a really nice think you've painted a really nice think you've painted a really nice picture of dopamine and the various picture of dopamine and the various picture of dopamine and the various things it does and even just this early things it does and even just this early things it does and even just this early statement that you made that dopamine is statement that you made that dopamine is statement that you made that dopamine is fluctuating according to our constant is fluctuating according to our constant is fluctuating according to our constant updating not just expectation reward but updating not just expectation reward but updating not just expectation reward but expectation maybe the reward never comes expectation maybe the reward never comes expectation maybe the reward never comes maybe it does let's talk about serotonin maybe it does let's talk about serotonin maybe it does let's talk about serotonin because not in every case but at least because not in every case but at least because not in every case but at least in some cases my understanding is that in some cases my understanding is that in some cases my understanding is that serotonin is fluctuating in the opposite serotonin is fluctuating in the opposite serotonin is fluctuating in the opposite direction to dopamine at least in animal direction to dopamine at least in animal direction to dopamine at least in animal studies it see these are some studies it see these are some studies it see these are some interesting in interesting in interesting in &gt;&gt; human studies too &gt;&gt; human studies too &gt;&gt; human studies too &gt;&gt; great so educate us about serotonin in &gt;&gt; great so educate us about serotonin in &gt;&gt; great so educate us about serotonin in this context because I know it's a huge this context because I know it's a huge this context because I know it's a huge topic right a habit that people that topic right a habit that people that topic right a habit that people that work on neurom modulators I'll name a work on neurom modulators I'll name a work on neurom modulators I'll name a few dopamine serotonin norepinephrine few dopamine serotonin norepinephrine few dopamine serotonin norepinephrine acetylcholine histamine um probably on the order of let's say 15 um probably on the order of let's say 15 um probably on the order of let's say 15 to 20 let's say and then there are a lot to 20 let's say and then there are a lot to 20 let's say and then there are a lot of peptides and all but the big three of peptides and all but the big three of peptides and all but the big three dopamine serotonin norepinephrine dopamine serotonin norepinephrine dopamine serotonin norepinephrine um learning and motivation uh active um learning and motivation uh active um learning and motivation uh active inhibition um attention that's what people would um attention that's what people would um attention that's what people would say ep norepinephrine and epinephrine or say ep norepinephrine and epinephrine or say ep norepinephrine and epinephrine or controlling attentional states serotonin controlling attentional states serotonin controlling attentional states serotonin tells you to get ready to wait like you tells you to get ready to wait like you tells you to get ready to wait like you put an animal uh you put a piece of put an animal uh you put a piece of put an animal uh you put a piece of cheese over an area of a table and cheese over an area of a table and cheese over an area of a table and there's an electrified grid on the there's an electrified grid on the there's an electrified grid on the table. The animal knows it's table. The animal knows it's table. The animal knows it's electrified. He really they see the electrified. He really they see the electrified. He really they see the cheese, they want the some rodent. Uh cheese, they want the some rodent. Uh cheese, they want the some rodent. Uh they see the cheese, they want the they see the cheese, they want the they see the cheese, they want the cheese, but the light is on that means cheese, but the light is on that means cheese, but the light is on that means that the grit is active and they're not that the grit is active and they're not that the grit is active and they're not super hungry, so they wait, but you super hungry, so they wait, but you super hungry, so they wait, but you know, there's a part of their nervous know, there's a part of their nervous know, there's a part of their nervous system that's making that hard. Active system that's making that hard. Active system that's making that hard. Active waiting. um which also suggests another set of um which also suggests another set of um which also suggests another set of things for serotonin that it's uh things for serotonin that it's uh things for serotonin that it's uh learning about negative things. Dopamine learning about negative things. Dopamine learning about negative things. Dopamine is learning about positive things or the is learning about positive things or the is learning about positive things or the absence of negative things or the Okay, absence of negative things or the Okay, absence of negative things or the Okay, so there's ambiguity in there so there's ambiguity in there so there's ambiguity in there because the experiments aren't all that because the experiments aren't all that because the experiments aren't all that clear yet. There's an enormous amount of clear yet. There's an enormous amount of clear yet. There's an enormous amount of work going on in humans. We are the only work going on in humans. We are the only work going on in humans. We are the only group who records sub-second levels of group who records sub-second levels of group who records sub-second levels of dopamine and serotonin in conscious dopamine and serotonin in conscious dopamine and serotonin in conscious human beings while they do things. human beings while they do things. human beings while they do things. Reward motivated tasks, social Reward motivated tasks, social Reward motivated tasks, social interactions with other people, uh interactions with other people, uh interactions with other people, uh various kinds of visual perceptual various kinds of visual perceptual various kinds of visual perceptual tasks, looking at emotional tasks, looking at emotional tasks, looking at emotional u pictures, positive, negative, and u pictures, positive, negative, and u pictures, positive, negative, and neutral and whatnot. The theme that neutral and whatnot. The theme that neutral and whatnot. The theme that emerges from that is dopamine and emerges from that is dopamine and emerges from that is dopamine and serotonin are opponent to one another. serotonin are opponent to one another. serotonin are opponent to one another. When dopamine goes up, serotonin goes When dopamine goes up, serotonin goes When dopamine goes up, serotonin goes down. When serotonin goes up, dopamine down. When serotonin goes up, dopamine down. When serotonin goes up, dopamine goes down. We could talk about those goes down. We could talk about those goes down. We could talk about those events as being for positive events or events as being for positive events or events as being for positive events or anticipation of positive events. anticipation of positive events. anticipation of positive events. Dopamine goes up and serotonin goes down Dopamine goes up and serotonin goes down Dopamine goes up and serotonin goes down and opponent see that. um at your own and opponent see that. um at your own and opponent see that. um at your own institution, Rob Malinka has a set of institution, Rob Malinka has a set of institution, Rob Malinka has a set of beautiful results in rodents where the beautiful results in rodents where the beautiful results in rodents where the learning that they see in the animal learning that they see in the animal learning that they see in the animal requires that kind of opponency and I requires that kind of opponency and I requires that kind of opponency and I mean it's a definitive experiment in the mean it's a definitive experiment in the mean it's a definitive experiment in the rodent. Um, it's harder to do these rodent. Um, it's harder to do these rodent. Um, it's harder to do these things in humans because you can do things in humans because you can do things in humans because you can do simple things in humans. That's fine. simple things in humans. That's fine. simple things in humans. That's fine. But humans can sit and have an idea and But humans can sit and have an idea and But humans can sit and have an idea and it can generate these kinds of signals it can generate these kinds of signals it can generate these kinds of signals and they can run through the ideas. And and they can run through the ideas. And and they can run through the ideas. And so that that's a hard thing to both get so that that's a hard thing to both get so that that's a hard thing to both get our hands around and to do in a our hands around and to do in a our hands around and to do in a controlled setting. And so that's why controlled setting. And so that's why controlled setting. And so that's why it's been ambiguous. But the first time it's been ambiguous. But the first time it's been ambiguous. But the first time we were able to measure dopamine and we were able to measure dopamine and we were able to measure dopamine and serotonin concurrently, they look serotonin concurrently, they look serotonin concurrently, they look opponent and they look opponent all over opponent and they look opponent all over opponent and they look opponent all over the place. They're old ideas the place. They're old ideas the place. They're old ideas uh from the 60s and 70s about opponent uh from the 60s and 70s about opponent uh from the 60s and 70s about opponent systems in this sort of a effective systems in this sort of a effective systems in this sort of a effective processing space. Dopamine has now processing space. Dopamine has now processing space. Dopamine has now inherited the positive part of that and inherited the positive part of that and inherited the positive part of that and serotonin the negative part of that. serotonin the negative part of that. serotonin the negative part of that. Opponent as you know is a theme in the Opponent as you know is a theme in the Opponent as you know is a theme in the nervous system. In the retina you have nervous system. In the retina you have nervous system. In the retina you have color opponency, you have light and dark color opponency, you have light and dark color opponency, you have light and dark opponency. These kinds of information opponency. These kinds of information opponency. These kinds of information channels go all the way through to the channels go all the way through to the channels go all the way through to the visual cortex. One other thing that's visual cortex. One other thing that's visual cortex. One other thing that's interesting is that when you put SSRIs interesting is that when you put SSRIs interesting is that when you put SSRIs on people um you prevent ser selective on people um you prevent ser selective on people um you prevent ser selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors KAC serotonin reuptake inhibitors KAC serotonin reuptake inhibitors KAC fluoxitine luxro um it blocks the fluoxitine luxro um it blocks the fluoxitine luxro um it blocks the re-uptake of serotonin in the serotonin re-uptake of serotonin in the serotonin re-uptake of serotonin in the serotonin terminals over a few weeks period you terminals over a few weeks period you terminals over a few weeks period you have a clinical effect and you know for have a clinical effect and you know for have a clinical effect and you know for some people it's a life changer It's some people it's a life changer It's some people it's a life changer It's very heterogeneous. Um, but it pushes very heterogeneous. Um, but it pushes very heterogeneous. Um, but it pushes serotonin into the dopamine terminals, serotonin into the dopamine terminals, serotonin into the dopamine terminals, too. This is less well understood, too. This is less well understood, too. This is less well understood, &gt;&gt; but you know, if you were a system and &gt;&gt; but you know, if you were a system and &gt;&gt; but you know, if you were a system and you thought that the positive juice was you thought that the positive juice was you thought that the positive juice was dopamine and the negative juice was dopamine and the negative juice was dopamine and the negative juice was serotonin and you put the negative juice serotonin and you put the negative juice serotonin and you put the negative juice in the positive terminals, then the in the positive terminals, then the in the positive terminals, then the cells that control the release of that cells that control the release of that cells that control the release of that are going to chatter for positive are going to chatter for positive are going to chatter for positive things. You might start negatively things. You might start negatively things. You might start negatively conditioning on things that you should conditioning on things that you should conditioning on things that you should actually pursue and learn about. SSRIs actually pursue and learn about. SSRIs actually pursue and learn about. SSRIs have helped a great number of people. have helped a great number of people. have helped a great number of people. There have also been some devastatingly There have also been some devastatingly There have also been some devastatingly tragic circumstances where SSRIs have tragic circumstances where SSRIs have tragic circumstances where SSRIs have the theory is that they've accelerated the theory is that they've accelerated the theory is that they've accelerated uh suicidality. They've accelerated uh suicidality. They've accelerated uh suicidality. They've accelerated ahidonia. They they've created a lot of ahidonia. They they've created a lot of ahidonia. They they've created a lot of problems. If we were to just take a step problems. If we were to just take a step problems. If we were to just take a step back in terms of serotonin as learning back in terms of serotonin as learning back in terms of serotonin as learning about negative things, if you could just about negative things, if you could just about negative things, if you could just summarize these results for me AC summarize these results for me AC summarize these results for me AC animals and what the expectation animals and what the expectation animals and what the expectation would be in humans. So, let's say that would be in humans. So, let's say that would be in humans. So, let's say that somebody or an animal is learning a somebody or an animal is learning a somebody or an animal is learning a task where they get shocked. If one were task where they get shocked. If one were task where they get shocked. If one were to artificially increase serotonin, does to artificially increase serotonin, does to artificially increase serotonin, does that make somebody or an animal more or that make somebody or an animal more or that make somebody or an animal more or less likely to code something as less likely to code something as less likely to code something as negative? &gt;&gt; Well, the idea would be it makes you &gt;&gt; Well, the idea would be it makes you &gt;&gt; Well, the idea would be it makes you less likely to code something as less likely to code something as less likely to code something as negative because you have less serotonin negative because you have less serotonin negative because you have less serotonin in the serotonin terminals. And so if in the serotonin terminals. And so if in the serotonin terminals. And so if they're communicating this information they're communicating this information they're communicating this information about &gt;&gt; more serotonin in the serotonin &gt;&gt; more serotonin in the serotonin &gt;&gt; more serotonin in the serotonin terminals. &gt;&gt; Gotcha. So if somebody takes an SSRI, &gt;&gt; Gotcha. So if somebody takes an SSRI, &gt;&gt; Gotcha. So if somebody takes an SSRI, serotonin is increased and they have a serotonin is increased and they have a serotonin is increased and they have a tough interaction at work. tough interaction at work. tough interaction at work. Uh the idea is that they would encode Uh the idea is that they would encode Uh the idea is that they would encode that cognitively as less bad that cognitively as less bad that cognitively as less bad because there's an abundance of because there's an abundance of because there's an abundance of serotonin or worse than it would be had serotonin or worse than it would be had serotonin or worse than it would be had they not been on this drug. When you they not been on this drug. When you they not been on this drug. When you increase serotonin increase serotonin increase serotonin in your brain because you won't let it in your brain because you won't let it in your brain because you won't let it be vacuumed out by the normal mechanisms be vacuumed out by the normal mechanisms be vacuumed out by the normal mechanisms that clear it from your brain, then it that clear it from your brain, then it that clear it from your brain, then it has the opportunity to be there longer has the opportunity to be there longer has the opportunity to be there longer and it has the opportunity to go into and it has the opportunity to go into and it has the opportunity to go into the dopamine terminals. This is the dopamine terminals. This is the dopamine terminals. This is something we know. The the mechanisms something we know. The the mechanisms something we know. The the mechanisms that suck dopamine out of the spaces of that suck dopamine out of the spaces of that suck dopamine out of the spaces of your brain um will also bind to your brain um will also bind to your brain um will also bind to serotonin and suck it out. Not quite as serotonin and suck it out. Not quite as serotonin and suck it out. Not quite as well because it's tuned. It's called a well because it's tuned. It's called a well because it's tuned. It's called a dopamine transporter. Um, and so dopamine transporter. Um, and so dopamine transporter. Um, and so depending on what the downstream depending on what the downstream depending on what the downstream parts of your brain think, then in fact parts of your brain think, then in fact parts of your brain think, then in fact increasing serotonin could uh decrease increasing serotonin could uh decrease increasing serotonin could uh decrease the serotonin in the serotonin terminals the serotonin in the serotonin terminals the serotonin in the serotonin terminals by blocking the reuptake. I see. So by blocking the reuptake. I see. So by blocking the reuptake. I see. So that's why you said it earlier. I tried that's why you said it earlier. I tried that's why you said it earlier. I tried to correct you saying no, it's going to correct you saying no, it's going to correct you saying no, it's going to increase serotonin because you're increase serotonin because you're increase serotonin because you're blocking reuptake. You're saying no, it blocking reuptake. You're saying no, it blocking reuptake. You're saying no, it pushes serotonin into the dopamine pushes serotonin into the dopamine pushes serotonin into the dopamine terminals and this is why people might terminals and this is why people might terminals and this is why people might not get as much reward from a positive not get as much reward from a positive not get as much reward from a positive event. Correct. event. Correct. event. Correct. &gt;&gt; When serotonin is elevated &gt;&gt; When serotonin is elevated &gt;&gt; When serotonin is elevated pharmacologically, &gt;&gt; there was a killer paper 20 years ago on &gt;&gt; there was a killer paper 20 years ago on &gt;&gt; there was a killer paper 20 years ago on that where they showed they gave rodents that where they showed they gave rodents that where they showed they gave rodents um some common SSRI they waited this um some common SSRI they waited this um some common SSRI they waited this number of weeks and they went in there number of weeks and they went in there number of weeks and they went in there to say where is the serotonin. to say where is the serotonin. to say where is the serotonin. &gt;&gt; Okay. And what they showed was that the &gt;&gt; Okay. And what they showed was that the &gt;&gt; Okay. And what they showed was that the dopamine transporter pathway was the dopamine transporter pathway was the dopamine transporter pathway was the thing that was taking it into the thing that was taking it into the thing that was taking it into the dopamine terminals because that's where dopamine terminals because that's where dopamine terminals because that's where the dopamine transporters are. And so I the dopamine transporters are. And so I the dopamine transporters are. And so I don't know where that's gone since then, don't know where that's gone since then, don't know where that's gone since then, but that's a 20-year-old result. It's a but that's a 20-year-old result. It's a but that's a 20-year-old result. It's a very clear result. very clear result. very clear result. &gt;&gt; It was in a journal called Neuron. John &gt;&gt; It was in a journal called Neuron. John &gt;&gt; It was in a journal called Neuron. John Danny was the senior author. He's at Danny was the senior author. He's at Danny was the senior author. He's at Penn. Um was a remarkable paper. I don't Penn. Um was a remarkable paper. I don't Penn. Um was a remarkable paper. I don't know that people have followed up in know that people have followed up in know that people have followed up in humans. I actually think the only way to humans. I actually think the only way to humans. I actually think the only way to follow up in humans is to kind of do follow up in humans is to kind of do follow up in humans is to kind of do what we've been trying to do, which is what we've been trying to do, which is what we've been trying to do, which is develop methods of measuring these develop methods of measuring these develop methods of measuring these things in humans directly. Uh we've been things in humans directly. Uh we've been things in humans directly. Uh we've been able to do it in people that are having able to do it in people that are having able to do it in people that are having brain surgeries and they have an brain surgeries and they have an brain surgeries and they have an affliction. They're going to have a affliction. They're going to have a affliction. They're going to have a electrode put in their brain for various electrode put in their brain for various electrode put in their brain for various reasons and they let us piggyback on reasons and they let us piggyback on reasons and they let us piggyback on that. They consent obviously under that. They consent obviously under that. They consent obviously under strict ethical guidelines. Um but we can strict ethical guidelines. Um but we can strict ethical guidelines. Um but we can measure serotonin and dopamine when they measure serotonin and dopamine when they measure serotonin and dopamine when they do a rewarding task or they play a game do a rewarding task or they play a game do a rewarding task or they play a game that has a series of things that go on that has a series of things that go on that has a series of things that go on back and forth with another person. um back and forth with another person. um back and forth with another person. um which I like better which I like better which I like better &gt;&gt; in the sense that that's a more natural &gt;&gt; in the sense that that's a more natural &gt;&gt; in the sense that that's a more natural reward. Somebody does something to you reward. Somebody does something to you reward. Somebody does something to you and you do something back to them. and you do something back to them. and you do something back to them. Usually in our case they're economic Usually in our case they're economic Usually in our case they're economic games. &gt;&gt; This is encoded in money or the &gt;&gt; This is encoded in money or the &gt;&gt; This is encoded in money or the expectation of the money that's going to expectation of the money that's going to expectation of the money that's going to come and you can see strong opponency in come and you can see strong opponency in come and you can see strong opponency in dopamine and serotonin signaling in the dopamine and serotonin signaling in the dopamine and serotonin signaling in the amig deep structures in your brain. amig deep structures in your brain. amig deep structures in your brain. these experiments, if people positively these experiments, if people positively these experiments, if people positively anticipate um because things are quote unquote um because things are quote unquote um because things are quote unquote going well uh for them, uh you see going well uh for them, uh you see going well uh for them, uh you see dopamine going up and you see serotonin dopamine going up and you see serotonin dopamine going up and you see serotonin going down. going down. going down. &gt;&gt; And if they're losing at this game or &gt;&gt; And if they're losing at this game or &gt;&gt; And if they're losing at this game or they feel like the game isn't going well they feel like the game isn't going well they feel like the game isn't going well for them in some way, um there's more for them in some way, um there's more for them in some way, um there's more uncertainty perhaps. Serotonin goes up uncertainty perhaps. Serotonin goes up uncertainty perhaps. Serotonin goes up and dopamine goes down. and dopamine goes down. and dopamine goes down. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Interesting. And then there's state &gt;&gt; Interesting. And then there's state &gt;&gt; Interesting. And then there's state changes in your brain that can be changes in your brain that can be changes in your brain that can be induced by, for example, making somebody induced by, for example, making somebody induced by, for example, making somebody hungry &gt;&gt; where we don't really know how to &gt;&gt; where we don't really know how to &gt;&gt; where we don't really know how to explain what we're seeing, but they explain what we're seeing, but they explain what we're seeing, but they still show opponency. What would you say still show opponency. What would you say still show opponency. What would you say uh being hungry does to the dynamics for uh being hungry does to the dynamics for uh being hungry does to the dynamics for let's just take them one at a time, let's just take them one at a time, let's just take them one at a time, dopamine, does dopamine still increase dopamine, does dopamine still increase dopamine, does dopamine still increase for positive events when people are for positive events when people are for positive events when people are hungry? &gt;&gt; No. Not in rodent in rodent model. I &gt;&gt; No. Not in rodent in rodent model. I &gt;&gt; No. Not in rodent in rodent model. I can talk about rodent models. We are can talk about rodent models. We are can talk about rodent models. We are actually in the middle of doing actually in the middle of doing actually in the middle of doing something like that now where people something like that now where people something like that now where people come in the morning hungry. Uh in come in the morning hungry. Uh in come in the morning hungry. Uh in this case, these are people with this case, these are people with this case, these are people with epilepsy that have wires in their head. epilepsy that have wires in their head. epilepsy that have wires in their head. Um and we do an experiment on them when Um and we do an experiment on them when Um and we do an experiment on them when they're right before they're going to they're right before they're going to they're right before they're going to eat. And then we repeat the experiment eat. And then we repeat the experiment eat. And then we repeat the experiment after they've eaten. But in rodents it's after they've eaten. But in rodents it's after they've eaten. But in rodents it's very clear very clear very clear uh I guess at the level of the amydala uh I guess at the level of the amydala uh I guess at the level of the amydala if you make a rodent hungry then you can if you make a rodent hungry then you can if you make a rodent hungry then you can show that dopamine will encode um show that dopamine will encode um show that dopamine will encode um something like punishment prediction something like punishment prediction something like punishment prediction errors not reward prediction errors. In errors not reward prediction errors. In errors not reward prediction errors. In other words it does it's like it flips other words it does it's like it flips other words it does it's like it flips its role. It's like if you're in a how its role. It's like if you're in a how its role. It's like if you're in a how hungry do you have to be? I don't know hungry do you have to be? I don't know hungry do you have to be? I don't know how it feels to be a hungry rat but um how it feels to be a hungry rat but um how it feels to be a hungry rat but um imagine that it put it in an emergency imagine that it put it in an emergency imagine that it put it in an emergency state. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, it's not just a kind of like &gt;&gt; Okay. So, it's not just a kind of like &gt;&gt; Okay. So, it's not just a kind of like I mean I don't do any formal like I mean I don't do any formal like I mean I don't do any formal intermittent fasting, but I usually eat intermittent fasting, but I usually eat intermittent fasting, but I usually eat my first meal somewhere around my first meal somewhere around my first meal somewhere around between 10:00 and noon. Uh, and at 9:00 between 10:00 and noon. Uh, and at 9:00 between 10:00 and noon. Uh, and at 9:00 a.m. I'm like mildly hungry. I could a.m. I'm like mildly hungry. I could a.m. I'm like mildly hungry. I could eat, but I'm eat, but I'm eat, but I'm &gt;&gt; by four. You would be hungry. &gt;&gt; by four. You would be hungry. &gt;&gt; by four. You would be hungry. &gt;&gt; I'd be really hungry. &gt;&gt; I'd be really hungry. &gt;&gt; I'd be really hungry. &gt;&gt; You'd be you'd feel it. You'd feel what &gt;&gt; You'd be you'd feel it. You'd feel what &gt;&gt; You'd be you'd feel it. You'd feel what we've all felt when we're hungry. we've all felt when we're hungry. we've all felt when we're hungry. &gt;&gt; And um this is a guy called Mark &gt;&gt; And um this is a guy called Mark &gt;&gt; And um this is a guy called Mark Anderman at Harvard. Anderman at Harvard. Anderman at Harvard. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I know Mark. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I know Mark. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I know Mark. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, he puts animals in starvation states &gt;&gt; So, he puts animals in starvation states &gt;&gt; So, he puts animals in starvation states and he shows that dopamine will encode and he shows that dopamine will encode and he shows that dopamine will encode aversive events, aversive errors. very aversive events, aversive errors. very aversive events, aversive errors. very clear result. clear result. clear result. &gt;&gt; So folks, &gt;&gt; So folks, &gt;&gt; So folks, &gt;&gt; I know this because he called me. I &gt;&gt; I know this because he called me. I &gt;&gt; I know this because he called me. I mean, we met. mean, we met. mean, we met. &gt;&gt; So when your kid boyfriend or girlfriend &gt;&gt; So when your kid boyfriend or girlfriend &gt;&gt; So when your kid boyfriend or girlfriend is hungry and you're going to a show or is hungry and you're going to a show or is hungry and you're going to a show or you're going someplace, you got to feed you're going someplace, you got to feed you're going someplace, you got to feed them if they want to uh if you want them if they want to uh if you want them if they want to uh if you want them to enjoy the time. I mean, that's sort to enjoy the time. I mean, that's sort to enjoy the time. I mean, that's sort of obvious on the one hand, but I don't of obvious on the one hand, but I don't of obvious on the one hand, but I don't think we really think we really think we really &gt;&gt; Oh, it's even better than that. There's &gt;&gt; Oh, it's even better than that. There's &gt;&gt; Oh, it's even better than that. There's an Israeli paper from I don't know about an Israeli paper from I don't know about an Israeli paper from I don't know about 10 years ago where they looked at judges 10 years ago where they looked at judges 10 years ago where they looked at judges and the judgments that were made if you and the judgments that were made if you and the judgments that were made if you hadn't eaten versus judgments that you hadn't eaten versus judgments that you hadn't eaten versus judgments that you made that you had eaten and you really made that you had eaten and you really made that you had eaten and you really want a judge that's had a good lunch. want a judge that's had a good lunch. want a judge that's had a good lunch. &gt;&gt; Very interesting. So general state of &gt;&gt; Very interesting. So general state of &gt;&gt; Very interesting. So general state of stress because hunger is a form of stress because hunger is a form of stress because hunger is a form of stress. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. uh drives the direction of the dopamine uh drives the direction of the dopamine uh drives the direction of the dopamine um to either reinforce positive things um to either reinforce positive things um to either reinforce positive things or reinforce negative. Yeah. Cuz think or reinforce negative. Yeah. Cuz think or reinforce negative. Yeah. Cuz think about it. If you get to a state where about it. If you get to a state where about it. If you get to a state where you're really starving, things have not you're really starving, things have not you're really starving, things have not been going well for a long time. been going well for a long time. been going well for a long time. You've been making really bad decisions. You've been making really bad decisions. You've been making really bad decisions. The creek dried up. The, you know, some The creek dried up. The, you know, some The creek dried up. The, you know, some forest fire came through and ruined your forest fire came through and ruined your forest fire came through and ruined your foraging area or whatever. things your foraging area or whatever. things your foraging area or whatever. things are going really bad, are you are going really bad, are you are going really bad, are you going to really sit around and wait for going to really sit around and wait for going to really sit around and wait for the rewards? The main thing you want the rewards? The main thing you want the rewards? The main thing you want to do is stay alive. If you don't stay to do is stay alive. If you don't stay to do is stay alive. If you don't stay alive, it doesn't matter what rewards alive, it doesn't matter what rewards alive, it doesn't matter what rewards you chase. And so, in a sense, flipping you chase. And so, in a sense, flipping you chase. And so, in a sense, flipping dopamine's meaning is exactly what you'd dopamine's meaning is exactly what you'd dopamine's meaning is exactly what you'd want to do. You're in an emergency want to do. You're in an emergency want to do. You're in an emergency state, and you want to use this state, and you want to use this state, and you want to use this reinforcement system, this expectation reinforcement system, this expectation reinforcement system, this expectation system to stay alive. You want to pay system to stay alive. You want to pay system to stay alive. You want to pay attention mainly to those things. You attention mainly to those things. You attention mainly to those things. You want to pay attention to them. You want to pay attention to them. You want to pay attention to them. You want to be motivated by them. We want to be to be motivated by them. We want to be to be motivated by them. We want to be motivated and pay attention and avoid motivated and pay attention and avoid motivated and pay attention and avoid the negative things. But that's an the negative things. But that's an the negative things. But that's an emergency state. When I talk to people emergency state. When I talk to people emergency state. When I talk to people about how um reinforcement learning about how um reinforcement learning about how um reinforcement learning models say have an impact on how you models say have an impact on how you models say have an impact on how you should train an animal, uh typically in should train an animal, uh typically in should train an animal, uh typically in my case, it's in the laboratory setting, my case, it's in the laboratory setting, my case, it's in the laboratory setting, but you could use this other dogs for but you could use this other dogs for but you could use this other dogs for example. Training animals with really negative Training animals with really negative Training animals with really negative feedback is a really bad thing to do feedback is a really bad thing to do feedback is a really bad thing to do because what happens when you get really because what happens when you get really because what happens when you get really negative feedback. You're in a mall, negative feedback. You're in a mall, negative feedback. You're in a mall, somebody shot beside you. That's somebody shot beside you. That's somebody shot beside you. That's negative feedback. What happens? You negative feedback. What happens? You negative feedback. What happens? You have in the extreme case, you have PTSD. have in the extreme case, you have PTSD. have in the extreme case, you have PTSD. But what you do is you overgeneralize. But what you do is you overgeneralize. But what you do is you overgeneralize. That was so bad it's rational for your That was so bad it's rational for your That was so bad it's rational for your nervous system to think anything that nervous system to think anything that nervous system to think anything that looks like the mall, the fear will looks like the mall, the fear will looks like the mall, the fear will start to come. It'll move out to the start to come. It'll move out to the start to come. It'll move out to the curb. It'll eress. This is the whole curb. It'll eress. This is the whole curb. It'll eress. This is the whole PTSD cycle. But that's rational. That's PTSD cycle. But that's rational. That's PTSD cycle. But that's rational. That's rational. That was a that was an rational. That was a that was an rational. That was a that was an absolutely unexpected cataclysmic event. absolutely unexpected cataclysmic event. absolutely unexpected cataclysmic event. You better and you don't know what could You better and you don't know what could You better and you don't know what could have caused it really as far as have caused it really as far as have caused it really as far as events leading to it. So you events leading to it. So you events leading to it. So you overgeneralize and all. So you don't overgeneralize and all. So you don't overgeneralize and all. So you don't learn very well like that. So you know a learn very well like that. So you know a learn very well like that. So you know a teacher that instead of when you miss teacher that instead of when you miss teacher that instead of when you miss when you're trying to add fractions and when you're trying to add fractions and when you're trying to add fractions and you don't get a common denominator quite you don't get a common denominator quite you don't get a common denominator quite right. Um, when she takes a ruler and right. Um, when she takes a ruler and right. Um, when she takes a ruler and slaps you over the hand. They could slaps you over the hand. They could slaps you over the hand. They could still do that when I was in school. This still do that when I was in school. This still do that when I was in school. This is a generational shift. A good one. is a generational shift. A good one. is a generational shift. A good one. Uh, that's a really bad way to teach me Uh, that's a really bad way to teach me Uh, that's a really bad way to teach me to find a common denominator. Instead, to find a common denominator. Instead, to find a common denominator. Instead, you could just say, you know, nudge, you could just say, you know, nudge, you could just say, you know, nudge, nudge. nudge, nudge. nudge, nudge. &gt;&gt; Anytime someone says, I have a friend, &gt;&gt; Anytime someone says, I have a friend, &gt;&gt; Anytime someone says, I have a friend, it's like code on the internet for like it's like code on the internet for like it's like code on the internet for like it's actually you and that's like the I it's actually you and that's like the I it's actually you and that's like the I have a friend, you know, but so I have a have a friend, you know, but so I have a have a friend, you know, but so I have a friend. Um, people might be surprised to friend. Um, people might be surprised to friend. Um, people might be surprised to hear that I have friends. Perhaps not. I hear that I have friends. Perhaps not. I hear that I have friends. Perhaps not. I have a lot of friends and um he's a have a lot of friends and um he's a have a lot of friends and um he's a lawyer and prior to becoming a lawyer he lawyer and prior to becoming a lawyer he lawyer and prior to becoming a lawyer he studied torture. studied torture. studied torture. &gt;&gt; In what context? &gt;&gt; In what context? &gt;&gt; In what context? &gt;&gt; Yeah. He was going to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. He was going to be &gt;&gt; Yeah. He was going to be &gt;&gt; torture 101. &gt;&gt; torture 101. &gt;&gt; torture 101. &gt;&gt; No, he was going to become a &gt;&gt; No, he was going to become a &gt;&gt; No, he was going to become a psychiatrist and he did a rotation with psychiatrist and he did a rotation with psychiatrist and he did a rotation with former victims of torture former victims of torture former victims of torture &gt;&gt; and then it took him down this rabbit &gt;&gt; and then it took him down this rabbit &gt;&gt; and then it took him down this rabbit hole of political, you know, political hole of political, you know, political hole of political, you know, political torture and the history of that. He's a torture and the history of that. He's a torture and the history of that. He's a real history buff. He's a very real history buff. He's a very real history buff. He's a very benevolent person, very kind. benevolent person, very kind. benevolent person, very kind. Uh but he told me something interesting Uh but he told me something interesting Uh but he told me something interesting that I think tells me that some people that I think tells me that some people that I think tells me that some people figured out this um thing that if figured out this um thing that if figured out this um thing that if somebody is stressed enough it um somebody is stressed enough it um somebody is stressed enough it um contorts the dopamine reward contingency contorts the dopamine reward contingency contorts the dopamine reward contingency um so that dopamine no longer encodes um so that dopamine no longer encodes um so that dopamine no longer encodes positive things. It just tries to positive things. It just tries to positive things. It just tries to prevent things from getting worse is prevent things from getting worse is prevent things from getting worse is what we're basically saying here. He what we're basically saying here. He what we're basically saying here. He said that the way that people torture said that the way that people torture said that the way that people torture people to get information from them is people to get information from them is people to get information from them is actually pretty surprising, at least it actually pretty surprising, at least it actually pretty surprising, at least it was to me, which is they hurt them a was to me, which is they hurt them a was to me, which is they hurt them a little bit and then they tell them little bit and then they tell them little bit and then they tell them they're going to hurt them a lot and they're going to hurt them a lot and they're going to hurt them a lot and then they don't. Rather than hurting then they don't. Rather than hurting then they don't. Rather than hurting them a lot, somehow what they by hurting them a lot, somehow what they by hurting them a lot, somehow what they by hurting them a little bit and then telling them a little bit and then telling them a little bit and then telling them this is going to get much worse unless this is going to get much worse unless this is going to get much worse unless &gt;&gt; people give up more information &gt;&gt; people give up more information &gt;&gt; people give up more information is it's interesting. And I think it is it's interesting. And I think it is it's interesting. And I think it speaks exactly to this mechanism where speaks exactly to this mechanism where speaks exactly to this mechanism where the mechanism speaks. the mechanism speaks. the mechanism speaks. &gt;&gt; If you hurt a person a lot, &gt;&gt; If you hurt a person a lot, &gt;&gt; If you hurt a person a lot, &gt;&gt; that's cataclysmic. That's categorical. &gt;&gt; that's cataclysmic. That's categorical. &gt;&gt; that's cataclysmic. That's categorical. I'm going to thank you for not breaking I'm going to thank you for not breaking I'm going to thank you for not breaking my arms again on Tuesday, my arms again on Tuesday, my arms again on Tuesday, &gt;&gt; right? I mean, if you break limb &gt;&gt; right? I mean, if you break limb &gt;&gt; right? I mean, if you break limb and you do these cataclysmic things and you do these cataclysmic things and you do these cataclysmic things which leave them near death. There's which leave them near death. There's which leave them near death. There's nothing left. nothing left. nothing left. &gt;&gt; It's a bad way to train someone. So, I &gt;&gt; It's a bad way to train someone. So, I &gt;&gt; It's a bad way to train someone. So, I mean, what I'm what I'm trying to say is mean, what I'm what I'm trying to say is mean, what I'm what I'm trying to say is I understand that. And the odd thing is I understand that. And the odd thing is I understand that. And the odd thing is when you stress someone enough, it's when you stress someone enough, it's when you stress someone enough, it's remarkable what becomes re rewarding. remarkable what becomes re rewarding. remarkable what becomes re rewarding. You know, the incremental removal of You know, the incremental removal of You know, the incremental removal of threat um given that you've made good on a um given that you've made good on a um given that you've made good on a little promise could be a lot. I mean little promise could be a lot. I mean little promise could be a lot. I mean I &gt;&gt; Oh, I I've seen that. &gt;&gt; Oh, I I've seen that. &gt;&gt; Oh, I I've seen that. &gt;&gt; That doesn't even have to be as extreme &gt;&gt; That doesn't even have to be as extreme &gt;&gt; That doesn't even have to be as extreme as torture, as torture, as torture, &gt;&gt; right? read uh doses in family read dos &gt;&gt; right? read uh doses in family read dos &gt;&gt; right? read uh doses in family read dos jeski and look at the family dynamics jeski and look at the family dynamics jeski and look at the family dynamics and go you know they're dialing knobs on and go you know they're dialing knobs on and go you know they're dialing knobs on you know degrees of punishment and you know degrees of punishment and you know degrees of punishment and it's very effective it's very effective it's very effective &gt;&gt; let's take the inverse of this let's &gt;&gt; let's take the inverse of this let's &gt;&gt; let's take the inverse of this let's shine some light in the room so to speak shine some light in the room so to speak shine some light in the room so to speak what if dopamine gets too high and I'm what if dopamine gets too high and I'm what if dopamine gets too high and I'm not talking about methamphetamine which not talking about methamphetamine which not talking about methamphetamine which will really skyrocket dopamine um I will really skyrocket dopamine um I will really skyrocket dopamine um I would say when people are on uh very would say when people are on uh very would say when people are on uh very high levels of dopamineergic drugs like high levels of dopamineergic drugs like high levels of dopamineergic drugs like methamphetamine or cocaine. like methamphetamine or cocaine. like methamphetamine or cocaine. Everything seems like a good idea to Everything seems like a good idea to Everything seems like a good idea to them and they become very self-obsessed. them and they become very self-obsessed. them and they become very self-obsessed. In fact, um there's a wonderful In fact, um there's a wonderful In fact, um there's a wonderful documentary about the Grateful Dead that documentary about the Grateful Dead that documentary about the Grateful Dead that I watched recently before Bob Weir died I watched recently before Bob Weir died I watched recently before Bob Weir died um which they someone was saying, you um which they someone was saying, you um which they someone was saying, you know, at some point in the mid80s uh it know, at some point in the mid80s uh it know, at some point in the mid80s uh it got a lot harder to make great music. got a lot harder to make great music. got a lot harder to make great music. And someone said, "What happened?" And someone said, "What happened?" And someone said, "What happened?" And they said, "Cocaine." He said, "Why they said, "Cocaine." He said, "Why they said, "Cocaine." He said, "Why would cocaine do that?" and he said would cocaine do that?" and he said would cocaine do that?" and he said because it's a me drug. because it's a me drug. because it's a me drug. &gt;&gt; Dopamine and cocaine are synonymous with &gt;&gt; Dopamine and cocaine are synonymous with &gt;&gt; Dopamine and cocaine are synonymous with one another. But there are a lot of one another. But there are a lot of one another. But there are a lot of situations where people are situations where people are situations where people are overindulging themselves with food, overindulging themselves with food, overindulging themselves with food, overindulging themselves with um overindulging themselves with um overindulging themselves with um dopamineergic activities. Um what does dopamineergic activities. Um what does dopamineergic activities. Um what does that do to the reward? If you look at it that do to the reward? If you look at it that do to the reward? If you look at it on the average, it resets expectations on the average, it resets expectations on the average, it resets expectations where very few if any natural events can where very few if any natural events can where very few if any natural events can exceed them. exceed them. exceed them. I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most member after searching for the most member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or harmful plastics and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function levels of mercury in my blood. function not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been limiting my tuna consumption. I'd been eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and glutathione production and glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be physical health that can only be physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to function. So, I to get early access to function. So, I to get early access to function. So, I rescued a dog once. Um, rescued a dog once. Um, rescued a dog once. Um, back I mean when I was a kid, I kept back I mean when I was a kid, I kept back I mean when I was a kid, I kept lots of animals when I was a kid. I had lots of animals when I was a kid. I had lots of animals when I was a kid. I had um my father told me at the end, oh no, um my father told me at the end, oh no, um my father told me at the end, oh no, you had over 30 cats. you had over 30 cats. you had over 30 cats. &gt;&gt; Oh my god. They stayed outside. That was &gt;&gt; Oh my god. They stayed outside. That was &gt;&gt; Oh my god. They stayed outside. That was back when animals I just kind of back when animals I just kind of back when animals I just kind of &gt;&gt; 30 cats. &gt;&gt; 30 cats. &gt;&gt; 30 cats. &gt;&gt; I had a cat. The cat had a litter. There &gt;&gt; I had a cat. The cat had a litter. There &gt;&gt; I had a cat. The cat had a litter. There were seven in the litter. They all were seven in the litter. They all were seven in the litter. They all survived. Then uh a good for you, man. survived. Then uh a good for you, man. survived. Then uh a good for you, man. &gt;&gt; I wasn't really a budding scientist &gt;&gt; I wasn't really a budding scientist &gt;&gt; I wasn't really a budding scientist then, but I realized in retrospect that then, but I realized in retrospect that then, but I realized in retrospect that I really watched them. I really watched them. I really watched them. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Okay. And understood the behavior. And &gt;&gt; Okay. And understood the behavior. And &gt;&gt; Okay. And understood the behavior. And there was this dog, this little dog that there was this dog, this little dog that there was this dog, this little dog that I rescued that had been beat up and I rescued that had been beat up and I rescued that had been beat up and stuff. And stuff. And stuff. And &gt;&gt; um that dog was never right. It was it &gt;&gt; um that dog was never right. It was it &gt;&gt; um that dog was never right. It was it had been so abused that basically it had been so abused that basically it had been so abused that basically it started out by biting you, right? And started out by biting you, right? And started out by biting you, right? And that's what that's what happens when you that's what that's what happens when you that's what that's what happens when you hurt a animal, you know, when you take hurt a animal, you know, when you take hurt a animal, you know, when you take it past the edge. Of course, then it past the edge. Of course, then it past the edge. Of course, then you take it even further and you have you take it even further and you have you take it even further and you have learned helplessness where you just sit learned helplessness where you just sit learned helplessness where you just sit and don't do anything. and don't do anything. and don't do anything. &gt;&gt; It was tragic. &gt;&gt; It was tragic. &gt;&gt; It was tragic. &gt;&gt; Um I couldn't get that dog to lighten up &gt;&gt; Um I couldn't get that dog to lighten up &gt;&gt; Um I couldn't get that dog to lighten up those cats and but her world was those cats and but her world was those cats and but her world was inverted permanently. Had just been inverted permanently. Had just been inverted permanently. Had just been completely inverted. Up was down, down completely inverted. Up was down, down completely inverted. Up was down, down was down was up. was down was up. was down was up. &gt;&gt; Basic safety was reward. Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; Basic safety was reward. Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; Basic safety was reward. Uh-huh. &gt;&gt; Everything else, &gt;&gt; Everything else, &gt;&gt; Everything else, &gt;&gt; you were in an emergency state. It's &gt;&gt; you were in an emergency state. It's &gt;&gt; you were in an emergency state. It's just a lot easier as a as a behavioral just a lot easier as a as a behavioral just a lot easier as a as a behavioral commitment to just start out by biting commitment to just start out by biting commitment to just start out by biting because you're going to have to bite at because you're going to have to bite at because you're going to have to bite at some point anyway. some point anyway. some point anyway. &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; And &gt;&gt; yeah, well, I think we've all known some &gt;&gt; yeah, well, I think we've all known some &gt;&gt; yeah, well, I think we've all known some people like this. And it's tragic people like this. And it's tragic people like this. And it's tragic to see. Yeah. hurt. People have a and to see. Yeah. hurt. People have a and to see. Yeah. hurt. People have a and um it's interesting as we get more and um it's interesting as we get more and um it's interesting as we get more and more knowledge about how to hack and more knowledge about how to hack and more knowledge about how to hack that and intervene on that um it'd that and intervene on that um it'd that and intervene on that um it'd be nice to be able to fix people like be nice to be able to fix people like be nice to be able to fix people like that. I think they would like to be that. I think they would like to be that. I think they would like to be fixed. I think of some people I know um fixed. I think of some people I know um fixed. I think of some people I know um a cousin in particular. Um a cousin in particular. Um a cousin in particular. Um drugs of abuse, you know, do this to drugs of abuse, you know, do this to drugs of abuse, you know, do this to people. They just, you know, they get people. They just, you know, they get people. They just, you know, they get people into these states where they just people into these states where they just people into these states where they just um people make decisions that they know are people make decisions that they know are people make decisions that they know are going to lead to, you know, they've done going to lead to, you know, they've done going to lead to, you know, they've done it before and they're just going to go it before and they're just going to go it before and they're just going to go down the hole again. I have lots of down the hole again. I have lots of down the hole again. I have lots of family members where that would be true. family members where that would be true. family members where that would be true. I think nowadays we all know or are I think nowadays we all know or are I think nowadays we all know or are aware of people that did that because of aware of people that did that because of aware of people that did that because of the incredible expansion of availability the incredible expansion of availability the incredible expansion of availability of drugs of abuse including prescription of drugs of abuse including prescription of drugs of abuse including prescription drugs. Um drugs. Um drugs. Um &gt;&gt; I think &gt;&gt; I think &gt;&gt; I think if I may, I just want to just to make if I may, I just want to just to make if I may, I just want to just to make sure that I'm staying oriented here. sure that I'm staying oriented here. sure that I'm staying oriented here. Here's where we've gotten. It seems Here's where we've gotten. It seems Here's where we've gotten. It seems dopamine encodes positive expectation and rewards encodes positive expectation and rewards encodes positive expectation and rewards and it's graded. You can have low and it's graded. You can have low and it's graded. You can have low levels, medium or high levels depending levels, medium or high levels depending levels, medium or high levels depending on how much positive anticipation. Um on how much positive anticipation. Um on how much positive anticipation. Um serotonin seems to encode negative serotonin seems to encode negative serotonin seems to encode negative events. Um if a human or an animal um events. Um if a human or an animal um events. Um if a human or an animal um sadly uh is raised in conditions or sadly uh is raised in conditions or sadly uh is raised in conditions or spends enough time in conditions where spends enough time in conditions where spends enough time in conditions where true rewards aren't there and survival true rewards aren't there and survival true rewards aren't there and survival itself becomes the reward, the dopamine itself becomes the reward, the dopamine itself becomes the reward, the dopamine system will adjust its baseline so that system will adjust its baseline so that system will adjust its baseline so that it's just fighting for the survival. And it's just fighting for the survival. And it's just fighting for the survival. And it's important when you're fighting for it's important when you're fighting for it's important when you're fighting for survival to recognize and anticipate survival to recognize and anticipate survival to recognize and anticipate negative events. And so the Anderman's negative events. And so the Anderman's negative events. And so the Anderman's work shows that it does prediction on work shows that it does prediction on work shows that it does prediction on the outcome that's going to be negative the outcome that's going to be negative the outcome that's going to be negative and it gives you a positive pulse for and it gives you a positive pulse for and it gives you a positive pulse for that. You better go learn about that that. You better go learn about that that. You better go learn about that thing. &gt;&gt; You better learn about this thing &gt;&gt; You better learn about this thing &gt;&gt; You better learn about this thing because you're in a negative state. I because you're in a negative state. I because you're in a negative state. I don't know how you got here, but I don't know how you got here, but I don't know how you got here, but you're in a real you're in an emergency you're in a real you're in an emergency you're in a real you're in an emergency state. &gt;&gt; You know, this is what stress would put &gt;&gt; You know, this is what stress would put &gt;&gt; You know, this is what stress would put you in. And so positive becomes you in. And so positive becomes you in. And so positive becomes negative. You need to have positive negative. You need to have positive negative. You need to have positive prediction errors to the prediction of prediction errors to the prediction of prediction errors to the prediction of negative events because that's what's negative events because that's what's negative events because that's what's going to keep you alive by paying going to keep you alive by paying going to keep you alive by paying attention to that. attention to that. attention to that. &gt;&gt; I keep coming back to relationships, but &gt;&gt; I keep coming back to relationships, but &gt;&gt; I keep coming back to relationships, but there's so many examples from friends in there's so many examples from friends in there's so many examples from friends in my life. Um I have of a really good my life. Um I have of a really good my life. Um I have of a really good friend who uh had a series of very friend who uh had a series of very friend who uh had a series of very challenging relationships. I mean very challenging relationships. I mean very challenging relationships. I mean just and just brutal and then has just and just brutal and then has just and just brutal and then has entered a phase of his life where things entered a phase of his life where things entered a phase of his life where things are really good and really peaceful and are really good and really peaceful and are really good and really peaceful and um for about the first I don't know 3 um for about the first I don't know 3 um for about the first I don't know 3 years of that new healthy relationship I years of that new healthy relationship I years of that new healthy relationship I hey how's it going and he'd be like and hey how's it going and he'd be like and hey how's it going and he'd be like and he used to say uh he used to say uh he used to say uh I'm like a cat in a room full of rocking I'm like a cat in a room full of rocking I'm like a cat in a room full of rocking chairs he'd say and I go is why it's chairs he'd say and I go is why it's chairs he'd say and I go is why it's tense and he goes no it's so calm and I tense and he goes no it's so calm and I tense and he goes no it's so calm and I would say Only recently has that would say Only recently has that would say Only recently has that message changed and now he's like really message changed and now he's like really message changed and now he's like really I mean he's really flourishing. The I mean he's really flourishing. The I mean he's really flourishing. The relationship is flourishing. The whole relationship is flourishing. The whole relationship is flourishing. The whole landscape around it is flourishing and landscape around it is flourishing and landscape around it is flourishing and it's really cool to see. But it's really cool to see. But it's really cool to see. But it's exactly what you're talking about. You exactly what you're talking about. You exactly what you're talking about. You know, it takes some time of feeling safe know, it takes some time of feeling safe know, it takes some time of feeling safe for somebody to stop just thinking they for somebody to stop just thinking they for somebody to stop just thinking they need to fight for survival and safety. need to fight for survival and safety. need to fight for survival and safety. And then it seems that the dopamine And then it seems that the dopamine And then it seems that the dopamine system can then adjust its baseline so system can then adjust its baseline so system can then adjust its baseline so that it can now work for rewards again. that it can now work for rewards again. that it can now work for rewards again. &gt;&gt; Um, pretty incredible. Makes good sense &gt;&gt; Um, pretty incredible. Makes good sense &gt;&gt; Um, pretty incredible. Makes good sense that the dopamine system will be that the dopamine system will be that the dopamine system will be adaptive in this way and not just for adaptive in this way and not just for adaptive in this way and not just for rewards because throughout human rewards because throughout human rewards because throughout human evolution, I mean, people have had to evolution, I mean, people have had to evolution, I mean, people have had to deal with tremendous hardship and stress deal with tremendous hardship and stress deal with tremendous hardship and stress when things are really shitty. What is when things are really shitty. What is when things are really shitty. What is the serotonin system doing? the serotonin system doing? the serotonin system doing? &gt;&gt; Much less has been done on that. The the &gt;&gt; Much less has been done on that. The the &gt;&gt; Much less has been done on that. The the thing that we know for sure in humans is thing that we know for sure in humans is thing that we know for sure in humans is that in all these probes that we have that in all these probes that we have that in all these probes that we have done um it's opponent. It's opponent. It done um it's opponent. It's opponent. It done um it's opponent. It's opponent. It it is going the opposite direction. Some it is going the opposite direction. Some it is going the opposite direction. Some of the best data is from humans, not of the best data is from humans, not of the best data is from humans, not rodents. It's it's a minority rodents. It's it's a minority rodents. It's it's a minority observation in rodents. I mean there observation in rodents. I mean there observation in rodents. I mean there it's scattered. it's scattered. it's scattered. &gt;&gt; Um it's quite hard to engineer the &gt;&gt; Um it's quite hard to engineer the &gt;&gt; Um it's quite hard to engineer the behavior in a rodent. I think it's behavior in a rodent. I think it's behavior in a rodent. I think it's &gt;&gt; Well, I love that we're talking about &gt;&gt; Well, I love that we're talking about &gt;&gt; Well, I love that we're talking about humans. I mean most people listening are humans. I mean most people listening are humans. I mean most people listening are interested in humans. Uh, I am totally interested in humans. Uh, I am totally interested in humans. Uh, I am totally fascinated to the point of being blown fascinated to the point of being blown fascinated to the point of being blown away by this SS SSRI thing that if away by this SS SSRI thing that if away by this SS SSRI thing that if serotonin reuptake inhibitors uh drive serotonin reuptake inhibitors uh drive serotonin reuptake inhibitors uh drive up serotonin, which they do, they up serotonin, which they do, they up serotonin, which they do, they prevent reuptake that some of that prevent reuptake that some of that prevent reuptake that some of that serotonin gets into the dopamine. A lot serotonin gets into the dopamine. A lot serotonin gets into the dopamine. A lot of it does. of it does. of it does. &gt;&gt; A lot of it does. Why haven't we been &gt;&gt; A lot of it does. Why haven't we been &gt;&gt; A lot of it does. Why haven't we been told this? told this? told this? &gt;&gt; And then it lowers the rewarding &gt;&gt; And then it lowers the rewarding &gt;&gt; And then it lowers the rewarding properties of good stuff. properties of good stuff. properties of good stuff. &gt;&gt; That's the best way to explain it. And &gt;&gt; That's the best way to explain it. And &gt;&gt; That's the best way to explain it. And you know, it's science. Somebody doesn't you know, it's science. Somebody doesn't you know, it's science. Somebody doesn't think that's the explanation. But the think that's the explanation. But the think that's the explanation. But the fact is, when you put an SSRI on, the fact is, when you put an SSRI on, the fact is, when you put an SSRI on, the serotonin that's released due to serotonin that's released due to serotonin that's released due to activity in serotonin neurons, it's not activity in serotonin neurons, it's not activity in serotonin neurons, it's not going back into serotonin terminals. going back into serotonin terminals. going back into serotonin terminals. Where does it go? This paper by John Where does it go? This paper by John Where does it go? This paper by John Danny in 2005 showed it goes into the Danny in 2005 showed it goes into the Danny in 2005 showed it goes into the dopamine system. And he knows that dopamine system. And he knows that dopamine system. And he knows that because he could block the dopamine because he could block the dopamine because he could block the dopamine reuptake. And you and it was a 40% reuptake. And you and it was a 40% reuptake. And you and it was a 40% difference. So there's all this difference. So there's all this difference. So there's all this serotonin sitting there in these serotonin sitting there in these serotonin sitting there in these terminals they're going to be releasing. terminals they're going to be releasing. terminals they're going to be releasing. Now it's the negative juice. Let's say Now it's the negative juice. Let's say Now it's the negative juice. Let's say let's say that on the other side of this let's say that on the other side of this let's say that on the other side of this signaling pathway um electrical activity signaling pathway um electrical activity signaling pathway um electrical activity comes through. You release this comes through. You release this comes through. You release this transmitter. It has an impact and the transmitter. It has an impact and the transmitter. It has an impact and the receiver goes, "Oh, I'm getting a lot of receiver goes, "Oh, I'm getting a lot of receiver goes, "Oh, I'm getting a lot of negative stuff here." But in fact, it's negative stuff here." But in fact, it's negative stuff here." But in fact, it's because it's sitting in neurons that because it's sitting in neurons that because it's sitting in neurons that chatter for positive things. You would chatter for positive things. You would chatter for positive things. You would have a hard time learning about positive have a hard time learning about positive have a hard time learning about positive things. You might also register negative things. You might also register negative things. You might also register negative events as being rewarding and you learn events as being rewarding and you learn events as being rewarding and you learn yourself into a kind of depression that yourself into a kind of depression that yourself into a kind of depression that way. That's an interesting set of way. That's an interesting set of way. That's an interesting set of possibilities, physical possibilities. possibilities, physical possibilities. possibilities, physical possibilities. &gt;&gt; Um, yeah, that was a fantastic paper. I &gt;&gt; Um, yeah, that was a fantastic paper. I &gt;&gt; Um, yeah, that was a fantastic paper. I don't know why it didn't sort of catch don't know why it didn't sort of catch don't know why it didn't sort of catch on. I think there um I don't remember, on. I think there um I don't remember, on. I think there um I don't remember, but I know John Danny quite well and he but I know John Danny quite well and he but I know John Danny quite well and he did hard experiments and they took a did hard experiments and they took a did hard experiments and they took a long time. long time. long time. &gt;&gt; We'll put a reference to the paper. I &gt;&gt; We'll put a reference to the paper. I &gt;&gt; We'll put a reference to the paper. I think uh I'll answer my own question by think uh I'll answer my own question by think uh I'll answer my own question by saying that I think that really good saying that I think that really good saying that I think that really good scientific findings and theories need scientific findings and theories need scientific findings and theories need advocacy to get led. advocacy to get led. advocacy to get led. &gt;&gt; They need a shepherd. &gt;&gt; They need a shepherd. &gt;&gt; They need a shepherd. &gt;&gt; They need a shepherd. I mean, it's part &gt;&gt; They need a shepherd. I mean, it's part &gt;&gt; They need a shepherd. I mean, it's part of the reason I started the podcast and of the reason I started the podcast and of the reason I started the podcast and invite amazing guests like you and like invite amazing guests like you and like invite amazing guests like you and like Terry on and people who really think Terry on and people who really think Terry on and people who really think deeply about the whole field and deeply about the whole field and deeply about the whole field and you're changing the way that I think you're changing the way that I think you're changing the way that I think about serotonin, SSRIs, dopamine. You're about serotonin, SSRIs, dopamine. You're about serotonin, SSRIs, dopamine. You're expanding all of it truly. Um, and I expanding all of it truly. Um, and I expanding all of it truly. Um, and I know for those listening it's that's know for those listening it's that's know for those listening it's that's also true. I know you're chomping at the also true. I know you're chomping at the also true. I know you're chomping at the bit to talk about learning algorithms bit to talk about learning algorithms bit to talk about learning algorithms and AI, but I want to know first about and AI, but I want to know first about and AI, but I want to know first about the experiments where you stuck wires up the experiments where you stuck wires up the experiments where you stuck wires up people's noses and recorded uh dopamine people's noses and recorded uh dopamine people's noses and recorded uh dopamine signals in their noses because um these signals in their noses because um these signals in their noses because um these are wild and cool experiments. are wild and cool experiments. are wild and cool experiments. &gt;&gt; They are. And they're not wild and cool &gt;&gt; They are. And they're not wild and cool &gt;&gt; They are. And they're not wild and cool because of me. They're wild and cool because of me. They're wild and cool because of me. They're wild and cool because of Christina Zelano at because of Christina Zelano at because of Christina Zelano at Northwestern. But let me say one thing Northwestern. But let me say one thing Northwestern. But let me say one thing about how we do measure dopamine in about how we do measure dopamine in about how we do measure dopamine in human brains. We do it in very human brains. We do it in very human brains. We do it in very specialized circumstances where you are specialized circumstances where you are specialized circumstances where you are having a deep brain stimulating having a deep brain stimulating having a deep brain stimulating electrode put into your brain to treat a electrode put into your brain to treat a electrode put into your brain to treat a movement disorder like Parkinson's movement disorder like Parkinson's movement disorder like Parkinson's disease or a central tremors. So when disease or a central tremors. So when disease or a central tremors. So when you have that and a minority of patients you have that and a minority of patients you have that and a minority of patients choose to have a small bur hole put in choose to have a small bur hole put in choose to have a small bur hole put in their head and under careful operating their head and under careful operating their head and under careful operating room procedures it's put down into room procedures it's put down into room procedures it's put down into different structures in your brain. We different structures in your brain. We different structures in your brain. We won't name them and then turned on. won't name them and then turned on. won't name them and then turned on. Okay? and it's symptomrevieving. Okay? and it's symptomrevieving. Okay? and it's symptomrevieving. Essential tremors is like Parkinson's Essential tremors is like Parkinson's Essential tremors is like Parkinson's disease. You have tremors and you have disease. You have tremors and you have disease. You have tremors and you have difficulty with movement and whatnot. I difficulty with movement and whatnot. I difficulty with movement and whatnot. I don't think you have the emotional don't think you have the emotional don't think you have the emotional problems the Parkinson's patients do, problems the Parkinson's patients do, problems the Parkinson's patients do, but it's not Parkinson's. You have not but it's not Parkinson's. You have not but it's not Parkinson's. You have not lost dopamine. If you give an essential lost dopamine. If you give an essential lost dopamine. If you give an essential tremor patient um dopamine drugs like tremor patient um dopamine drugs like tremor patient um dopamine drugs like they do Parkinson's patients, they get they do Parkinson's patients, they get they do Parkinson's patients, they get much worse. Okay, the tremors are much worse. Okay, the tremors are much worse. Okay, the tremors are typically just really irritating for typically just really irritating for typically just really irritating for people and so they do elective people and so they do elective people and so they do elective neurosurgery to have uh microwars put in neurosurgery to have uh microwars put in neurosurgery to have uh microwars put in their brain and it's a very active area their brain and it's a very active area their brain and it's a very active area of clinical neuroscience and clinical of clinical neuroscience and clinical of clinical neuroscience and clinical treatment. Parkinson's disease also you treatment. Parkinson's disease also you treatment. Parkinson's disease also you can have a stimulating electrode put in. can have a stimulating electrode put in. can have a stimulating electrode put in. When you do that, you put a little tiny, When you do that, you put a little tiny, When you do that, you put a little tiny, and I mean tiny, u guide tube down and I mean tiny, u guide tube down and I mean tiny, u guide tube down and they drop the electrodes in there. And they drop the electrodes in there. And they drop the electrodes in there. And under those circumstances, we ask to put under those circumstances, we ask to put under those circumstances, we ask to put uh an electrode in equipped with a uh an electrode in equipped with a uh an electrode in equipped with a neural network model that knows how to neural network model that knows how to neural network model that knows how to interpret electrical signals on the interpret electrical signals on the interpret electrical signals on the electrode as dopamine, serotonin, electrode as dopamine, serotonin, electrode as dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine, pH, and peroxide norepinephrine, pH, and peroxide norepinephrine, pH, and peroxide fluctuations. Um, this isn't exactly, fluctuations. Um, this isn't exactly, fluctuations. Um, this isn't exactly, you know, you don't go into Walmart and you know, you don't go into Walmart and you know, you don't go into Walmart and find this kind of stuff. I mean, the find this kind of stuff. I mean, the find this kind of stuff. I mean, the reason nobody's heard about it is reason nobody's heard about it is reason nobody's heard about it is because it's a very specialized area because it's a very specialized area because it's a very specialized area right on the edge of translational right on the edge of translational right on the edge of translational neuroscience. And so, it's there that neuroscience. And so, it's there that neuroscience. And so, it's there that we've gotten recordings from deep in the we've gotten recordings from deep in the we've gotten recordings from deep in the brain. What's amazing is when you ask brain. What's amazing is when you ask brain. What's amazing is when you ask people, would you let us piggyback on people, would you let us piggyback on people, would you let us piggyback on your electrodes because the electrodes your electrodes because the electrodes your electrodes because the electrodes that they use have research contacts and that they use have research contacts and that they use have research contacts and we can make measurements of these we can make measurements of these we can make measurements of these transmitters without sitting on any of transmitters without sitting on any of transmitters without sitting on any of the clinical bandwidth. In other words, the clinical bandwidth. In other words, the clinical bandwidth. In other words, we don't eat up any of the ability of we don't eat up any of the ability of we don't eat up any of the ability of the neurologist to use the electrode the neurologist to use the electrode the neurologist to use the electrode output um to make decisions about the output um to make decisions about the output um to make decisions about the treatment. Okay, there are a lot of treatment. Okay, there are a lot of treatment. Okay, there are a lot of moving parts in that. These these are moving parts in that. These these are moving parts in that. These these are I've been doing this for a while. And so I've been doing this for a while. And so I've been doing this for a while. And so for about the last 12 years, I've I got for about the last 12 years, I've I got for about the last 12 years, I've I got very motivated to measure dopamine in very motivated to measure dopamine in very motivated to measure dopamine in human beings at time scales that were human beings at time scales that were human beings at time scales that were physiological and during cognitive physiological and during cognitive physiological and during cognitive events that we find meaningful. Okay. events that we find meaningful. Okay. events that we find meaningful. Okay. So, I thought the method was very clever. I thought the method was very clever. I thought the method was very clever. I won't even go into talking about the won't even go into talking about the won't even go into talking about the method. It kind of worked right away. method. It kind of worked right away. method. It kind of worked right away. Um, but the entire process didn't Um, but the entire process didn't Um, but the entire process didn't work right away and it's taken way over work right away and it's taken way over work right away and it's taken way over a decade. I mean, took a lot of work. a decade. I mean, took a lot of work. a decade. I mean, took a lot of work. Um, so we have sites set up around the Um, so we have sites set up around the Um, so we have sites set up around the world where we do these things. Okay. world where we do these things. Okay. world where we do these things. Okay. It's in that context that we have got It's in that context that we have got It's in that context that we have got knowledge about how to use these depth knowledge about how to use these depth knowledge about how to use these depth electrodes to instead of just measuring electrodes to instead of just measuring electrodes to instead of just measuring electrical activity to do electrical activity to do electrical activity to do neurochemistry. Okay. Then I ran into neurochemistry. Okay. Then I ran into neurochemistry. Okay. Then I ran into Christina Zolano who's an old factory Christina Zolano who's an old factory Christina Zolano who's an old factory physiologist at Northwestern un full physiologist at Northwestern un full physiologist at Northwestern un full professor at Northwestern University professor at Northwestern University professor at Northwestern University very gifted. What Christina was doing very gifted. What Christina was doing very gifted. What Christina was doing was taking these depth electrodes that was taking these depth electrodes that was taking these depth electrodes that are FDA approved normally used to be put are FDA approved normally used to be put are FDA approved normally used to be put carefully down into the tissue of your carefully down into the tissue of your carefully down into the tissue of your brain. They're basically just rubbery brain. They're basically just rubbery brain. They're basically just rubbery little tubes about a millimeter in little tubes about a millimeter in little tubes about a millimeter in diameter and snaking it up people's nose diameter and snaking it up people's nose diameter and snaking it up people's nose and just laying it up against a region and just laying it up against a region and just laying it up against a region of the olfactory epithelium. part of the olfactory epithelium. part of the olfactory epithelium. part of your tissue inside your nose way up high your tissue inside your nose way up high your tissue inside your nose way up high basically around here basically around here basically around here &gt;&gt; near your eyeball &gt;&gt; near your eyeball &gt;&gt; near your eyeball &gt;&gt; near your eyeball above your eyeball &gt;&gt; near your eyeball above your eyeball &gt;&gt; near your eyeball above your eyeball above and northwest of your eyeball if above and northwest of your eyeball if above and northwest of your eyeball if you know how to put okay you know how to put okay you know how to put okay &gt;&gt; um and doing electrophysiology listening &gt;&gt; um and doing electrophysiology listening &gt;&gt; um and doing electrophysiology listening to the electrical activity and she to the electrical activity and she to the electrical activity and she already had she had rodent model stuff already had she had rodent model stuff already had she had rodent model stuff that okay and I went I can totally get that okay and I went I can totally get that okay and I went I can totally get the chemistry off of that and why is the chemistry off of that and why is the chemistry off of that and why is that important well other than being that important well other than being that important well other than being weird. You can consent healthy people weird. You can consent healthy people weird. You can consent healthy people into doing this. You can snake this into doing this. You can snake this into doing this. You can snake this thing up there and clip it to their thing up there and clip it to their thing up there and clip it to their nostril, set up the electronics beside nostril, set up the electronics beside nostril, set up the electronics beside them, and then you can do all kinds of them, and then you can do all kinds of them, and then you can do all kinds of stuff, including letting them eat, stuff, including letting them eat, stuff, including letting them eat, letting them do mindfulness, meditation, letting them do mindfulness, meditation, letting them do mindfulness, meditation, breathing exercises, breathing exercises, breathing exercises, uh letting them do decision-making tasks uh letting them do decision-making tasks uh letting them do decision-making tasks with and without other people. You can with and without other people. You can with and without other people. You can do simple things like just a uh a do simple things like just a uh a do simple things like just a uh a stimulus and then squirt odor in there, stimulus and then squirt odor in there, stimulus and then squirt odor in there, a rewarding smell, a rewarding smell, a rewarding smell, &gt;&gt; and measure dopamine and serotonin. Oh &gt;&gt; and measure dopamine and serotonin. Oh &gt;&gt; and measure dopamine and serotonin. Oh yeah. And so we're giddy about this yeah. And so we're giddy about this yeah. And so we're giddy about this mainly because we can consent healthy mainly because we can consent healthy mainly because we can consent healthy people into doing this. One of the people into doing this. One of the people into doing this. One of the complaints of course of doing it in complaints of course of doing it in complaints of course of doing it in people with epilepsy and Parkinson's and people with epilepsy and Parkinson's and people with epilepsy and Parkinson's and whatnot is they have epilepsy and whatnot is they have epilepsy and whatnot is they have epilepsy and Parkinson. They have an affliction on Parkinson. They have an affliction on Parkinson. They have an affliction on board. Could you just share with us are board. Could you just share with us are board. Could you just share with us are there any um top contour statements that there any um top contour statements that there any um top contour statements that we can make about brain state um we can make about brain state um we can make about brain state um dopamine and serotonin as measured off dopamine and serotonin as measured off dopamine and serotonin as measured off uh through the nose. like for uh through the nose. like for uh through the nose. like for instance if you see a fluctuation in instance if you see a fluctuation in instance if you see a fluctuation in dopamine through one of these nasal dopamine through one of these nasal dopamine through one of these nasal probes. &gt;&gt; Okay. What we see uh in the nasal &gt;&gt; Okay. What we see uh in the nasal &gt;&gt; Okay. What we see uh in the nasal recordings looks very much like exactly recordings looks very much like exactly recordings looks very much like exactly what we would expect if we were what we would expect if we were what we would expect if we were recording from the neurons in the recording from the neurons in the recording from the neurons in the midbrain based on what people have midbrain based on what people have midbrain based on what people have recorded on the simple experiments. You recorded on the simple experiments. You recorded on the simple experiments. You know there's a Q there's a reward know there's a Q there's a reward know there's a Q there's a reward there's this it went up it went down there's this it went up it went down there's this it went up it went down that kind of thing there. This is a that kind of thing there. This is a that kind of thing there. This is a positive picture. This is a negative positive picture. This is a negative positive picture. This is a negative picture. This is positive effect. This picture. This is positive effect. This picture. This is positive effect. This is negative effect. is negative effect. is negative effect. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, dopamine increases when &gt;&gt; Okay. So, dopamine increases when &gt;&gt; Okay. So, dopamine increases when there's a positive expectation. there's a positive expectation. there's a positive expectation. Serotonin increases when there's a Serotonin increases when there's a Serotonin increases when there's a negative expectation. And you're negative expectation. And you're negative expectation. And you're recording that from the nose essentially recording that from the nose essentially recording that from the nose essentially non-invasively except some somebody has non-invasively except some somebody has non-invasively except some somebody has to &gt;&gt; apparently the language is minimally &gt;&gt; apparently the language is minimally &gt;&gt; apparently the language is minimally invasive. &gt;&gt; All right. Well, &gt;&gt; All right. Well, &gt;&gt; All right. Well, cool. I can live with minimally cool. I can live with minimally cool. I can live with minimally invasive. So, I haven't done it yet invasive. So, I haven't done it yet invasive. So, I haven't done it yet myself because when I went in when I was myself because when I went in when I was myself because when I went in when I was scheduled to do it, we realized we had u scheduled to do it, we realized we had u scheduled to do it, we realized we had u clipped the age at 65 and I had a clipped the age at 65 and I had a clipped the age at 65 and I had a birthday on Sunday and I aged out. So, birthday on Sunday and I aged out. So, birthday on Sunday and I aged out. So, I'm How old are you now? I'm How old are you now? I'm How old are you now? &gt;&gt; I'm 66. &gt;&gt; I'm 66. &gt;&gt; I'm 66. &gt;&gt; You're looking good, man. &gt;&gt; You're looking good, man. &gt;&gt; You're looking good, man. &gt;&gt; People are going to be like, "What are &gt;&gt; People are going to be like, "What are &gt;&gt; People are going to be like, "What are you What are your protocols?" You know, you What are your protocols?" You know, you What are your protocols?" You know, raise five kids, run a big lad. Never raise five kids, run a big lad. Never raise five kids, run a big lad. Never sleep. &gt;&gt; Never. Do you not sleep? &gt;&gt; Never. Do you not sleep? &gt;&gt; Never. Do you not sleep? &gt;&gt; Never sleep. Not really. &gt;&gt; Never sleep. Not really. &gt;&gt; Never sleep. Not really. &gt;&gt; Do you not sleep well or you just work &gt;&gt; Do you not sleep well or you just work &gt;&gt; Do you not sleep well or you just work all the time? You know, my dad who died all the time? You know, my dad who died all the time? You know, my dad who died at 91 in 2021, uh, he didn't sleep. at 91 in 2021, uh, he didn't sleep. at 91 in 2021, uh, he didn't sleep. You know, take that Matt Walker, Brian You know, take that Matt Walker, Brian You know, take that Matt Walker, Brian Johnson. You don't have to sleep to live Johnson. You don't have to sleep to live Johnson. You don't have to sleep to live to 9 hours. A lot of that's genetics. to 9 hours. A lot of that's genetics. to 9 hours. A lot of that's genetics. It's completely I'm just teasing. A lot It's completely I'm just teasing. A lot It's completely I'm just teasing. A lot of that's genetics. I think I do find of that's genetics. I think I do find of that's genetics. I think I do find on six hours I prefer seven, but I don't on six hours I prefer seven, but I don't on six hours I prefer seven, but I don't need eight. I definitely do not need eight. I definitely do not need eight. I definitely do not need eight. &gt;&gt; It's really variable with people. And &gt;&gt; It's really variable with people. And &gt;&gt; It's really variable with people. And then there's the cognitive people, the then there's the cognitive people, the then there's the cognitive people, the people that develop an opinion about how people that develop an opinion about how people that develop an opinion about how well or long they slept. And that idea well or long they slept. And that idea well or long they slept. And that idea um circulates in their mind. I didn't um circulates in their mind. I didn't um circulates in their mind. I didn't get much sleep last night. get much sleep last night. get much sleep last night. &gt;&gt; How much do you sleep per night? I know &gt;&gt; How much do you sleep per night? I know &gt;&gt; How much do you sleep per night? I know we're taking a tangent here, but people we're taking a tangent here, but people we're taking a tangent here, but people will find this interesting, and I will find this interesting, and I will find this interesting, and I certainly do. certainly do. certainly do. &gt;&gt; Okay. When I was younger, it would be &gt;&gt; Okay. When I was younger, it would be &gt;&gt; Okay. When I was younger, it would be like 4. like 4. like 4. &gt;&gt; Okay. I know another person like that. &gt;&gt; Okay. I know another person like that. &gt;&gt; Okay. I know another person like that. &gt;&gt; Okay. Now, because I get up really, &gt;&gt; Okay. Now, because I get up really, &gt;&gt; Okay. Now, because I get up really, really early. really early. really early. &gt;&gt; What time do you get up? &gt;&gt; What time do you get up? &gt;&gt; What time do you get up? &gt;&gt; I get up 3:30, 4 in the morning. I &gt;&gt; I get up 3:30, 4 in the morning. I &gt;&gt; I get up 3:30, 4 in the morning. I really enjoy quiet. really enjoy quiet. really enjoy quiet. &gt;&gt; What time do you go to sleep? &gt;&gt; What time do you go to sleep? &gt;&gt; What time do you go to sleep? &gt;&gt; Well, I go to sleep twice, but yeah. You &gt;&gt; Well, I go to sleep twice, but yeah. You &gt;&gt; Well, I go to sleep twice, but yeah. You know, I'll fall asleep in the evening. know, I'll fall asleep in the evening. know, I'll fall asleep in the evening. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And then I wake up. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And then I wake up. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And then I wake up. &gt;&gt; What time in the evening? Like 8 n &gt;&gt; What time in the evening? Like 8 n &gt;&gt; What time in the evening? Like 8 n &gt;&gt; 8. &gt;&gt; 8. &gt;&gt; 8. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; I sleep till 10:00. &gt;&gt; I sleep till 10:00. &gt;&gt; I sleep till 10:00. &gt;&gt; But if I do that, I feel good. &gt;&gt; But if I do that, I feel good. &gt;&gt; But if I do that, I feel good. &gt;&gt; And then I have to pretend like I'm need &gt;&gt; And then I have to pretend like I'm need &gt;&gt; And then I have to pretend like I'm need to go to bed. And so I'll lie down and to go to bed. And so I'll lie down and to go to bed. And so I'll lie down and then, you know, when everything's quiet, then, you know, when everything's quiet, then, you know, when everything's quiet, I'll move back downstairs. The way I do I'll move back downstairs. The way I do I'll move back downstairs. The way I do science is I have to get quiet. That science is I have to get quiet. That science is I have to get quiet. That part I can't do with other people. I part I can't do with other people. I part I can't do with other people. I have to do it in dead quiet. The data have to do it in dead quiet. The data have to do it in dead quiet. The data would say that first round of short would say that first round of short would say that first round of short sleep, you're grabbing your deep sleep. sleep, you're grabbing your deep sleep. sleep, you're grabbing your deep sleep. You're getting your growth hormone You're getting your growth hormone You're getting your growth hormone surge. Um, which is great. bodily repair surge. Um, which is great. bodily repair surge. Um, which is great. bodily repair sufficient to keep you healthy sufficient to keep you healthy sufficient to keep you healthy enough and the second phase probably enough and the second phase probably enough and the second phase probably you're getting some REM sleep and enough you're getting some REM sleep and enough you're getting some REM sleep and enough to seem like an emotionally stable guy. to seem like an emotionally stable guy. to seem like an emotionally stable guy. So &gt;&gt; yeah, that's not true. But I you know, &gt;&gt; yeah, that's not true. But I you know, &gt;&gt; yeah, that's not true. But I you know, my mom who's also who died in 2023 at my mom who's also who died in 2023 at my mom who's also who died in 2023 at almost 90. Um almost 90. Um almost 90. Um &gt;&gt; she used to complain to me as a child, &gt;&gt; she used to complain to me as a child, &gt;&gt; she used to complain to me as a child, you're up. I because I'd you're up. I because I'd you're up. I because I'd wander outside and back when I was a wander outside and back when I was a wander outside and back when I was a kid, no one was scared of anything, you kid, no one was scared of anything, you kid, no one was scared of anything, you know? So I'd walk out in the dark and I know? So I'd walk out in the dark and I know? So I'd walk out in the dark and I might walk a mile away from home or might walk a mile away from home or might walk a mile away from home or something. I mean, we just weren't something. I mean, we just weren't something. I mean, we just weren't scared of anything then. You know, now scared of anything then. You know, now scared of anything then. You know, now we're scared of everything. But um and I we're scared of everything. But um and I we're scared of everything. But um and I worried about it until I got a little worried about it until I got a little worried about it until I got a little older, till I was 12 or 13 years old. older, till I was 12 or 13 years old. older, till I was 12 or 13 years old. And then I just realized I'm if I'm just And then I just realized I'm if I'm just And then I just realized I'm if I'm just going to decide how I think I feel going to decide how I think I feel going to decide how I think I feel &gt;&gt; and that's it. And everybody else is &gt;&gt; and that's it. And everybody else is &gt;&gt; and that's it. And everybody else is different than me. And I and I was different than me. And I and I was different than me. And I and I was raised in a community where raised in a community where raised in a community where there was clearly something wrong with there was clearly something wrong with there was clearly something wrong with me compared to everybody else. Right. So me compared to everybody else. Right. So me compared to everybody else. Right. So &gt;&gt; or maybe someone was wrong with all of &gt;&gt; or maybe someone was wrong with all of &gt;&gt; or maybe someone was wrong with all of them. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, maybe. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, maybe. Um &gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, maybe. Um &gt;&gt; I mean it's cool that you learn to trust &gt;&gt; I mean it's cool that you learn to trust &gt;&gt; I mean it's cool that you learn to trust that. Um because we get a lot of that. Um because we get a lot of that. Um because we get a lot of messages about we need X Y and Z and I messages about we need X Y and Z and I messages about we need X Y and Z and I mean you clearly you know you're a mean you clearly you know you're a mean you clearly you know you're a competitive athlete, your lab's done competitive athlete, your lab's done competitive athlete, your lab's done spectacularly well. I mean it works spectacularly well. I mean it works spectacularly well. I mean it works for you. So you know if it works for you for you. So you know if it works for you for you. So you know if it works for you it probably also helped with raising it probably also helped with raising it probably also helped with raising kids because uh having all that energy kids because uh having all that energy kids because uh having all that energy to raise five kids is to raise five kids is to raise five kids is &gt;&gt; well I've had two marriages so maybe it &gt;&gt; well I've had two marriages so maybe it &gt;&gt; well I've had two marriages so maybe it worked or didn't work but worked or didn't work but worked or didn't work but &gt;&gt; so you have some conditioning too. &gt;&gt; so you have some conditioning too. &gt;&gt; so you have some conditioning too. &gt;&gt; So you know what I hear you talk about &gt;&gt; So you know what I hear you talk about &gt;&gt; So you know what I hear you talk about we'll delete that. I hear you talk about we'll delete that. I hear you talk about we'll delete that. I hear you talk about people like I just think to myself, people like I just think to myself, people like I just think to myself, &gt;&gt; oh, you know, I have this person, they &gt;&gt; oh, you know, I have this person, they &gt;&gt; oh, you know, I have this person, they have a relationship, D. Um, the one have a relationship, D. Um, the one have a relationship, D. Um, the one thing that does for you is you back off thing that does for you is you back off thing that does for you is you back off people a little bit. people a little bit. people a little bit. &gt;&gt; What does for you? &gt;&gt; What does for you? &gt;&gt; What does for you? &gt;&gt; Divorce. &gt;&gt; Divorce. &gt;&gt; Divorce. &gt;&gt; You kind of go if you're think at all &gt;&gt; You kind of go if you're think at all &gt;&gt; You kind of go if you're think at all about it, you just go, about it, you just go, about it, you just go, nobody is one thing. Everybody's a nobody is one thing. Everybody's a nobody is one thing. Everybody's a little complicated. little complicated. little complicated. Nobody's Mother Teresa 99.9% of the Nobody's Mother Teresa 99.9% of the Nobody's Mother Teresa 99.9% of the time. They're they're, you know, they time. They're they're, you know, they time. They're they're, you know, they were a jerk last Thursday or they were a jerk last Thursday or they were a jerk last Thursday or they were this. And nobody gets through life this. And nobody gets through life this. And nobody gets through life without making stupid dumbass mistakes. without making stupid dumbass mistakes. without making stupid dumbass mistakes. Um, and it's easy to be judgmental until and it's easy to be judgmental until and it's easy to be judgmental until something bad has happened to you, like something bad has happened to you, like something bad has happened to you, like something really kind of soul crushing, something really kind of soul crushing, something really kind of soul crushing, you know, like a divorce, and you have you know, like a divorce, and you have you know, like a divorce, and you have to go because generally it's there are to go because generally it's there are to go because generally it's there are two people involved in that. And so um two people involved in that. And so um two people involved in that. And so um that's a learning that's a learning that's a learning that's a learning that's a learning that's a learning lesson that helped me uh in many it's lesson that helped me uh in many it's lesson that helped me uh in many it's helped me in many ways. I appreciate my helped me in many ways. I appreciate my helped me in many ways. I appreciate my life now life now life now &gt;&gt; for reason and I and I wouldn't do it if &gt;&gt; for reason and I and I wouldn't do it if &gt;&gt; for reason and I and I wouldn't do it if I didn't have those kind of scars. Um I didn't have those kind of scars. Um I didn't have those kind of scars. Um also science uh I don't know if you talk also science uh I don't know if you talk also science uh I don't know if you talk about this science is a contact sport. about this science is a contact sport. about this science is a contact sport. &gt;&gt; I haven't talked so much about this. &gt;&gt; I haven't talked so much about this. &gt;&gt; I haven't talked so much about this. &gt;&gt; Science is a contact sport at the at the &gt;&gt; Science is a contact sport at the at the &gt;&gt; Science is a contact sport at the at the leading edge. Science is a contact leading edge. Science is a contact leading edge. Science is a contact sport. And you know, um, there are a lot sport. And you know, um, there are a lot sport. And you know, um, there are a lot of smart people doing science on the of smart people doing science on the of smart people doing science on the world stage and certainly on the world stage and certainly on the world stage and certainly on the American stage. And they're out there American stage. And they're out there American stage. And they're out there sort of battling at the frontier. And sort of battling at the frontier. And sort of battling at the frontier. And the first thing that happens when the first thing that happens when the first thing that happens when you do anything good is, you know, you do anything good is, you know, you do anything good is, you know, out come the chain mail and the maces out come the chain mail and the maces out come the chain mail and the maces and whatnot. And you have to you kind of and whatnot. And you have to you kind of and whatnot. And you have to you kind of have to fight for yourself a little bit. have to fight for yourself a little bit. have to fight for yourself a little bit. Uh, and so then you ask you it asks of Uh, and so then you ask you it asks of Uh, and so then you ask you it asks of you to look inside yourself like do I is you to look inside yourself like do I is you to look inside yourself like do I is this an important problem? Do I really this an important problem? Do I really this an important problem? Do I really believe this result? And our job, the believe this result? And our job, the believe this result? And our job, the reason we're paid tax money to discover reason we're paid tax money to discover reason we're paid tax money to discover stuff is our job is to push the edge of stuff is our job is to push the edge of stuff is our job is to push the edge of what we know, not sit there just, you what we know, not sit there just, you what we know, not sit there just, you know, getting money to twiddle our know, getting money to twiddle our know, getting money to twiddle our thumbs. And so if you're on the edge, thumbs. And so if you're on the edge, thumbs. And so if you're on the edge, you're going to make mistakes or you're going to make mistakes or you're going to make mistakes or you're going to be wrong or you're going to be going to be wrong or you're going to be going to be wrong or you're going to be attacked or not popular, you know. Um, attacked or not popular, you know. Um, attacked or not popular, you know. Um, and that never ends. We call it the and that never ends. We call it the and that never ends. We call it the reviewer two syndrome. reviewer two syndrome. reviewer two syndrome. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Reviewer two is the one that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Reviewer two is the one that &gt;&gt; Yeah. Reviewer two is the one that &gt;&gt; reviewer two &gt;&gt; reviewer two &gt;&gt; reviewer two &gt;&gt; makes your life more difficult but maybe &gt;&gt; makes your life more difficult but maybe &gt;&gt; makes your life more difficult but maybe makes the papers better in the long run. makes the papers better in the long run. makes the papers better in the long run. It makes us stronger. It's the brutally It makes us stronger. It's the brutally It makes us stronger. It's the brutally hard coach of our career. I mean I'm no hard coach of our career. I mean I'm no hard coach of our career. I mean I'm no longer running a lab but did until a few longer running a lab but did until a few longer running a lab but did until a few years ago. And I'll tell you that the years ago. And I'll tell you that the years ago. And I'll tell you that the other thing that's brutally hard about other thing that's brutally hard about other thing that's brutally hard about science &gt;&gt; is that just the work is hard. The &gt;&gt; is that just the work is hard. The &gt;&gt; is that just the work is hard. The culture of it also has some punishing culture of it also has some punishing culture of it also has some punishing features but they build us. They make us features but they build us. They make us features but they build us. They make us stronger. But it's one of the few stronger. But it's one of the few stronger. But it's one of the few professions where there are others, but professions where there are others, but professions where there are others, but it's one of the few professions where it's one of the few professions where it's one of the few professions where you have to work exceedingly hard to get you have to work exceedingly hard to get you have to work exceedingly hard to get the resources just to do the work. So, the resources just to do the work. So, the resources just to do the work. So, it's like having two jobs um wrapped it's like having two jobs um wrapped it's like having two jobs um wrapped into one. And I had no idea that's where into one. And I had no idea that's where into one. And I had no idea that's where knowledge and textbooks came from when I knowledge and textbooks came from when I knowledge and textbooks came from when I was 10 and living in Mon, Georgia. I was 10 and living in Mon, Georgia. I was 10 and living in Mon, Georgia. I uh I don't think most people do. Part of I don't think most people do. Part of I don't think most people do. Part of the reason we started this podcast is the reason we started this podcast is the reason we started this podcast is that people should interface with that people should interface with that people should interface with scientists, learn from them, understand scientists, learn from them, understand scientists, learn from them, understand kind of some of what it's about. I mean, kind of some of what it's about. I mean, kind of some of what it's about. I mean, it's still an awesome it's still an awesome it's still an awesome endeavor, right? To discover things, but endeavor, right? To discover things, but endeavor, right? To discover things, but you're right. You have to have some real you're right. You have to have some real you're right. You have to have some real fortitude, but you're not told that when fortitude, but you're not told that when fortitude, but you're not told that when you join the club. you join the club. you join the club. &gt;&gt; No, not so much. &gt;&gt; No, not so much. &gt;&gt; No, not so much. &gt;&gt; You're not really told that. You're &gt;&gt; You're not really told that. You're &gt;&gt; You're not really told that. You're you're generally uh science is a you're generally uh science is a you're generally uh science is a um you're an assistant. You're an um you're an assistant. You're an um you're an assistant. You're an apprentice. It's an apprenticeship apprentice. It's an apprenticeship apprentice. It's an apprenticeship training. Mhm. training. Mhm. training. Mhm. &gt;&gt; You go sit by some person who's great at &gt;&gt; You go sit by some person who's great at &gt;&gt; You go sit by some person who's great at X and the main thing you do is you X and the main thing you do is you X and the main thing you do is you absorb them doing the all these little things. them doing the all these little things. them doing the all these little things. It's not training in X and Y and Z in It's not training in X and Y and Z in It's not training in X and Y and Z in school and whatnot. It's not like that school and whatnot. It's not like that school and whatnot. It's not like that at all. It's not like getting grades in at all. It's not like getting grades in at all. It's not like getting grades in school, but you do absorb stuff from school, but you do absorb stuff from school, but you do absorb stuff from smart people around you. Um I've smart people around you. Um I've smart people around you. Um I've benefited from an enormous number of um benefited from an enormous number of um benefited from an enormous number of um firebrand intuitive people that are in firebrand intuitive people that are in firebrand intuitive people that are in um but you're typically not paying for but you're typically not paying for but you're typically not paying for yourself. Then then you go out and you yourself. Then then you go out and you yourself. Then then you go out and you try to do your own thing and you're like try to do your own thing and you're like try to do your own thing and you're like gosh I you know it's bracing in a way. I you know it's bracing in a way. I you know it's bracing in a way. Um, the American system I think is I Um, the American system I think is I Um, the American system I think is I don't know how to compare to Europe, don't know how to compare to Europe, don't know how to compare to Europe, even though I've had European grants, even though I've had European grants, even though I've had European grants, but I've never been plugged in the but I've never been plugged in the but I've never been plugged in the system here. We're we're hard on system here. We're we're hard on system here. We're we're hard on each other here. And I've had people each other here. And I've had people each other here. And I've had people that have been on uh study review panels that have been on uh study review panels that have been on uh study review panels &gt;&gt; from Europe on American study review &gt;&gt; from Europe on American study review &gt;&gt; from Europe on American study review panels who say, "Wow, you guys are just panels who say, "Wow, you guys are just panels who say, "Wow, you guys are just &gt;&gt; I thought you were slapping everybody on &gt;&gt; I thought you were slapping everybody on &gt;&gt; I thought you were slapping everybody on the back." And the back." And the back." And &gt;&gt; oh, no. I sat on study section review &gt;&gt; oh, no. I sat on study section review &gt;&gt; oh, no. I sat on study section review panels for a lot of years. I was a panels for a lot of years. I was a panels for a lot of years. I was a regular member. and you go in there regular member. and you go in there regular member. and you go in there knowing you're going to have to knowing you're going to have to knowing you're going to have to eliminate 70% of the grants that eliminate 70% of the grants that eliminate 70% of the grants that you read. So you sort of advocate you read. So you sort of advocate you read. So you sort of advocate for the ones that you really like, but for the ones that you really like, but for the ones that you really like, but you have to come up with reasons why you have to come up with reasons why you have to come up with reasons why you dislike things and that's an you dislike things and that's an you dislike things and that's an unfortunate consequence of not enough unfortunate consequence of not enough unfortunate consequence of not enough funding. I do think that things are funding. I do think that things are funding. I do think that things are changing um somewhat and there are other changing um somewhat and there are other changing um somewhat and there are other sources of funding fortunately sources of funding fortunately sources of funding fortunately philanthropy uh foundations um but yeah philanthropy uh foundations um but yeah philanthropy uh foundations um but yeah it it's not for the weak of heart uh at it it's not for the weak of heart uh at it it's not for the weak of heart uh at all and having a minimal sleep need all and having a minimal sleep need all and having a minimal sleep need definitely helps I mean I don't know definitely helps I mean I don't know definitely helps I mean I don't know anyone that succeeds in science without anyone that succeeds in science without anyone that succeeds in science without working really hard working really hard working really hard &gt;&gt; I will also say if you really want to &gt;&gt; I will also say if you really want to &gt;&gt; I will also say if you really want to get your ass kicked just become a public get your ass kicked just become a public get your ass kicked just become a public facing person but science made all facing person but science made all facing person but science made all of this feel much easier. of this feel much easier. of this feel much easier. &gt;&gt; Like there's much easier. I mean, it's &gt;&gt; Like there's much easier. I mean, it's &gt;&gt; Like there's much easier. I mean, it's different, right? But science, I mean, different, right? But science, I mean, different, right? But science, I mean, &gt;&gt; I don't want to get into war stories &gt;&gt; I don't want to get into war stories &gt;&gt; I don't want to get into war stories about long hours because no one's about long hours because no one's about long hours because no one's interested in that. But yeah, science is interested in that. But yeah, science is interested in that. But yeah, science is a thorough asskicking with the a thorough asskicking with the a thorough asskicking with the occasional reward. occasional reward. occasional reward. &gt;&gt; Plus, it's biology. meaning even when &gt;&gt; Plus, it's biology. meaning even when &gt;&gt; Plus, it's biology. meaning even when you're right on Tuesday eventually it's you're right on Tuesday eventually it's you're right on Tuesday eventually it's like oh well like oh well like oh well &gt;&gt; but this gets us back to dopamine and &gt;&gt; but this gets us back to dopamine and &gt;&gt; but this gets us back to dopamine and rewards which is one thing I will say is rewards which is one thing I will say is rewards which is one thing I will say is very in my experience was very valuable very in my experience was very valuable very in my experience was very valuable about doing a PhD um about working in a about doing a PhD um about working in a about doing a PhD um about working in a lab doing biology experiments is that it lab doing biology experiments is that it lab doing biology experiments is that it teaches you to set up a reward teaches you to set up a reward teaches you to set up a reward expectation motivation contingency loop expectation motivation contingency loop expectation motivation contingency loop that is based on everyday things and is based on everyday things and is based on everyday things and long-term goals I mean, I think one of long-term goals I mean, I think one of long-term goals I mean, I think one of the features of being a healthy human is the features of being a healthy human is the features of being a healthy human is being able to like, oh, like, hey, you being able to like, oh, like, hey, you being able to like, oh, like, hey, you know, it was a great cup of coffee this know, it was a great cup of coffee this know, it was a great cup of coffee this afternoon, but also afternoon, but also afternoon, but also um register the serotonergic like, ah, um register the serotonergic like, ah, um register the serotonergic like, ah, that experiment failed again. But then that experiment failed again. But then that experiment failed again. But then when things are working again, you can when things are working again, you can when things are working again, you can kind of feel like get some motivation kind of feel like get some motivation kind of feel like get some motivation from that and not just think about the from that and not just think about the from that and not just think about the PhD as the reward, right? So I go PhD as the reward, right? So I go PhD as the reward, right? So I go through life now not expecting great through life now not expecting great through life now not expecting great things to happen every day or even every things to happen every day or even every things to happen every day or even every week because I was trained in a system week because I was trained in a system week because I was trained in a system where the big rewards came every couple where the big rewards came every couple where the big rewards came every couple of years in terms of publishing papers. of years in terms of publishing papers. of years in terms of publishing papers. Sometimes more frequently but you know Sometimes more frequently but you know Sometimes more frequently but you know &gt;&gt; it's a long-term thing. But what about &gt;&gt; it's a long-term thing. But what about &gt;&gt; it's a long-term thing. But what about for the more typical example in people for the more typical example in people for the more typical example in people where you know you grow up and things where you know you grow up and things where you know you grow up and things are either really easy, really hard or are either really easy, really hard or are either really easy, really hard or for most people it's kind of a mix. Do for most people it's kind of a mix. Do for most people it's kind of a mix. Do you think that that's part of us you think that that's part of us you think that that's part of us learning how to navigate life going learning how to navigate life going learning how to navigate life going forward? Like you got to register your forward? Like you got to register your forward? Like you got to register your wins in order to continue to have wins in order to continue to have wins in order to continue to have motivation. Um, you also need to motivation. Um, you also need to motivation. Um, you also need to register your losses in order to not register your losses in order to not register your losses in order to not make the same stupid mistakes. make the same stupid mistakes. make the same stupid mistakes. &gt;&gt; You have to sustain your losses, right? &gt;&gt; You have to sustain your losses, right? &gt;&gt; You have to sustain your losses, right? And get up again. Um, And get up again. Um, And get up again. Um, this is why I like sports for kids. this is why I like sports for kids. this is why I like sports for kids. Okay? So, I've made all my kids do Okay? So, I've made all my kids do Okay? So, I've made all my kids do sports and one of them did competitive sports and one of them did competitive sports and one of them did competitive dance. So sports as a means to dance. So sports as a means to dance. So sports as a means to understand effort, reward, contingency, understand effort, reward, contingency, understand effort, reward, contingency, &gt;&gt; and learning how to lose &gt;&gt; and learning how to lose &gt;&gt; and learning how to lose &gt;&gt; even though you've brought everything &gt;&gt; even though you've brought everything &gt;&gt; even though you've brought everything you could do you could do you could do &gt;&gt; that day. The best you could possibly &gt;&gt; that day. The best you could possibly &gt;&gt; that day. The best you could possibly do. Yeah, somebody's better than you. do. Yeah, somebody's better than you. do. Yeah, somebody's better than you. You know what are you going to do now? You know what are you going to do now? You know what are you going to do now? You know that is a template for a You know that is a template for a You know that is a template for a lot of lessons. Um same thing for lot of lessons. Um same thing for lot of lessons. Um same thing for students in science labs, especially students in science labs, especially students in science labs, especially mine. And students do things, they come, mine. And students do things, they come, mine. And students do things, they come, they show me something and I go they show me something and I go they show me something and I go you know, and then they feel sad and but you know, and then they feel sad and but you know, and then they feel sad and but I watch them evolve. They evolve, you I watch them evolve. They evolve, you I watch them evolve. They evolve, you know, they all they all get better at it know, they all they all get better at it know, they all they all get better at it and then they do this transition. You and then they do this transition. You and then they do this transition. You know, graduate students, I mean, maybe know, graduate students, I mean, maybe know, graduate students, I mean, maybe this is a little academic. Graduate this is a little academic. Graduate this is a little academic. Graduate students are completely worthless to you students are completely worthless to you students are completely worthless to you for a long time for a long time for a long time &gt;&gt; and then &gt;&gt; and then &gt;&gt; and then my experience my experience my experience &gt;&gt; well in my in my world, they have so &gt;&gt; well in my in my world, they have so &gt;&gt; well in my in my world, they have so much to learn before they can do much to learn before they can do much to learn before they can do anything. That's what I mean. No, I mean anything. That's what I mean. No, I mean anything. That's what I mean. No, I mean as people they're valuable. They're as people they're valuable. They're as people they're valuable. They're there. You're your gra you're there. You're your gra you're there. You're your gra you're &gt;&gt; you mean in terms of data output. Yeah. &gt;&gt; you mean in terms of data output. Yeah. &gt;&gt; you mean in terms of data output. Yeah. Well, they don't know how to interpret Well, they don't know how to interpret Well, they don't know how to interpret the experience. the experience. the experience. &gt;&gt; No, they don't know how to do anything &gt;&gt; No, they don't know how to do anything &gt;&gt; No, they don't know how to do anything at first. No, they're very valuable to at first. No, they're very valuable to at first. No, they're very valuable to have around. You you want young people have around. You you want young people have around. You you want young people around. &gt;&gt; You want young fresh people around doing &gt;&gt; You want young fresh people around doing &gt;&gt; You want young fresh people around doing things and thinking great thoughts. But things and thinking great thoughts. But things and thinking great thoughts. But then all of a sudden they do this then all of a sudden they do this then all of a sudden they do this transition where they're literally the transition where they're literally the transition where they're literally the most valuable person most valuable person most valuable person in the lab and then six months later in the lab and then six months later in the lab and then six months later they break your heart. they break your heart. they break your heart. &gt;&gt; They leave. &gt;&gt; They leave. &gt;&gt; They leave. &gt;&gt; They leave. &gt;&gt; They leave. &gt;&gt; They leave. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Just like you did to your &gt;&gt; Yeah. Just like you did to your &gt;&gt; Yeah. Just like you did to your adviserss. That's what I always say. Oh, adviserss. That's what I always say. Oh, adviserss. That's what I always say. Oh, they were all glad to see me again. they were all glad to see me again. they were all glad to see me again. &gt;&gt; I was so blessed. I mean, all my &gt;&gt; I was so blessed. I mean, all my &gt;&gt; I was so blessed. I mean, all my students did great. One's at uh down at students did great. One's at uh down at students did great. One's at uh down at UT, one's uh University of Utah. UT, one's uh University of Utah. UT, one's uh University of Utah. They're both kicking butt at another They're both kicking butt at another They're both kicking butt at another graduate students in biotech and another graduate students in biotech and another graduate students in biotech and another one's on the job market now. And I'm one's on the job market now. And I'm one's on the job market now. And I'm just glad I'm not competing with any of just glad I'm not competing with any of just glad I'm not competing with any of them because I will tell you they are them because I will tell you they are them because I will tell you they are phenomenal. I don't take any credit for phenomenal. I don't take any credit for phenomenal. I don't take any credit for it. I did what I could with them and it. I did what I could with them and it. I did what I could with them and then you know, so a couple one was a then you know, so a couple one was a then you know, so a couple one was a postoc that I just mentioned, but postoc that I just mentioned, but postoc that I just mentioned, but &gt;&gt; it was fun to be around to watch it. &gt;&gt; it was fun to be around to watch it. &gt;&gt; it was fun to be around to watch it. It's just so cool. I mean, that the It's just so cool. I mean, that the It's just so cool. I mean, that the energy of youth and, you know, and um energy of youth and, you know, and um energy of youth and, you know, and um pouring into something with so much pouring into something with so much pouring into something with so much focus and um and not for the money focus and um and not for the money focus and um and not for the money because Lord knows they don't pay them because Lord knows they don't pay them because Lord knows they don't pay them very much even as professors. very much even as professors. very much even as professors. &gt;&gt; What you said about insisting that your &gt;&gt; What you said about insisting that your &gt;&gt; What you said about insisting that your kids play at least one sport. Um I think kids play at least one sport. Um I think kids play at least one sport. Um I think that also gets back to removing a that also gets back to removing a that also gets back to removing a problem we talked about earlier, which problem we talked about earlier, which problem we talked about earlier, which is at least when you're playing a sport, is at least when you're playing a sport, is at least when you're playing a sport, you can't be on your phone. you can't be on your phone. you can't be on your phone. &gt;&gt; Also, if you're really tired, &gt;&gt; Also, if you're really tired, &gt;&gt; Also, if you're really tired, it's hard to get in trouble. It's very it's hard to get in trouble. It's very it's hard to get in trouble. It's very hard to get in trouble if you're a hard to get in trouble if you're a hard to get in trouble if you're a soccer player. You run. I mean, you are soccer player. You run. I mean, you are soccer player. You run. I mean, you are shot at the end of the day. Yeah. shot at the end of the day. Yeah. shot at the end of the day. Yeah. &gt;&gt; It's just you just Yep. Hey, let's go &gt;&gt; It's just you just Yep. Hey, let's go &gt;&gt; It's just you just Yep. Hey, let's go drive in. You know, I don't feel like drive in. You know, I don't feel like drive in. You know, I don't feel like it. So, it's a generic strategy I use. it. So, it's a generic strategy I use. it. So, it's a generic strategy I use. And I just think sports, it's not so And I just think sports, it's not so And I just think sports, it's not so that they can be champions. I mean, it's that they can be champions. I mean, it's that they can be champions. I mean, it's great if that happens. It's great for great if that happens. It's great for great if that happens. It's great for them, but um they challenge you in ways them, but um they challenge you in ways them, but um they challenge you in ways that other elements of your life don't. that other elements of your life don't. that other elements of your life don't. You know, I think of wrestling and you You know, I think of wrestling and you You know, I think of wrestling and you get your air cut off and the main thing get your air cut off and the main thing get your air cut off and the main thing you learn when you're a wrestler is how you learn when you're a wrestler is how you learn when you're a wrestler is how to manage your rising sense of panic. to manage your rising sense of panic. to manage your rising sense of panic. &gt;&gt; Don't panic. You know, think about where &gt;&gt; Don't panic. You know, think about where &gt;&gt; Don't panic. You know, think about where you are. You're not good at that at you are. You're not good at that at you are. You're not good at that at first. You know, I mean, when you go first. You know, I mean, when you go first. You know, I mean, when you go into an office and you face your boss or into an office and you face your boss or into an office and you face your boss or your coworker or something, nobody comes your coworker or something, nobody comes your coworker or something, nobody comes over and chokes you and says, "Now think over and chokes you and says, "Now think over and chokes you and says, "Now think no." Okay. You don't that's the only no." Okay. You don't that's the only no." Okay. You don't that's the only socially acceptable setting where that socially acceptable setting where that socially acceptable setting where that kind of thing teaches you. You know what kind of thing teaches you. You know what kind of thing teaches you. You know what are you going to do? Losing is losing is are you going to do? Losing is losing is are you going to do? Losing is losing is such an amaz especially when you don't such an amaz especially when you don't such an amaz especially when you don't want to lose and you did the absolute want to lose and you did the absolute want to lose and you did the absolute best &gt;&gt; in front of people. &gt;&gt; in front of people. &gt;&gt; in front of people. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like track and field you know you &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like track and field you know you &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like track and field you know you run there's only one winner. You know um run there's only one winner. You know um run there's only one winner. You know um my kids been going to these giant meets my kids been going to these giant meets my kids been going to these giant meets these sort of mid-Atlantic meets and these sort of mid-Atlantic meets and these sort of mid-Atlantic meets and they'll be this is middle school. I they'll be this is middle school. I they'll be this is middle school. I mean, it's amazing how wellrun they are. mean, it's amazing how wellrun they are. mean, it's amazing how wellrun they are. But there'll be 40 teams there, there'll But there'll be 40 teams there, there'll But there'll be 40 teams there, there'll be 60 kids in her event, you know. So, be 60 kids in her event, you know. So, be 60 kids in her event, you know. So, if you get second, that's really, really if you get second, that's really, really if you get second, that's really, really good. But if you want to win, there's good. But if you want to win, there's good. But if you want to win, there's still this little thing that eats at you still this little thing that eats at you still this little thing that eats at you and you learn how to manage it. So, I and you learn how to manage it. So, I and you learn how to manage it. So, I couldn't teach her that. Sport teaches couldn't teach her that. Sport teaches couldn't teach her that. Sport teaches her that. I see those as tests that we her that. I see those as tests that we her that. I see those as tests that we don't get put to in the modern world. don't get put to in the modern world. don't get put to in the modern world. You know, it used to be different when You know, it used to be different when You know, it used to be different when we ran around in bands and we literally we ran around in bands and we literally we ran around in bands and we literally had to defend ourselves had to defend ourselves had to defend ourselves &gt;&gt; a lot. you may have to do something that &gt;&gt; a lot. you may have to do something that &gt;&gt; a lot. you may have to do something that requires um awful things. You got to be requires um awful things. You got to be requires um awful things. You got to be ready to do an awful thing. We're not ready to do an awful thing. We're not ready to do an awful thing. We're not put in that circumstance. A lot of put in that circumstance. A lot of put in that circumstance. A lot of modern ills come from, modern ills come from, modern ills come from, you know, we still have that brain. you know, we still have that brain. you know, we still have that brain. &gt;&gt; Um and &gt;&gt; Um and &gt;&gt; Um and civilization forces you to manage the civilization forces you to manage the civilization forces you to manage the stress in ways that it's just kind of stress in ways that it's just kind of stress in ways that it's just kind of not designed to do. not designed to do. not designed to do. It's funny because uh when I was growing It's funny because uh when I was growing It's funny because uh when I was growing up, the sport of choice for me was up, the sport of choice for me was up, the sport of choice for me was skateboarding and there weren't teams or skateboarding and there weren't teams or skateboarding and there weren't teams or anything like that. I mean, you could anything like that. I mean, you could anything like that. I mean, you could get sponsors and some of us did, but get sponsors and some of us did, but get sponsors and some of us did, but that's not the point. Um, but what I that's not the point. Um, but what I that's not the point. Um, but what I learned from it was pain, learned from it was pain, learned from it was pain, fail, pain, pain made it. pain, fail, pain, pain made it. pain, fail, pain, pain made it. &gt;&gt; Those guys pain like you just and I &gt;&gt; Those guys pain like you just and I &gt;&gt; Those guys pain like you just and I wasn't, you know, good enough to take a wasn't, you know, good enough to take a wasn't, you know, good enough to take a career into it. I had friends that were career into it. I had friends that were career into it. I had friends that were and um and a lot of that is done in and um and a lot of that is done in and um and a lot of that is done in solitude. It was a great uh learning for solitude. It was a great uh learning for solitude. It was a great uh learning for science where I was alone in the lab. My science where I was alone in the lab. My science where I was alone in the lab. My graduate adviser wasn't she was graduate adviser wasn't she was graduate adviser wasn't she was available when I needed her but I was available when I needed her but I was available when I needed her but I was the only one in the lab. So I worked the only one in the lab. So I worked the only one in the lab. So I worked alone. She said don't burn down. Don't alone. She said don't burn down. Don't alone. She said don't burn down. Don't kill yourself. Don't drink the tetroto kill yourself. Don't drink the tetroto kill yourself. Don't drink the tetroto toxin you know and uh actually had some toxin you know and uh actually had some toxin you know and uh actually had some pretty good lab accidents um from pretty good lab accidents um from pretty good lab accidents um from working really long hours late at night. working really long hours late at night. working really long hours late at night. But it was failure discomfort But it was failure discomfort But it was failure discomfort failure got something failure got something failure got something failure you know and it felt a lot like failure you know and it felt a lot like failure you know and it felt a lot like that. And I remember thinking, um, that. And I remember thinking, um, that. And I remember thinking, um, skateboarding was great because as hard skateboarding was great because as hard skateboarding was great because as hard as this is, it's not as hard as falling as this is, it's not as hard as falling as this is, it's not as hard as falling on concrete. Same thing when I tried to on concrete. Same thing when I tried to on concrete. Same thing when I tried to learn to snowboard. Everyone was like, learn to snowboard. Everyone was like, learn to snowboard. Everyone was like, snowboarding is pretty tough. I was snowboarding is pretty tough. I was snowboarding is pretty tough. I was like, it's snow. I was like, concrete like, it's snow. I was like, concrete like, it's snow. I was like, concrete hurts. Snow is soft and even the ice hurts. Snow is soft and even the ice hurts. Snow is soft and even the ice pack is softer than And I was like, you pack is softer than And I was like, you pack is softer than And I was like, you know, so it hurt. It took me some time know, so it hurt. It took me some time know, so it hurt. It took me some time to get good at it, but like you're like, to get good at it, but like you're like, to get good at it, but like you're like, okay, like I get it. So I think um this okay, like I get it. So I think um this okay, like I get it. So I think um this actually is directly nested in actually is directly nested in actually is directly nested in everything we were talking about before everything we were talking about before everything we were talking about before which is our expectation of whether or which is our expectation of whether or which is our expectation of whether or not our efforts are worth investing or not our efforts are worth investing or not our efforts are worth investing or not. Whether or not we update the keep not. Whether or not we update the keep not. Whether or not we update the keep going or quit depends a lot on how we going or quit depends a lot on how we going or quit depends a lot on how we interpret how many pain episodes or rewards we how many pain episodes or rewards we how many pain episodes or rewards we expect to get before. expect to get before. expect to get before. &gt;&gt; And and people can do people have &gt;&gt; And and people can do people have &gt;&gt; And and people can do people have cognitive control. People can intend to cognitive control. People can intend to cognitive control. People can intend to do something and inhibit your natural do something and inhibit your natural do something and inhibit your natural instincts to avoid it or to quit or to instincts to avoid it or to quit or to instincts to avoid it or to quit or to back away from it. So the aversion back away from it. So the aversion back away from it. So the aversion signals that you would normally flee signals that you would normally flee signals that you would normally flee from have to be sustained, right, when from have to be sustained, right, when from have to be sustained, right, when you're training to do anything like you're training to do anything like you're training to do anything like that. And um it transfers when you're that. And um it transfers when you're that. And um it transfers when you're older. It transfers older. It transfers older. It transfers older. &gt;&gt; Oh, totally. &gt;&gt; Oh, totally. &gt;&gt; Oh, totally. &gt;&gt; Yeah. trained people that are successful &gt;&gt; Yeah. trained people that are successful &gt;&gt; Yeah. trained people that are successful at athletics, people that just tried to at athletics, people that just tried to at athletics, people that just tried to do it, which is why our little school, a do it, which is why our little school, a do it, which is why our little school, a little private school in Rowan Oak, little private school in Rowan Oak, little private school in Rowan Oak, Virginia, um has a no- cut policy. So, I Virginia, um has a no- cut policy. So, I Virginia, um has a no- cut policy. So, I think there were 45 kids on the tennis think there were 45 kids on the tennis think there were 45 kids on the tennis team last year. It was it was almost team last year. It was it was almost team last year. It was it was almost unmanageable, but you know, they're all unmanageable, but you know, they're all unmanageable, but you know, they're all out there and they compete at the level out there and they compete at the level out there and they compete at the level they can compete at and they win and they can compete at and they win and they can compete at and they win and lose and it's just a great I can't teach lose and it's just a great I can't teach lose and it's just a great I can't teach a kid a lesson that good. So, and that's a kid a lesson that good. So, and that's a kid a lesson that good. So, and that's training these same systems. It is training these same systems. It is training these same systems. It is expectations, disappointment, elation, disappointment, elation, disappointment, elation, recovery, do it again. recovery, do it again. recovery, do it again. It's all built in. I'd like to take a It's all built in. I'd like to take a It's all built in. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I have sufficient electrolytes, when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with to claim a free Element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. I'm going to claim a free sample pack. I'm going to claim a free sample pack. I'm going to come back to your athletic career, to come back to your athletic career, to come back to your athletic career, but I want to ask about meditation and but I want to ask about meditation and but I want to ask about meditation and breathing. Um, I think of meditation breathing. Um, I think of meditation breathing. Um, I think of meditation as some variant on close your eyes, as some variant on close your eyes, as some variant on close your eyes, focus on your internal state, direct focus on your internal state, direct focus on your internal state, direct your attention to your breathing or the your attention to your breathing or the your attention to your breathing or the your forehead. I know there are walking your forehead. I know there are walking your forehead. I know there are walking meditations, open monitoring meditations, open monitoring meditations, open monitoring meditations, but I think most laboratory meditations, but I think most laboratory meditations, but I think most laboratory and most people when they think and most people when they think and most people when they think meditating, they're doing something like meditating, they're doing something like meditating, they're doing something like what I just described. And I think of it what I just described. And I think of it what I just described. And I think of it as a perceptual exercise first, like as a perceptual exercise first, like as a perceptual exercise first, like you're deliberately setting your you're deliberately setting your you're deliberately setting your perception internally, not externally. I perception internally, not externally. I perception internally, not externally. I understand there's these insights into understand there's these insights into understand there's these insights into consciousness, improve sleep, reduce consciousness, improve sleep, reduce consciousness, improve sleep, reduce stress, but that's all secondary and stress, but that's all secondary and stress, but that's all secondary and tertiary to me. What is the consequence tertiary to me. What is the consequence tertiary to me. What is the consequence of going into of the doing the practice of going into of the doing the practice of going into of the doing the practice of meditation? Directing your state of meditation? Directing your state of meditation? Directing your state inward as opposed to outward, eyes inward as opposed to outward, eyes inward as opposed to outward, eyes closed, focusing inward, breathing in a closed, focusing inward, breathing in a closed, focusing inward, breathing in a controlled way. What does that do to controlled way. What does that do to controlled way. What does that do to dopamine and serotonin andor what are dopamine and serotonin andor what are dopamine and serotonin andor what are dopamine and serotonin just doing when dopamine and serotonin just doing when dopamine and serotonin just doing when you go from like a conversation that you go from like a conversation that you go from like a conversation that we're having to a meditation? So we've we're having to a meditation? So we've we're having to a meditation? So we've been doing experiments on this with my been doing experiments on this with my been doing experiments on this with my graduate student Nishka Raheda who um graduate student Nishka Raheda who um graduate student Nishka Raheda who um went to the Ohio State University and went to the Ohio State University and went to the Ohio State University and then worked in um a guy called Jeff then worked in um a guy called Jeff then worked in um a guy called Jeff Shernbomb's lab at the intramural Shernbomb's lab at the intramural Shernbomb's lab at the intramural program in Baltimore this NAIDA National program in Baltimore this NAIDA National program in Baltimore this NAIDA National Institute of Drug Abuse um came highly Institute of Drug Abuse um came highly Institute of Drug Abuse um came highly recommended to me and so she wants to recommended to me and so she wants to recommended to me and so she wants to study the neural basis of mindfulness study the neural basis of mindfulness study the neural basis of mindfulness meditation. She's herself a meditator. meditation. She's herself a meditator. meditation. She's herself a meditator. Um, there's a whole bunch of narrative Um, there's a whole bunch of narrative Um, there's a whole bunch of narrative that you put on top of this thing. And that you put on top of this thing. And that you put on top of this thing. And I'm a little bit of a feet on the I'm a little bit of a feet on the I'm a little bit of a feet on the ground, real simple-minded, simple. So, ground, real simple-minded, simple. So, ground, real simple-minded, simple. So, I said, I'll do that, but we're going to I said, I'll do that, but we're going to I said, I'll do that, but we're going to do all these breathing experiments do all these breathing experiments do all these breathing experiments first. And so, she's been um in two first. And so, she's been um in two first. And so, she's been um in two settings. One is recording from the settings. One is recording from the settings. One is recording from the amygdala, anterior singlet cortex or the amygdala, anterior singlet cortex or the amygdala, anterior singlet cortex or the hippocampus while people are doing hippocampus while people are doing hippocampus while people are doing structured breathing. This is her structured breathing. This is her structured breathing. This is her instructing them to brea, you know, instructing them to brea, you know, instructing them to brea, you know, inhale 1 2 3 4, hold, exhale. Okay, I inhale 1 2 3 4, hold, exhale. Okay, I inhale 1 2 3 4, hold, exhale. Okay, I sit here and I'm not instructed to do sit here and I'm not instructed to do sit here and I'm not instructed to do anything. I'm just breathing. Just free anything. I'm just breathing. Just free anything. I'm just breathing. Just free form free form breathing. So, um, well, form free form breathing. So, um, well, form free form breathing. So, um, well, cycles with it. Norepinephrine and cycles with it. Norepinephrine and cycles with it. Norepinephrine and dopamine cycle with the breathing cycle. dopamine cycle with the breathing cycle. dopamine cycle with the breathing cycle. The most interesting The most interesting The most interesting &gt;&gt; on inhale, exhale or overall they change &gt;&gt; on inhale, exhale or overall they change &gt;&gt; on inhale, exhale or overall they change as you as you as you &gt;&gt; that kind of granular detail is waiting &gt;&gt; that kind of granular detail is waiting &gt;&gt; that kind of granular detail is waiting on &gt;&gt; numbers. Okay. uh but I can the general &gt;&gt; numbers. Okay. uh but I can the general &gt;&gt; numbers. Okay. uh but I can the general gist now this is from deep structures in gist now this is from deep structures in gist now this is from deep structures in the brain is that um easy breathing you the brain is that um easy breathing you the brain is that um easy breathing you can just see the co you it is like can just see the co you it is like can just see the co you it is like a metronome a metronome a metronome &gt;&gt; the amplitude of the neurotransmitter &gt;&gt; the amplitude of the neurotransmitter &gt;&gt; the amplitude of the neurotransmitter fluctuations follows the inhale exhale fluctuations follows the inhale exhale fluctuations follows the inhale exhale cycles &gt;&gt; it's right with it it's very easy you &gt;&gt; it's right with it it's very easy you &gt;&gt; it's right with it it's very easy you feel like you're watching the brain stem feel like you're watching the brain stem feel like you're watching the brain stem work &gt;&gt; okay &gt;&gt; okay &gt;&gt; okay &gt;&gt; so when I tell you &gt;&gt; so when I tell you &gt;&gt; so when I tell you &gt;&gt; breathe in two, three, four, hold, you &gt;&gt; breathe in two, three, four, hold, you &gt;&gt; breathe in two, three, four, hold, you know, da da. And now exhale. Okay, all know, da da. And now exhale. Okay, all know, da da. And now exhale. Okay, all hell doesn't break loose, but it becomes hell doesn't break loose, but it becomes hell doesn't break loose, but it becomes hard for them to follow and the hard for them to follow and the hard for them to follow and the transmitters are kind of wiggling and transmitters are kind of wiggling and transmitters are kind of wiggling and wobbling, too. Okay, so that's in people wobbling, too. Okay, so that's in people wobbling, too. Okay, so that's in people that are in the epilepsy monitoring that are in the epilepsy monitoring that are in the epilepsy monitoring unit. Uh, this is taking place at unit. Uh, this is taking place at unit. Uh, this is taking place at Phoenix at Banner Hospital with our Phoenix at Banner Hospital with our Phoenix at Banner Hospital with our colleague Robert Bina. The most exciting colleague Robert Bina. The most exciting colleague Robert Bina. The most exciting stuff is using this probe that we can stuff is using this probe that we can stuff is using this probe that we can put up the nose of healthy people uh and put up the nose of healthy people uh and put up the nose of healthy people uh and do the same sort of thing. And we see do the same sort of thing. And we see do the same sort of thing. And we see generally the same sort of thing. The generally the same sort of thing. The generally the same sort of thing. The the whole instructed breathing, the whole instructed breathing, the whole instructed breathing, you have to engage cognitive control you have to engage cognitive control you have to engage cognitive control over it. And you're um differentially over it. And you're um differentially over it. And you're um differentially adequate at doing that. So that they're adequate at doing that. So that they're adequate at doing that. So that they're doing structured breathing. Does they're doing structured breathing. Does they're doing structured breathing. Does dopamine track map onto the breathing? dopamine track map onto the breathing? dopamine track map onto the breathing? &gt;&gt; Yes. But the interesting thing is we &gt;&gt; Yes. But the interesting thing is we &gt;&gt; Yes. But the interesting thing is we have people playing uh an economic have people playing uh an economic have people playing uh an economic exchange game. It's called an ultimatum exchange game. It's called an ultimatum exchange game. It's called an ultimatum game. Ultimatum game should be labeled game. Ultimatum game should be labeled game. Ultimatum game should be labeled take it or leave it. I have $20. I'm take it or leave it. I have $20. I'm take it or leave it. I have $20. I'm going to offer you a split. Eight to going to offer you a split. Eight to going to offer you a split. Eight to you, 12 to me. Okay. Control passes to you, 12 to me. Okay. Control passes to you, 12 to me. Okay. Control passes to you. You're going to either accept that you. You're going to either accept that you. You're going to either accept that in which case we walk away with eight in which case we walk away with eight in which case we walk away with eight for you and 12 for me. Or you're going for you and 12 for me. Or you're going for you and 12 for me. Or you're going to reject it, which case no one gets to reject it, which case no one gets to reject it, which case no one gets anything. What do people do? Well, you anything. What do people do? Well, you anything. What do people do? Well, you know, they tend to they see the inequity know, they tend to they see the inequity know, they tend to they see the inequity across the players as a signal. And at across the players as a signal. And at across the players as a signal. And at about 8020, you're indifferent. In other about 8020, you're indifferent. In other about 8020, you're indifferent. In other words, 80% to me, 20% offered to you. words, 80% to me, 20% offered to you. words, 80% to me, 20% offered to you. 50% of the time you're going to say, 50% of the time you're going to say, 50% of the time you're going to say, I'll take it. 50% of the time you're I'll take it. 50% of the time you're I'll take it. 50% of the time you're going to send me a signal and say, you going to send me a signal and say, you going to send me a signal and say, you know, go home. I'm not taking that know, go home. I'm not taking that know, go home. I'm not taking that money. So, nobody gets anything at a money. So, nobody gets anything at a money. So, nobody gets anything at a cost to you. cost to you. cost to you. &gt;&gt; When you reject, it's at a cost to you. &gt;&gt; When you reject, it's at a cost to you. &gt;&gt; When you reject, it's at a cost to you. The pattern that we see recording up the The pattern that we see recording up the The pattern that we see recording up the nose uh is reg the breathing is nose uh is reg the breathing is nose uh is reg the breathing is registered cleanly with the peroxide registered cleanly with the peroxide registered cleanly with the peroxide signal which is a which is a proxy for signal which is a which is a proxy for signal which is a which is a proxy for mitochondrial function and the dopamine mitochondrial function and the dopamine mitochondrial function and the dopamine signal and the norepi signal. So the signal and the norepi signal. So the signal and the norepi signal. So the norepic as this pattern of exchange is norepic as this pattern of exchange is norepic as this pattern of exchange is going on between the two of us if you're going on between the two of us if you're going on between the two of us if you're going to update a model in other words going to update a model in other words going to update a model in other words if the signal across the two of us is if the signal across the two of us is if the signal across the two of us is such that you have to do some learning such that you have to do some learning such that you have to do some learning it's like your brea your maximum it's like your brea your maximum it's like your brea your maximum breathing is tracking when you're going breathing is tracking when you're going breathing is tracking when you're going to need oxygen in the mitochondria to need oxygen in the mitochondria to need oxygen in the mitochondria to produce ATP to make an update that's produce ATP to make an update that's produce ATP to make an update that's going to be um allowed by the dopamine going to be um allowed by the dopamine going to be um allowed by the dopamine signal. It's the most amazing looking signal. It's the most amazing looking signal. It's the most amazing looking data I have ever seen. And this is in data I have ever seen. And this is in data I have ever seen. And this is in other words, your breathing and your other words, your breathing and your other words, your breathing and your dopamine signal in your nasal epithelium dopamine signal in your nasal epithelium dopamine signal in your nasal epithelium seems registered depending on the seems registered depending on the seems registered depending on the demands of the task and the elements of demands of the task and the elements of demands of the task and the elements of the task. the task. the task. &gt;&gt; Is this why you refer to dopamine as a &gt;&gt; Is this why you refer to dopamine as a &gt;&gt; Is this why you refer to dopamine as a currency? &gt;&gt; Yes, I refer to it as a currency mainly &gt;&gt; Yes, I refer to it as a currency mainly &gt;&gt; Yes, I refer to it as a currency mainly for the reason that a currency is used. for the reason that a currency is used. for the reason that a currency is used. It's a way to take dissimilar objects It's a way to take dissimilar objects It's a way to take dissimilar objects and assign a common value scheme to and assign a common value scheme to and assign a common value scheme to them. Like if I were going to trade cups them. Like if I were going to trade cups them. Like if I were going to trade cups for windshields, for windshields, for windshields, &gt;&gt; uh it's easier, unless we're going to &gt;&gt; uh it's easier, unless we're going to &gt;&gt; uh it's easier, unless we're going to haul a bunch of windshields and cups to haul a bunch of windshields and cups to haul a bunch of windshields and cups to the trading site, it's much easier to the trading site, it's much easier to the trading site, it's much easier to say this is worth something in a say this is worth something in a say this is worth something in a currency I understand that you agree to currency I understand that you agree to currency I understand that you agree to and agree to some price. A lot of times and agree to some price. A lot of times and agree to some price. A lot of times I think it doesn't matter if you're I think it doesn't matter if you're I think it doesn't matter if you're talking about the US dollar, the euro or talking about the US dollar, the euro or talking about the US dollar, the euro or bitcoin. Dopamine is the underlying bitcoin. Dopamine is the underlying bitcoin. Dopamine is the underlying currency. It doesn't matter if you're currency. It doesn't matter if you're currency. It doesn't matter if you're talking about wins in sport or other, talking about wins in sport or other, talking about wins in sport or other, you know, kind of more evolutionarily you know, kind of more evolutionarily you know, kind of more evolutionarily adaptive type examples like dopamine is adaptive type examples like dopamine is adaptive type examples like dopamine is the currency. It actually can provide the currency. It actually can provide the currency. It actually can provide some uh method for resilience in my some uh method for resilience in my some uh method for resilience in my experience. You'll notice in human experience. You'll notice in human experience. You'll notice in human dynamics online because I spend a fair dynamics online because I spend a fair dynamics online because I spend a fair amount of time there that people will amount of time there that people will amount of time there that people will try and rob people of their uh sort of try and rob people of their uh sort of try and rob people of their uh sort of message by like taking like pot shots at message by like taking like pot shots at message by like taking like pot shots at them or something. And in science you them or something. And in science you them or something. And in science you see legitimate critique and you see no see legitimate critique and you see no see legitimate critique and you see no illegitimate critique, right? same thing illegitimate critique, right? same thing illegitimate critique, right? same thing in human dynamics that you observe in human dynamics that you observe in human dynamics that you observe online. There's real lessons to be online. There's real lessons to be online. There's real lessons to be learned from some of the critique. But learned from some of the critique. But learned from some of the critique. But sometimes people are just trying to rob sometimes people are just trying to rob sometimes people are just trying to rob people of um whatever impact they're people of um whatever impact they're people of um whatever impact they're having. And so you can think of one's having. And so you can think of one's having. And so you can think of one's own dopamine, one's own level of own dopamine, one's own level of own dopamine, one's own level of motivation. Like are you going to let motivation. Like are you going to let motivation. Like are you going to let somebody rob you of this currency? We're somebody rob you of this currency? We're somebody rob you of this currency? We're not aware that we're using dopamine as not aware that we're using dopamine as not aware that we're using dopamine as currency, but ultimately like the person currency, but ultimately like the person currency, but ultimately like the person who's winning has more energy to go do who's winning has more energy to go do who's winning has more energy to go do more winning. people who are losing uh more winning. people who are losing uh more winning. people who are losing uh sometimes dissolve into a puddle of sometimes dissolve into a puddle of sometimes dissolve into a puddle of their own tears or worse other times their own tears or worse other times their own tears or worse other times they try and uh rob other people of they try and uh rob other people of they try and uh rob other people of their of their currency and you know and their of their currency and you know and their of their currency and you know and this is the notion of zero sum versus this is the notion of zero sum versus this is the notion of zero sum versus non-zero sum games and when I step back non-zero sum games and when I step back non-zero sum games and when I step back now and I look at like the media now and I look at like the media now and I look at like the media landscape the political landscape the landscape the political landscape the landscape the political landscape the social dynamics at large I always social dynamics at large I always social dynamics at large I always think of dopamine as the currency if think of dopamine as the currency if think of dopamine as the currency if we're really honest about what's we're really honest about what's we're really honest about what's happening in the world it's a battle happening in the world it's a battle happening in the world it's a battle over resources and all those resources over resources and all those resources over resources and all those resources ratchet back down to this one single ratchet back down to this one single ratchet back down to this one single molecule. It's really incredible. molecule. It's really incredible. molecule. It's really incredible. &gt;&gt; Well, these same systems &gt;&gt; Well, these same systems &gt;&gt; Well, these same systems &gt;&gt; systems. Yes. Thank you. Systems. &gt;&gt; systems. Yes. Thank you. Systems. &gt;&gt; systems. Yes. Thank you. Systems. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because they're working as a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because they're working as a &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because they're working as a coordinated system. coordinated system. coordinated system. &gt;&gt; You know, dopamine is turns on &gt;&gt; You know, dopamine is turns on &gt;&gt; You know, dopamine is turns on mitochondria. &gt;&gt; I mean, gives you life. &gt;&gt; I mean, gives you life. &gt;&gt; I mean, gives you life. &gt;&gt; It's probably the literally it literally &gt;&gt; It's probably the literally it literally &gt;&gt; It's probably the literally it literally turns on mitochondria. It binds to the turns on mitochondria. It binds to the turns on mitochondria. It binds to the outside mitochondria to monomine oxidase outside mitochondria to monomine oxidase outside mitochondria to monomine oxidase &gt;&gt; and it initiate it jens up electron &gt;&gt; and it initiate it jens up electron &gt;&gt; and it initiate it jens up electron transport. I mean, it makes it's a transport. I mean, it makes it's a transport. I mean, it makes it's a signal to make ATP available. Um, that's signal to make ATP available. Um, that's signal to make ATP available. Um, that's a really direct connection. Now, what a really direct connection. Now, what a really direct connection. Now, what neuroscience hasn't understood very well neuroscience hasn't understood very well neuroscience hasn't understood very well is the connection between the algorithms is the connection between the algorithms is the connection between the algorithms that the dopamine runs, the computations that the dopamine runs, the computations that the dopamine runs, the computations and the combustion. So, uh, like if you and the combustion. So, uh, like if you and the combustion. So, uh, like if you touch your forehead, your forehead is touch your forehead, your forehead is touch your forehead, your forehead is merely warm, right? Now, if you touched merely warm, right? Now, if you touched merely warm, right? Now, if you touched a computer in a server center, a computer in a server center, a computer in a server center, um, if you could get your finger near um, if you could get your finger near um, if you could get your finger near the chip, it would burn your finger. And the chip, it would burn your finger. And the chip, it would burn your finger. And if you turn the air conditioning off in if you turn the air conditioning off in if you turn the air conditioning off in a server center, within minutes they a server center, within minutes they a server center, within minutes they burst into flame. The whole thing would burst into flame. The whole thing would burst into flame. The whole thing would go up in smoke. They're they're go up in smoke. They're they're go up in smoke. They're they're mainly generating entrop heat. mainly generating entrop heat. mainly generating entrop heat. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um there's a big market play here &gt;&gt; Okay. Um there's a big market play here &gt;&gt; Okay. Um there's a big market play here to make chips that run and do the same to make chips that run and do the same to make chips that run and do the same computing but on 40% of the power. I computing but on 40% of the power. I computing but on 40% of the power. I mean service centers are amazingly and mean service centers are amazingly and mean service centers are amazingly and just our computing machinery is just our computing machinery is just our computing machinery is amazingly inefficient. And so there's amazingly inefficient. And so there's amazingly inefficient. And so there's great things to come as people take on great things to come as people take on great things to come as people take on this problem. But we don't understand this problem. But we don't understand this problem. But we don't understand how it is that we get away to run our how it is that we get away to run our how it is that we get away to run our entire brain on 23 watts. Well, earlier entire brain on 23 watts. Well, earlier entire brain on 23 watts. Well, earlier we were talking about sleep and we were talking about sleep and we were talking about sleep and we talked about meditation. Um I want to talked about meditation. Um I want to talked about meditation. Um I want to make sure that um I at least offer you make sure that um I at least offer you make sure that um I at least offer you the opportunity to speculate. What do the opportunity to speculate. What do the opportunity to speculate. What do you think the um kind of rejuvenative you think the um kind of rejuvenative you think the um kind of rejuvenative properties of sleep and meditation um properties of sleep and meditation um properties of sleep and meditation um are you know for instance if however are you know for instance if however are you know for instance if however little you need to sleep if you don't little you need to sleep if you don't little you need to sleep if you don't sleep for two days you are a different sleep for two days you are a different sleep for two days you are a different beast altogether and sure adenosine goes beast altogether and sure adenosine goes beast altogether and sure adenosine goes up and the inflammatory markers go up and the inflammatory markers go up and the inflammatory markers go up there a lot of reasons for that there a lot of reasons for that there a lot of reasons for that but motivation goes way down dopamine but motivation goes way down dopamine but motivation goes way down dopamine dynamics change completely right Um so dynamics change completely right Um so dynamics change completely right Um so what do you think allows us to replenish what do you think allows us to replenish what do you think allows us to replenish this currency uh you know in sleep? Like this currency uh you know in sleep? Like this currency uh you know in sleep? Like what is it? Is it the slow breathing and what is it? Is it the slow breathing and what is it? Is it the slow breathing and meditation and sleep that allows meditation and sleep that allows meditation and sleep that allows &gt;&gt; you? Probably it's a combination of &gt;&gt; you? Probably it's a combination of &gt;&gt; you? Probably it's a combination of physiological responses and the physiological responses and the physiological responses and the algorithmic cleaning up. It's a it's a algorithmic cleaning up. It's a it's a algorithmic cleaning up. It's a it's a computational device. At least we see it computational device. At least we see it computational device. At least we see it as a computational device. That's the as a computational device. That's the as a computational device. That's the modern metaphor for how we go in and modern metaphor for how we go in and modern metaphor for how we go in and understand it. And it has to erase understand it. And it has to erase understand it. And it has to erase stuff. You need a time off. You don't stuff. You need a time off. You don't stuff. You need a time off. You don't need you can't have information streams need you can't have information streams need you can't have information streams processing through when you need to be processing through when you need to be processing through when you need to be going I don't not I'm not going to save going I don't not I'm not going to save going I don't not I'm not going to save all that or I'm going to consolidate all that or I'm going to consolidate all that or I'm going to consolidate that and I'm a lot of it's about eraser that and I'm a lot of it's about eraser that and I'm a lot of it's about eraser and homeostasis and recovery. I mean and homeostasis and recovery. I mean and homeostasis and recovery. I mean that translates physically into that translates physically into that translates physically into recycling transmitters and rebuilding recycling transmitters and rebuilding recycling transmitters and rebuilding all that all that all that &gt;&gt; because there's nothing like the kind of &gt;&gt; because there's nothing like the kind of &gt;&gt; because there's nothing like the kind of motivation we feel after a great night's motivation we feel after a great night's motivation we feel after a great night's sleep. The way we interpret events sleep. The way we interpret events sleep. The way we interpret events &gt;&gt; and all animals sleep. It used to be &gt;&gt; and all animals sleep. It used to be &gt;&gt; and all animals sleep. It used to be thought the akidna didn't have REM thought the akidna didn't have REM thought the akidna didn't have REM sleep, but that's no longer that's sleep, but that's no longer that's sleep, but that's no longer that's false. &gt;&gt; It's the first time the akidna has been &gt;&gt; It's the first time the akidna has been &gt;&gt; It's the first time the akidna has been mentioned on this podcast. mentioned on this podcast. mentioned on this podcast. &gt;&gt; Okay, there we go. &gt;&gt; Okay, there we go. &gt;&gt; Okay, there we go. &gt;&gt; You may not want to go here, so feel &gt;&gt; You may not want to go here, so feel &gt;&gt; You may not want to go here, so feel free to say pass, but I'm very um free to say pass, but I'm very um free to say pass, but I'm very um interested in the relationship between interested in the relationship between interested in the relationship between dopamine and other neurom modulators and dopamine and other neurom modulators and dopamine and other neurom modulators and time perception. time perception. time perception. &gt;&gt; Ah, &gt;&gt; Ah, &gt;&gt; Ah, &gt;&gt; could we start with some a general &gt;&gt; could we start with some a general &gt;&gt; could we start with some a general exploration of this? So really like in exploration of this? So really like in exploration of this? So really like in the simplest way, if dopamine levels are the simplest way, if dopamine levels are the simplest way, if dopamine levels are artificially increased with a drug, what artificially increased with a drug, what artificially increased with a drug, what happens to time perception? happens to time perception? happens to time perception? &gt;&gt; It changes. &gt;&gt; It changes. &gt;&gt; It changes. uh one of the things that's latent in uh one of the things that's latent in uh one of the things that's latent in any description any description any description um of what dopamine is doing either from um of what dopamine is doing either from um of what dopamine is doing either from a point of view of psychology or a point of view of psychology or a point of view of psychology or algorithms that I focus on um is timing. algorithms that I focus on um is timing. algorithms that I focus on um is timing. Okay. So you to learn something is to Okay. So you to learn something is to Okay. So you to learn something is to suppress the statement. You learn suppress the statement. You learn suppress the statement. You learn something about what's going to happen something about what's going to happen something about what's going to happen when and how much. You know what, where, when and how much. You know what, where, when and how much. You know what, where, when and how. And so you have to have a when and how. And so you have to have a when and how. And so you have to have a lot of clocks in there. Mhm. Okay. It lot of clocks in there. Mhm. Okay. It lot of clocks in there. Mhm. Okay. It used as you well know it used to be used as you well know it used to be used as you well know it used to be thought we had this one area the super thought we had this one area the super thought we had this one area the super kiosmatic nucleus it set daylight cycles kiosmatic nucleus it set daylight cycles kiosmatic nucleus it set daylight cycles etc and all and that was one of the main etc and all and that was one of the main etc and all and that was one of the main sources of clocks. Now what we know is sources of clocks. Now what we know is sources of clocks. Now what we know is every cell in your body has clocks in it every cell in your body has clocks in it every cell in your body has clocks in it and many multiple clocks. Um this is and many multiple clocks. Um this is and many multiple clocks. Um this is true for using these dopamine signals true for using these dopamine signals true for using these dopamine signals too. You not only have to have clocks too. You not only have to have clocks too. You not only have to have clocks you have to be able to register the time you have to be able to register the time you have to be able to register the time that something was happening. Now I that something was happening. Now I that something was happening. Now I don't know exactly how that's done but don't know exactly how that's done but don't know exactly how that's done but we just know that the system learns we just know that the system learns we just know that the system learns particular times and whatnot and so um particular times and whatnot and so um particular times and whatnot and so um those almost certainly have to be those almost certainly have to be those almost certainly have to be rejuvenated and reset. There's a whole rejuvenated and reset. There's a whole rejuvenated and reset. There's a whole literature in rodents called the literature in rodents called the literature in rodents called the interval timing literature where you interval timing literature where you interval timing literature where you teach an animal to anticipate something teach an animal to anticipate something teach an animal to anticipate something at a particular time in the future in at a particular time in the future in at a particular time in the future in the near future few seconds um and the near future few seconds um and the near future few seconds um and dopamine plays a critical role in that dopamine plays a critical role in that dopamine plays a critical role in that and there's a group in London who's I and there's a group in London who's I and there's a group in London who's I forget the PI's name um who uses that forget the PI's name um who uses that forget the PI's name um who uses that and uses manipulations in humans of and uses manipulations in humans of and uses manipulations in humans of dopamine dopamineergic drugs to look at dopamine dopamineergic drugs to look at dopamine dopamineergic drugs to look at time perception changes but these are time perception changes but these are time perception changes but these are whole you're like what did you perceive? whole you're like what did you perceive? whole you're like what did you perceive? &gt;&gt; Is there a simple statement that we can &gt;&gt; Is there a simple statement that we can &gt;&gt; Is there a simple statement that we can make like if we if you increase dopamine make like if we if you increase dopamine make like if we if you increase dopamine pharmacologically and then you does your pharmacologically and then you does your pharmacologically and then you does your perception of time shift to it moving perception of time shift to it moving perception of time shift to it moving faster or uh slower? faster or uh slower? faster or uh slower? &gt;&gt; No, there's no I'm not saying no to &gt;&gt; No, there's no I'm not saying no to &gt;&gt; No, there's no I'm not saying no to that. I'm saying that there's no clear that. I'm saying that there's no clear that. I'm saying that there's no clear there's no broomemide for that. What we there's no broomemide for that. What we there's no broomemide for that. What we do know is that do know is that do know is that people who smoke cannabis oftentimes people who smoke cannabis oftentimes people who smoke cannabis oftentimes think a long period of time went by and think a long period of time went by and think a long period of time went by and they find out that a very short period they find out that a very short period they find out that a very short period of time. of time. of time. &gt;&gt; Also, people on methylenad I mean people &gt;&gt; Also, people on methylenad I mean people &gt;&gt; Also, people on methylenad I mean people on rin will report that they lose time. on rin will report that they lose time. on rin will report that they lose time. Now presumably they're concentrating for Now presumably they're concentrating for Now presumably they're concentrating for longer periods of time and you it has longer periods of time and you it has longer periods of time and you it has the sound of multiple systems not all of the sound of multiple systems not all of the sound of multiple systems not all of which you're conscious of. Um but which you're conscious of. Um but which you're conscious of. Um but dopamine's had a I could start naming dopamine's had a I could start naming dopamine's had a I could start naming the people I know this literature in the people I know this literature in the people I know this literature in rodents um interval timing and um rodents um interval timing and um rodents um interval timing and um they're beautiful relationships between they're beautiful relationships between they're beautiful relationships between the dopamine signaling and the timing the dopamine signaling and the timing the dopamine signaling and the timing but it's not sort of they haven't been but it's not sort of they haven't been but it's not sort of they haven't been experiments where you could open up the experiments where you could open up the experiments where you could open up the modern understanding of it as a modern understanding of it as a modern understanding of it as a the key and reinforcement learning that the key and reinforcement learning that the key and reinforcement learning that goes on. Do you track time well on the goes on. Do you track time well on the goes on. Do you track time well on the order of a day? Like are as you move order of a day? Like are as you move order of a day? Like are as you move through your day, are you aware of through your day, are you aware of through your day, are you aware of how much time has passed? how much time has passed? how much time has passed? &gt;&gt; I'm awful. &gt;&gt; I'm awful. &gt;&gt; I'm awful. &gt;&gt; I'm awful with directions and time. &gt;&gt; I'm awful with directions and time. &gt;&gt; I'm awful with directions and time. &gt;&gt; Can you orient well in space? &gt;&gt; Can you orient well in space? &gt;&gt; Can you orient well in space? &gt;&gt; Well, I mean, if you tell me where the &gt;&gt; Well, I mean, if you tell me where the &gt;&gt; Well, I mean, if you tell me where the sun is. sun is. sun is. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; Interesting. &gt;&gt; You mean my body? &gt;&gt; You mean my body? &gt;&gt; You mean my body? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like I know where my body is. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like I know where my body is. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Like I know where my body is. &gt;&gt; Well, no, you kesthetically. I mean, &gt;&gt; Well, no, you kesthetically. I mean, &gt;&gt; Well, no, you kesthetically. I mean, we're a competitive athlete, so that we're a competitive athlete, so that we're a competitive athlete, so that makes No, I mean, um makes No, I mean, um makes No, I mean, um &gt;&gt; I am stereoblind. &gt;&gt; I am stereoblind. &gt;&gt; I am stereoblind. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. &gt;&gt; That's so weird. Really &gt;&gt; That's so weird. Really &gt;&gt; That's so weird. Really &gt;&gt; Ramachandran came to New York when I was &gt;&gt; Ramachandran came to New York when I was &gt;&gt; Ramachandran came to New York when I was in the audience. in the audience. in the audience. &gt;&gt; Reception is messed up. &gt;&gt; Reception is messed up. &gt;&gt; Reception is messed up. &gt;&gt; Well, apparently. &gt;&gt; Well, apparently. &gt;&gt; Well, apparently. &gt;&gt; But you were a javelin thrower. &gt;&gt; But you were a javelin thrower. &gt;&gt; But you were a javelin thrower. &gt;&gt; I threw pitched baseballs until I was &gt;&gt; I threw pitched baseballs until I was &gt;&gt; I threw pitched baseballs until I was 15. &gt;&gt; Did you probably It's the kinetic &gt;&gt; Did you probably It's the kinetic &gt;&gt; Did you probably It's the kinetic depth effect, right? Where you shake depth effect, right? Where you shake depth effect, right? Where you shake your head and the motion paral. your head and the motion paral. your head and the motion paral. &gt;&gt; You move your head from side to side. &gt;&gt; You move your head from side to side. &gt;&gt; You move your head from side to side. &gt;&gt; I maybe. &gt;&gt; I maybe. &gt;&gt; I maybe. &gt;&gt; Mhm. But he Ramosandran was a famous &gt;&gt; Mhm. But he Ramosandran was a famous &gt;&gt; Mhm. But he Ramosandran was a famous visual psychophysics guy from UCSD came visual psychophysics guy from UCSD came visual psychophysics guy from UCSD came and he was showing all these pictures and he was showing all these pictures and he was showing all these pictures and he goes, "Can anyone in here not see and he goes, "Can anyone in here not see and he goes, "Can anyone in here not see the thing?" I couldn't see anything. the thing?" I couldn't see anything. the thing?" I couldn't see anything. &gt;&gt; He goes, "Oh, you're stereo blind. It's &gt;&gt; He goes, "Oh, you're stereo blind. It's &gt;&gt; He goes, "Oh, you're stereo blind. It's about I don't know 5% or something. You about I don't know 5% or something. You about I don't know 5% or something. You probably have a hard time with like probably have a hard time with like probably have a hard time with like barriers and you know I was a hurdler in barriers and you know I was a hurdler in barriers and you know I was a hurdler in high school and college and then and high school and college and then and high school and college and then and throwing balls and I also pv vaulted and throwing balls and I also pv vaulted and throwing balls and I also pv vaulted and I was a left-handed until I was eight I was a left-handed until I was eight I was a left-handed until I was eight and my mother made me switch my hands and my mother made me switch my hands and my mother made me switch my hands rough. &gt;&gt; It's a right-handed world. You go into &gt;&gt; It's a right-handed world. You go into &gt;&gt; It's a right-handed world. You go into your classroom, you count the number of your classroom, you count the number of your classroom, you count the number of left-handed desk and I came back. I left-handed desk and I came back. I left-handed desk and I came back. I said, "There's one. There you go. You're said, "There's one. There you go. You're said, "There's one. There you go. You're going to use your right hand now." And going to use your right hand now." And going to use your right hand now." And so she was horrified when I cut my food so she was horrified when I cut my food so she was horrified when I cut my food and flipped the fork over in my left and flipped the fork over in my left and flipped the fork over in my left hand instead of switching hands. And hand instead of switching hands. And hand instead of switching hands. And &gt;&gt; well, you got some brain plasticity out &gt;&gt; well, you got some brain plasticity out &gt;&gt; well, you got some brain plasticity out of it. No doubt. of it. No doubt. of it. No doubt. &gt;&gt; Probably. &gt;&gt; Probably. &gt;&gt; Probably. &gt;&gt; Um I asked if you track time well &gt;&gt; Um I asked if you track time well &gt;&gt; Um I asked if you track time well because I think that um because I think that um because I think that um &gt;&gt; this is totally uh you know just &gt;&gt; this is totally uh you know just &gt;&gt; this is totally uh you know just observation. And I think that um all the observation. And I think that um all the observation. And I think that um all the people that I know that are very driven people that I know that are very driven people that I know that are very driven who um have more of a I don't like to who um have more of a I don't like to who um have more of a I don't like to use clinical terms um nonclinally but use clinical terms um nonclinally but use clinical terms um nonclinally but more of a obsessive nature than um more of a obsessive nature than um more of a obsessive nature than um more ADHD like um seem to not track time well ADHD like um seem to not track time well ADHD like um seem to not track time well &gt;&gt; and they're able to just throw &gt;&gt; and they're able to just throw &gt;&gt; and they're able to just throw themselves into things um and discard themselves into things um and discard themselves into things um and discard with thoughts about the rest of the with thoughts about the rest of the with thoughts about the rest of the world And um I think about this a lot world And um I think about this a lot world And um I think about this a lot because of a generation of people who because of a generation of people who because of a generation of people who grew up constantly being bombarded with grew up constantly being bombarded with grew up constantly being bombarded with information from all over the world all information from all over the world all information from all over the world all day long. Um it's pretty it just feel day long. Um it's pretty it just feel day long. Um it's pretty it just feel feels and sounds so noisy to me. And I feels and sounds so noisy to me. And I feels and sounds so noisy to me. And I saw an interesting article recently that saw an interesting article recently that saw an interesting article recently that um the generation that grew up with um the generation that grew up with um the generation that grew up with um social media and smartphones social media and smartphones social media and smartphones &gt;&gt; that there's some interesting data that &gt;&gt; that there's some interesting data that &gt;&gt; that there's some interesting data that they may not track time the same way on they may not track time the same way on they may not track time the same way on the order of a day but also in terms of the order of a day but also in terms of the order of a day but also in terms of their life arc and um it makes it harder their life arc and um it makes it harder their life arc and um it makes it harder for them to envision long-term goals. for them to envision long-term goals. for them to envision long-term goals. And I think it's an interesting but And I think it's an interesting but And I think it's an interesting but still emerging literature. But it kind still emerging literature. But it kind still emerging literature. But it kind of makes sense if the dopamine system is of makes sense if the dopamine system is of makes sense if the dopamine system is um involved in this and if it's um kind um involved in this and if it's um kind um involved in this and if it's um kind of mapped to very short-term of mapped to very short-term of mapped to very short-term contingencies. I grew up contingencies. I grew up contingencies. I grew up where there were uh I was I would wander where there were uh I was I would wander where there were uh I was I would wander forests for hours and hours and hours. forests for hours and hours and hours. forests for hours and hours and hours. There was no and you weren't monitored There was no and you weren't monitored There was no and you weren't monitored by your parents. It was you know you by your parents. It was you know you by your parents. It was you know you left in the morning and you were left in the morning and you were left in the morning and you were supposed to show up by dark or something supposed to show up by dark or something supposed to show up by dark or something and people didn't worry about their and people didn't worry about their and people didn't worry about their children as I mean maybe this wasn't the children as I mean maybe this wasn't the children as I mean maybe this wasn't the right thing to do but this is the way it right thing to do but this is the way it right thing to do but this is the way it went. If you wanted information, you had went. If you wanted information, you had went. If you wanted information, you had to go find it somewhere. to go find it somewhere. to go find it somewhere. And it's so much calmer than the things And it's so much calmer than the things And it's so much calmer than the things that our kids are embedded in. I think that our kids are embedded in. I think that our kids are embedded in. I think it's different. I'm not sure it's all so it's different. I'm not sure it's all so it's different. I'm not sure it's all so pathological. &gt;&gt; The adults in the room all share a worry &gt;&gt; The adults in the room all share a worry &gt;&gt; The adults in the room all share a worry over it, but we don't know really what over it, but we don't know really what over it, but we don't know really what to do. I don't think we do. Um, to do. I don't think we do. Um, to do. I don't think we do. Um, and then you know these large language and then you know these large language and then you know these large language models. I don't know if how much you models. I don't know if how much you models. I don't know if how much you talk to them but you know they speak 180 talk to them but you know they speak 180 talk to them but you know they speak 180 languages. &gt;&gt; I use Claude. &gt;&gt; I use Claude. &gt;&gt; I use Claude. &gt;&gt; I love Claude. &gt;&gt; I love Claude. &gt;&gt; I love Claude. &gt;&gt; I love Claude AI. I you know I love the &gt;&gt; I love Claude AI. I you know I love the &gt;&gt; I love Claude AI. I you know I love the interface. I think the answers it I use interface. I think the answers it I use interface. I think the answers it I use it for research from time to time. it for research from time to time. it for research from time to time. &gt;&gt; Do you ask it to summarize areas for &gt;&gt; Do you ask it to summarize areas for &gt;&gt; Do you ask it to summarize areas for you? &gt;&gt; I ask it to direct me to literatures. I &gt;&gt; I ask it to direct me to literatures. I &gt;&gt; I ask it to direct me to literatures. I guess I've asked it for some summaries guess I've asked it for some summaries guess I've asked it for some summaries here and there, but I've asked it to here and there, but I've asked it to here and there, but I've asked it to compare and contrast things, which is compare and contrast things, which is compare and contrast things, which is really cool because I can't do that in really cool because I can't do that in really cool because I can't do that in PubMed. I can't go into PubMed and say PubMed. I can't go into PubMed and say PubMed. I can't go into PubMed and say compare and contrast read Montigue's uh compare and contrast read Montigue's uh compare and contrast read Montigue's uh picture of dopamine uh to someone picture of dopamine uh to someone picture of dopamine uh to someone else's. Uh but Claude can um do that. I else's. Uh but Claude can um do that. I else's. Uh but Claude can um do that. I can set up a fivep person panel of uh can set up a fivep person panel of uh can set up a fivep person panel of uh around a topic and Claude I use it more around a topic and Claude I use it more around a topic and Claude I use it more and more these days and I love it. I and more these days and I love it. I and more these days and I love it. I also really like the interface. It's also really like the interface. It's also really like the interface. It's very clean and I'm I care about very clean and I'm I care about very clean and I'm I care about aesthetics. Um, and I think it's aesthetics. Um, and I think it's aesthetics. Um, and I think it's awesome. &gt;&gt; The game I've been in isn't the &gt;&gt; The game I've been in isn't the &gt;&gt; The game I've been in isn't the artificial intelligence end or even artificial intelligence end or even artificial intelligence end or even the neurobiology end. I've been at the neurobiology end. I've been at the neurobiology end. I've been at the interface of those two. So, I've lived interface of those two. So, I've lived interface of those two. So, I've lived in a in a in a &gt;&gt; a narrow space that shuttles &gt;&gt; a narrow space that shuttles &gt;&gt; a narrow space that shuttles &gt;&gt; stuff from one world into the other &gt;&gt; stuff from one world into the other &gt;&gt; stuff from one world into the other world. I mean, I've used algorithms world. I mean, I've used algorithms world. I mean, I've used algorithms to organize biological observations. to organize biological observations. to organize biological observations. Basically, I'm the I'm the middleman in Basically, I'm the I'm the middleman in Basically, I'm the I'm the middleman in a way. I never thought this neural a way. I never thought this neural a way. I never thought this neural network training would scale the way it network training would scale the way it network training would scale the way it has. I just I would never have guessed has. I just I would never have guessed has. I just I would never have guessed the way it does. And I know there are the way it does. And I know there are the way it does. And I know there are the you know the dissenting voices, the you know the dissenting voices, the you know the dissenting voices, &gt;&gt; the doomsday people. &gt;&gt; the doomsday people. &gt;&gt; the doomsday people. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It doesn't really do very well. It &gt;&gt; Yeah. It doesn't really do very well. It &gt;&gt; Yeah. It doesn't really do very well. It doesn't Well, I mean, compared to who? doesn't Well, I mean, compared to who? doesn't Well, I mean, compared to who? Does anyone know anyone else that can Does anyone know anyone else that can Does anyone know anyone else that can speak 170 languages? That can translate speak 170 languages? That can translate speak 170 languages? That can translate 170 language. I don't know anyone that 170 language. I don't know anyone that 170 language. I don't know anyone that can translate accurately 170 languages. can translate accurately 170 languages. can translate accurately 170 languages. What do you use it for? What do you use it for? What do you use it for? things like claude just do you use it as things like claude just do you use it as things like claude just do you use it as a kind of a search engine or a kind of a search engine or a kind of a search engine or &gt;&gt; well I ask it what's the relationship &gt;&gt; well I ask it what's the relationship &gt;&gt; well I ask it what's the relationship between the subjunctive mood and the use between the subjunctive mood and the use between the subjunctive mood and the use of complex numbers and quant and of complex numbers and quant and of complex numbers and quant and non-relativistic quantum mechanics I non-relativistic quantum mechanics I non-relativistic quantum mechanics I asked it that recently asked it that recently asked it that recently &gt;&gt; just for fun &gt;&gt; just for fun &gt;&gt; just for fun &gt;&gt; in quantum mechanics at least not &gt;&gt; in quantum mechanics at least not &gt;&gt; in quantum mechanics at least not quantum field theory but in quantum field theory but in quantum field theory but in quantum mechanics the ways things might happen influence the ways things might happen influence the ways things might happen influence the probability of the way they actually the probability of the way they actually the probability of the way they actually turn out okay whether or not you turn out okay whether or not you turn out okay whether or not you traverse that you have to add up all traverse that you have to add up all traverse that you have to add up all those possibilities ities, right? It's those possibilities ities, right? It's those possibilities ities, right? It's like a counterfactual. like a counterfactual. like a counterfactual. It's like a mathematical rendering of a It's like a mathematical rendering of a It's like a mathematical rendering of a counterfactual, but it's based on counterfactual, but it's based on counterfactual, but it's based on experiments people have done in the real experiments people have done in the real experiments people have done in the real world for hundred years. world for hundred years. world for hundred years. And the subjunctive mood in conditional is the subjunctive mood in conditional is the subjunctive mood in conditional is the same sort of thing. We discovered in the same sort of thing. We discovered in the same sort of thing. We discovered in lang once we discovered how to speak lang once we discovered how to speak lang once we discovered how to speak language, we discovered how to make language, we discovered how to make language, we discovered how to make reference to the thing that would be if reference to the thing that would be if reference to the thing that would be if something else had happened. They're something else had happened. They're something else had happened. They're sort of the same. I didn't say anything sort of the same. I didn't say anything sort of the same. I didn't say anything but just what's the relationship between but just what's the relationship between but just what's the relationship between that and it wrote this beautiful little that and it wrote this beautiful little that and it wrote this beautiful little essay as it were and I just thought okay essay as it were and I just thought okay essay as it were and I just thought okay I don't really care whether it maps I don't really care whether it maps I don't really care whether it maps onto some notion of consciousness or onto some notion of consciousness or onto some notion of consciousness or smart or that's I don't know anybody smart or that's I don't know anybody smart or that's I don't know anybody that could do that. I don't know any that could do that. I don't know any that could do that. I don't know any person that could do that and it's a person that could do that and it's a person that could do that and it's a better writer than I am. Now, I mean, better writer than I am. Now, I mean, better writer than I am. Now, I mean, maybe that's me, but um I'm just blown maybe that's me, but um I'm just blown maybe that's me, but um I'm just blown away by it. And I'm even I'm more blown away by it. And I'm even I'm more blown away by it. And I'm even I'm more blown away by the reinforcement learning guys, away by the reinforcement learning guys, away by the reinforcement learning guys, the David Silvers and the Goss and the David Silvers and the Goss and the David Silvers and the Goss and the Alpha Fold. And you know, they solved Alpha Fold. And you know, they solved Alpha Fold. And you know, they solved the protein folding problem. Uh Deep the protein folding problem. Uh Deep the protein folding problem. Uh Deep Mind, the company that was in owned by Mind, the company that was in owned by Mind, the company that was in owned by Google and uh in so I guess Google won Google and uh in so I guess Google won Google and uh in so I guess Google won one, two, three, four, they were three one, two, three, four, they were three one, two, three, four, they were three Nobel prizes or something this time. Nobel prizes or something this time. Nobel prizes or something this time. Well, the thing that happened that Well, the thing that happened that Well, the thing that happened that alpha fold is the program that alpha fold is the program that alpha fold is the program that takes DNA sequences and predicts protein takes DNA sequences and predicts protein takes DNA sequences and predicts protein structure and this is what Jumper and structure and this is what Jumper and structure and this is what Jumper and Habis got the Nobel Prize for. You know, Habis got the Nobel Prize for. You know, Habis got the Nobel Prize for. You know, that's a problem that the NIH has that's a problem that the NIH has that's a problem that the NIH has probably spent a hundred billion dollars probably spent a hundred billion dollars probably spent a hundred billion dollars on for the last 70 years. Okay? They've on for the last 70 years. Okay? They've on for the last 70 years. Okay? They've also spent money on people crystallizing also spent money on people crystallizing also spent money on people crystallizing proteins and seeing where the atoms are proteins and seeing where the atoms are proteins and seeing where the atoms are and whatnot. and whatnot. and whatnot. And what they showed is they can develop And what they showed is they can develop And what they showed is they can develop a mapping between the sequence and the a mapping between the sequence and the a mapping between the sequence and the predicted protein structure which is predicted protein structure which is predicted protein structure which is just I mean it would it was stunning to just I mean it would it was stunning to just I mean it would it was stunning to me. Now it required all that me. Now it required all that me. Now it required all that crystalallography data but um crystalallography data but um crystalallography data but um their general approach was treating it their general approach was treating it their general approach was treating it like a game like they had treated go like a game like they had treated go like a game like they had treated go where you do this reinforcement learning where you do this reinforcement learning where you do this reinforcement learning thing and you say you take long sequence thing and you say you take long sequence thing and you say you take long sequence of moves and the game ends and you get of moves and the game ends and you get of moves and the game ends and you get an outcome win or lose and that's enough an outcome win or lose and that's enough an outcome win or lose and that's enough to train up the best player that's ever to train up the best player that's ever to train up the best player that's ever existed in history and then they used existed in history and then they used existed in history and then they used Alpha Go Zero to train up to be a Alpha Go Zero to train up to be a Alpha Go Zero to train up to be a grandmaster chess player. grandmaster chess player. grandmaster chess player. back a few years ago, it took 30 or 40 back a few years ago, it took 30 or 40 back a few years ago, it took 30 or 40 days and I think they're down to I mean days and I think they're down to I mean days and I think they're down to I mean from scratch. So from scratch. So from scratch. So I mean if anybody's going to write a I mean if anybody's going to write a I mean if anybody's going to write a history book on that, those are those history book on that, those are those history book on that, those are those are historical are historical are historical breakthroughs really. And breakthroughs really. And breakthroughs really. And those algorithms are installed in our those algorithms are installed in our those algorithms are installed in our heads. Biology discovered that this is heads. Biology discovered that this is heads. Biology discovered that this is the way to handle the reality that the way to handle the reality that the way to handle the reality that whatever it is given the constructs that whatever it is given the constructs that whatever it is given the constructs that are generated by our brains and keeps us are generated by our brains and keeps us are generated by our brains and keeps us alive. That's just the start is what I alive. That's just the start is what I alive. That's just the start is what I think. In other words, the neural think. In other words, the neural think. In other words, the neural reinforcement learning world um is going reinforcement learning world um is going reinforcement learning world um is going to continue to grow. It's going to continue to grow. It's going to continue to grow. It's going to explode. We're going to really start to explode. We're going to really start to explode. We're going to really start to understand that. We may even understand that. We may even understand that. We may even understand how to engineer it. Let's say somebody how to engineer it. Let's say somebody how to engineer it. Let's say somebody wants to get better at understanding wants to get better at understanding wants to get better at understanding where they're at in the whole learning where they're at in the whole learning where they're at in the whole learning motivation, reward, contingency, motivation, reward, contingency, motivation, reward, contingency, dopamine thing. They're not going to dopamine thing. They're not going to dopamine thing. They're not going to drop a wire into their brain. They may drop a wire into their brain. They may drop a wire into their brain. They may or may not be able to participate in one or may not be able to participate in one or may not be able to participate in one of these experiments. But let's say of these experiments. But let's say of these experiments. But let's say somebody wants to kind of just uh somebody wants to kind of just uh somebody wants to kind of just uh reflect on their on where they are reflect on their on where they are reflect on their on where they are strong and where they are weak at the strong and where they are weak at the strong and where they are weak at the level of the algorithms they're running. level of the algorithms they're running. level of the algorithms they're running. &gt;&gt; I'm not suggesting you necessarily have &gt;&gt; I'm not suggesting you necessarily have &gt;&gt; I'm not suggesting you necessarily have anything for them right now. But aside anything for them right now. But aside anything for them right now. But aside from telling them to go play a from telling them to go play a from telling them to go play a competitive sport, competitive sport, competitive sport, &gt;&gt; I have a posttock that's making a &gt;&gt; I have a posttock that's making a &gt;&gt; I have a posttock that's making a company that's going to commercialize company that's going to commercialize company that's going to commercialize these things up people's noses. these things up people's noses. these things up people's noses. um when it goes from skunk works to um when it goes from skunk works to um when it goes from skunk works to kinder and gentler. Um and you could you kinder and gentler. Um and you could you kinder and gentler. Um and you could you could hack your own serotonin onto your could hack your own serotonin onto your could hack your own serotonin onto your cell phone, you could put it up there cell phone, you could put it up there cell phone, you could put it up there and you could go do a thing and you and you could go do a thing and you and you could go do a thing and you could watch it on your cell phone. And could watch it on your cell phone. And could watch it on your cell phone. And um we've never had anything like that um we've never had anything like that um we've never had anything like that before. Like I wonder what happens when before. Like I wonder what happens when before. Like I wonder what happens when I do this. I know I feel you know what I do this. I know I feel you know what I do this. I know I feel you know what happens when I solve a scrabble puzzle happens when I solve a scrabble puzzle happens when I solve a scrabble puzzle or what happens when I You could do it or what happens when I You could do it or what happens when I You could do it yourself. So that's his goal is to take yourself. So that's his goal is to take yourself. So that's his goal is to take this company and this company and this company and put it into a commercial space where put it into a commercial space where put it into a commercial space where people could make personal use of it. people could make personal use of it. people could make personal use of it. &gt;&gt; Oh my god, I can give this to this &gt;&gt; Oh my god, I can give this to this &gt;&gt; Oh my god, I can give this to this person who's asking me about their person who's asking me about their person who's asking me about their dating life and they can uh figure out dating life and they can uh figure out dating life and they can uh figure out how their dopamine reward expectation how their dopamine reward expectation how their dopamine reward expectation contingencies are running them. It would contingencies are running them. It would contingencies are running them. It would be very interesting to sit and run be very interesting to sit and run be very interesting to sit and run scenarios through your mind and run them scenarios through your mind and run them scenarios through your mind and run them through again and ask yourself ask through again and ask yourself ask through again and ask yourself ask whether you saw something like that whether you saw something like that whether you saw something like that going on with the mono the signaling going on with the mono the signaling going on with the mono the signaling that's available in your nose. That's that's available in your nose. That's that's available in your nose. That's the kind of experiments we're doing now. the kind of experiments we're doing now. the kind of experiments we're doing now. We have sentences playing out to people We have sentences playing out to people We have sentences playing out to people that have um as each word occurs there's that have um as each word occurs there's that have um as each word occurs there's a probability that there's going to be a probability that there's going to be a probability that there's going to be a veilance change in the sentence and veilance change in the sentence and veilance change in the sentence and we're looking at how it tracks this word we're looking at how it tracks this word we're looking at how it tracks this word by word. We have people playing social by word. We have people playing social by word. We have people playing social exchange games, um, thinking about exchange games, um, thinking about exchange games, um, thinking about themselves and others. I can imagine themselves and others. I can imagine themselves and others. I can imagine there's probably somebody out there that there's probably somebody out there that there's probably somebody out there that has even better ideas about how you has even better ideas about how you has even better ideas about how you could use it, right? I mean, I sit and could use it, right? I mean, I sit and could use it, right? I mean, I sit and work on the other end of it, but um, so work on the other end of it, but um, so work on the other end of it, but um, so I'm hoping he uh, I'm hoping he uh, I'm hoping he uh, that's going to hit the big time for that's going to hit the big time for that's going to hit the big time for him. Could you give me an example of him. Could you give me an example of him. Could you give me an example of something that you're particularly something that you're particularly something that you're particularly excited about that would excited about that would excited about that would make one of your kids' lives easier? make one of your kids' lives easier? make one of your kids' lives easier? learning how to concentrate. Like if I learning how to concentrate. Like if I learning how to concentrate. Like if I had a like this company uh this is Seth had a like this company uh this is Seth had a like this company uh this is Seth Batten, his company's called Nebula Batten, his company's called Nebula Batten, his company's called Nebula Neuro. He um if he had a probe that we Neuro. He um if he had a probe that we Neuro. He um if he had a probe that we could put up there easily like the could put up there easily like the could put up there easily like the little squishy things in your ears um little squishy things in your ears um little squishy things in your ears um then you could give him that and you then you could give him that and you then you could give him that and you could ask him to servo on their could ask him to servo on their could ask him to servo on their neurotransmitter release. neurotransmitter release. neurotransmitter release. &gt;&gt; So they would read a passage. you're &gt;&gt; So they would read a passage. you're &gt;&gt; So they would read a passage. you're getting real-time readout of dopamine getting real-time readout of dopamine getting real-time readout of dopamine and serotonin and serotonin and serotonin &gt;&gt; and then you make a suggestion about how &gt;&gt; and then you make a suggestion about how &gt;&gt; and then you make a suggestion about how to learn something about it, pay to learn something about it, pay to learn something about it, pay attention to a component of it. Or you attention to a component of it. Or you attention to a component of it. Or you could do something as simple as lower could do something as simple as lower could do something as simple as lower this lower this thing right here, lower this lower this thing right here, lower this lower this thing right here, lower this sigma right here. We just haven't this sigma right here. We just haven't this sigma right here. We just haven't had a way to measure that in real humans had a way to measure that in real humans had a way to measure that in real humans in settings that are like the in settings that are like the in settings that are like the real world. So you take a thousand real world. So you take a thousand real world. So you take a thousand people and you say, "Oh, look, these people and you say, "Oh, look, these people and you say, "Oh, look, these people are really comprehending in a way people are really comprehending in a way people are really comprehending in a way that we want them to comprehend." and that we want them to comprehend." and that we want them to comprehend." and these are in the middle and these are these are in the middle and these are these are in the middle and these are wow they're way off beam here and then wow they're way off beam here and then wow they're way off beam here and then you train a neural network who looks at you train a neural network who looks at you train a neural network who looks at the performance step by step with the performance step by step with the performance step by step with the transmitters there and it generates a transmitters there and it generates a transmitters there and it generates a picture of that kind of thing is picture of that kind of thing is picture of that kind of thing is going to dominate neurobiology coming up going to dominate neurobiology coming up going to dominate neurobiology coming up I mean it's changed whether or not I mean it's changed whether or not I mean it's changed whether or not people realize it or not so many people realize it or not so many people realize it or not so many people are getting trained in it over here but are getting trained in it over here but are getting trained in it over here but these are the important problems these are the important problems these are the important problems these are the human behavior human mind human are the human behavior human mind human are the human behavior human mind human perception problems that's what you perception problems that's what you perception problems that's what you really want to get that really want to get that really want to get that especially from mental illness and stuff especially from mental illness and stuff especially from mental illness and stuff like that, it's not going to be one, like that, it's not going to be one, like that, it's not going to be one, it's not going to be a simple one thing. it's not going to be a simple one thing. it's not going to be a simple one thing. So, the fact that these neural networks So, the fact that these neural networks So, the fact that these neural networks have had a big breakthrough and how do have had a big breakthrough and how do have had a big breakthrough and how do we train them and how do and there's we train them and how do and there's we train them and how do and there's still a ton of stuff we don't know. still a ton of stuff we don't know. still a ton of stuff we don't know. These networks often learn things that These networks often learn things that These networks often learn things that the designers don't know they know the designers don't know they know the designers don't know they know &gt;&gt; and I think that scares a lot of people, &gt;&gt; and I think that scares a lot of people, &gt;&gt; and I think that scares a lot of people, but I think there's excitement in it to but I think there's excitement in it to but I think there's excitement in it to be had in it also. be had in it also. be had in it also. &gt;&gt; And they're very convincing. They can &gt;&gt; And they're very convincing. They can &gt;&gt; And they're very convincing. They can make very convincing arguments and make very convincing arguments and make very convincing arguments and things like that. And so I just think things like that. And so I just think things like that. And so I just think letting it look at data I can't letting it look at data I can't letting it look at data I can't imagine a neuroscience experiment imagine a neuroscience experiment imagine a neuroscience experiment certainly on humans where you wouldn't certainly on humans where you wouldn't certainly on humans where you wouldn't do that where you wouldn't shine these do that where you wouldn't shine these do that where you wouldn't shine these networks on that and feed them the data. networks on that and feed them the data. networks on that and feed them the data. So a lot of this is going to be how do So a lot of this is going to be how do So a lot of this is going to be how do you collect the data? How do you feed it you collect the data? How do you feed it you collect the data? How do you feed it to the networks and whatnot? So I'm very to the networks and whatnot? So I'm very to the networks and whatnot? So I'm very excited about that. I'm excited about that. I'm excited about that. I'm excited about it because it was made fun of so about it because it was made fun of so about it because it was made fun of so much 30 years ago. Oh, reinforcement much 30 years ago. Oh, reinforcement much 30 years ago. Oh, reinforcement learning can't learn anything. learning can't learn anything. learning can't learn anything. Everything in science was made fun of Everything in science was made fun of Everything in science was made fun of when now these really sound like old two when now these really sound like old two when now these really sound like old two old guys talking about but when I first old guys talking about but when I first old guys talking about but when I first started going to the neur annual started going to the neur annual started going to the neur annual neuroscience meeting two things were the neuroscience meeting two things were the neuroscience meeting two things were the drags like no one attended those very drags like no one attended those very drags like no one attended those very few posters which were AI few posters which were AI few posters which were AI &gt;&gt; and brain machine interface those were &gt;&gt; and brain machine interface those were &gt;&gt; and brain machine interface those were considered like the like really just considered like the like really just considered like the like really just like the bottom of the pile like the bottom of the pile like the bottom of the pile &gt;&gt; now it's the hot thing. &gt;&gt; now it's the hot thing. &gt;&gt; now it's the hot thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then for a while there was the, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then for a while there was the, &gt;&gt; Yeah. Then for a while there was the, you know, molecular tools and genetic you know, molecular tools and genetic you know, molecular tools and genetic tools and those are still awesome, but tools and those are still awesome, but tools and those are still awesome, but now AI and brain machine now AI and brain machine now AI and brain machine interface is like all the rage. interface is like all the rage. interface is like all the rage. &gt;&gt; We're going to engineer our way into the &gt;&gt; We're going to engineer our way into the &gt;&gt; We're going to engineer our way into the brain now. We're not going to just look brain now. We're not going to just look brain now. We're not going to just look for a pill. for a pill. for a pill. &gt;&gt; Well, look, the same thing is true, if I &gt;&gt; Well, look, the same thing is true, if I &gt;&gt; Well, look, the same thing is true, if I may, I'm editorializing here in the may, I'm editorializing here in the may, I'm editorializing here in the health space, right? And so the same health space, right? And so the same health space, right? And so the same kind of what got knocked on meditation kind of what got knocked on meditation kind of what got knocked on meditation and magic carpet. Is it like a magic and magic carpet. Is it like a magic and magic carpet. Is it like a magic carpet ride? you know, woo, mysticism, carpet ride? you know, woo, mysticism, carpet ride? you know, woo, mysticism, breath work, meditation, psychedelics breath work, meditation, psychedelics breath work, meditation, psychedelics are making a big comeback now that needs are making a big comeback now that needs are making a big comeback now that needs to be approached with caution. to be approached with caution. to be approached with caution. Obviously, can set off psychotic Obviously, can set off psychotic Obviously, can set off psychotic episodes, but it's being looked at episodes, but it's being looked at episodes, but it's being looked at seriously clinically. U peptide, the seriously clinically. U peptide, the seriously clinically. U peptide, the GLPs have made peptides, super GLPs have made peptides, super GLPs have made peptides, super interesting. Um, I mean, basically, I interesting. Um, I mean, basically, I interesting. Um, I mean, basically, I have lived long enough in these spaces have lived long enough in these spaces have lived long enough in these spaces of science and health to say of science and health to say of science and health to say whatever people are beating up on now, whatever people are beating up on now, whatever people are beating up on now, that's going to be the next big thing. that's going to be the next big thing. that's going to be the next big thing. It's just going to take a while and you It's just going to take a while and you It's just going to take a while and you have to be discerning in how you go have to be discerning in how you go have to be discerning in how you go about it. But I think it's wonderful about it. But I think it's wonderful about it. But I think it's wonderful that guys like Hinton and others kept that guys like Hinton and others kept that guys like Hinton and others kept hammering on this stuff when everyone hammering on this stuff when everyone hammering on this stuff when everyone thought it was like kind of backwater. thought it was like kind of backwater. thought it was like kind of backwater. Well, why would you why would you do Well, why would you why would you do Well, why would you why would you do this stuff? Why would you do neural this stuff? Why would you do neural this stuff? Why would you do neural networks? Like because they can't learn, networks? Like because they can't learn, networks? Like because they can't learn, they say they can't learn anything. And they say they can't learn anything. And they say they can't learn anything. And it was sort of true. I mean, they it was sort of true. I mean, they it was sort of true. I mean, they weren't learning anything impressive. weren't learning anything impressive. weren't learning anything impressive. &gt;&gt; And then they transition to learning &gt;&gt; And then they transition to learning &gt;&gt; And then they transition to learning everything. I you can ask it what's in everything. I you can ask it what's in everything. I you can ask it what's in that picture that picture that picture and it'll answer you. There's a woman and it'll answer you. There's a woman and it'll answer you. There's a woman holding a puppy dog with a man dancing holding a puppy dog with a man dancing holding a puppy dog with a man dancing in the background. It looks like a in the background. It looks like a in the background. It looks like a painting from a Fellini movie. painting from a Fellini movie. painting from a Fellini movie. &gt;&gt; It's awesome. I mean, it's proof that &gt;&gt; It's awesome. I mean, it's proof that &gt;&gt; It's awesome. I mean, it's proof that whether or not you're talking about whether or not you're talking about whether or not you're talking about fitness or sport or science that if fitness or sport or science that if fitness or sport or science that if you love a certain area of something to you love a certain area of something to you love a certain area of something to just keep going because eventually the just keep going because eventually the just keep going because eventually the world kind of aligns with you and then world kind of aligns with you and then world kind of aligns with you and then it won't, right? Eventually it move on it won't, right? Eventually it move on it won't, right? Eventually it move on to something else. to something else. to something else. &gt;&gt; He's a psychologist, too. &gt;&gt; He's a psychologist, too. &gt;&gt; He's a psychologist, too. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so cool. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so cool. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so cool. &gt;&gt; His PhD is in psychology. &gt;&gt; His PhD is in psychology. &gt;&gt; His PhD is in psychology. &gt;&gt; Hinton. &gt;&gt; Hinton. &gt;&gt; Hinton. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Well, I'm glad to know that you're &gt;&gt; Well, I'm glad to know that you're &gt;&gt; Well, I'm glad to know that you're excited. I'm excited that you're excited. I'm excited that you're excited. I'm excited that you're excited. Um, and I'm also mostly an excited. Um, and I'm also mostly an excited. Um, and I'm also mostly an optimist about this stuff. I mean, I optimist about this stuff. I mean, I optimist about this stuff. I mean, I also think when it we've talked a lot also think when it we've talked a lot also think when it we've talked a lot about social media and reward about social media and reward about social media and reward contingencies and dopamine and stuff, contingencies and dopamine and stuff, contingencies and dopamine and stuff, but I also think that the human brain but I also think that the human brain but I also think that the human brain has adapted to conditions over and over has adapted to conditions over and over has adapted to conditions over and over and over again. So, this younger and over again. So, this younger and over again. So, this younger generation that we're like, how could generation that we're like, how could generation that we're like, how could you spend all this time on your phone? you spend all this time on your phone? you spend all this time on your phone? We don't want them to destroy We don't want them to destroy We don't want them to destroy themselves. On the other hand, they're themselves. On the other hand, they're themselves. On the other hand, they're doing pretty well. Like that there are doing pretty well. Like that there are doing pretty well. Like that there are there are examples of them doing there are examples of them doing there are examples of them doing spectacularly well um scrolling super spectacularly well um scrolling super spectacularly well um scrolling super fast and doing homework, playing sports, fast and doing homework, playing sports, fast and doing homework, playing sports, living their lives. So, um living their lives. So, um living their lives. So, um you willing to answer some questions you willing to answer some questions you willing to answer some questions from the general public? from the general public? from the general public? &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; some great questions here. Um, some of &gt;&gt; some great questions here. Um, some of &gt;&gt; some great questions here. Um, some of them you've already answered. them you've already answered. them you've already answered. &gt;&gt; Uh, but here's one I think is worth &gt;&gt; Uh, but here's one I think is worth &gt;&gt; Uh, but here's one I think is worth asking. How much of what the public hears about How much of what the public hears about How much of what the public hears about quote unquote dopamine hits is quote unquote dopamine hits is quote unquote dopamine hits is neuroscience BS, meaning it's probably neuroscience BS, meaning it's probably neuroscience BS, meaning it's probably not real neuroscience. And how much has not real neuroscience. And how much has not real neuroscience. And how much has an evidence base when we hear this thing an evidence base when we hear this thing an evidence base when we hear this thing dopamine hits? Something unexpected and dopamine hits? Something unexpected and dopamine hits? Something unexpected and rewarding &gt;&gt; causes a dopamine fluctuation. And &gt;&gt; causes a dopamine fluctuation. And &gt;&gt; causes a dopamine fluctuation. And that's true. that's true. that's true. &gt;&gt; Okay. But it's an incomplete story. &gt;&gt; Okay. But it's an incomplete story. &gt;&gt; Okay. But it's an incomplete story. &gt;&gt; Do you think it's an oversimplification &gt;&gt; Do you think it's an oversimplification &gt;&gt; Do you think it's an oversimplification to assign a serotonin hypothesis of to assign a serotonin hypothesis of to assign a serotonin hypothesis of depression and a dopamine hypothesis of depression and a dopamine hypothesis of depression and a dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia? And if so, what other schizophrenia? And if so, what other schizophrenia? And if so, what other points would you add? points would you add? points would you add? &gt;&gt; It's a bit of a loaded question and that &gt;&gt; It's a bit of a loaded question and that &gt;&gt; It's a bit of a loaded question and that both of those chemicals are fluctuating both of those chemicals are fluctuating both of those chemicals are fluctuating in both of those disorders. in both of those disorders. in both of those disorders. &gt;&gt; So involved, but that's not the complete &gt;&gt; So involved, but that's not the complete &gt;&gt; So involved, but that's not the complete story. You know, it was the most story. You know, it was the most story. You know, it was the most conspicuous feature of schizophrenia is conspicuous feature of schizophrenia is conspicuous feature of schizophrenia is the fact that blocking dopamine the fact that blocking dopamine the fact that blocking dopamine receptors turns the symptoms down a receptors turns the symptoms down a receptors turns the symptoms down a little bit. We discovered that a long little bit. We discovered that a long little bit. We discovered that a long time ago. It was it was very early on time ago. It was it was very early on time ago. It was it was very early on seen as a hyperdopamineergic seen as a hyperdopamineergic seen as a hyperdopamineergic state. And it is that I mean it is that state. And it is that I mean it is that state. And it is that I mean it is that if you block dopamine receptors, you if you block dopamine receptors, you if you block dopamine receptors, you don't hear voices anymore. If you take don't hear voices anymore. If you take don't hear voices anymore. If you take uh L-dopa and you don't have Parkinson's uh L-dopa and you don't have Parkinson's uh L-dopa and you don't have Parkinson's and you don't have schizophrenia, I can and you don't have schizophrenia, I can and you don't have schizophrenia, I can find a dose where you will start to hear find a dose where you will start to hear find a dose where you will start to hear voices. I can find a dose where you voices. I can find a dose where you voices. I can find a dose where you will start to feel paranoid. I can make will start to feel paranoid. I can make will start to feel paranoid. I can make you schizophren. And so that's r that's you schizophren. And so that's r that's you schizophren. And so that's r that's a rational assignment of dopamine. The a rational assignment of dopamine. The a rational assignment of dopamine. The the features of schizophrenia. the features of schizophrenia. the features of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is pretty illdefined. And Schizophrenia is pretty illdefined. And Schizophrenia is pretty illdefined. And I think all these words are going to I think all these words are going to I think all these words are going to start getting teased apart now that we start getting teased apart now that we start getting teased apart now that we can record things in healthy people, can record things in healthy people, can record things in healthy people, that we can record things in sick that we can record things in sick that we can record things in sick people, and we that we recording these people, and we that we recording these people, and we that we recording these transmitters in people that have these transmitters in people that have these transmitters in people that have these actual disorders. This person is curious actual disorders. This person is curious actual disorders. This person is curious about the serotonin to dopamine ratio in about the serotonin to dopamine ratio in about the serotonin to dopamine ratio in quitting decisions. quitting decisions. quitting decisions. At what point does the neurochemical At what point does the neurochemical At what point does the neurochemical drive to persist, what they're thinking drive to persist, what they're thinking drive to persist, what they're thinking of as dopamine pursuit, become of as dopamine pursuit, become of as dopamine pursuit, become pathological against the valuation pathological against the valuation pathological against the valuation signal that says this isn't working? In signal that says this isn't working? In signal that says this isn't working? In other words, what's the line between other words, what's the line between other words, what's the line between grit and sunk cost fallacy? grit and sunk cost fallacy? grit and sunk cost fallacy? They want a lot answered in this one. They want a lot answered in this one. They want a lot answered in this one. That's a great question. I think it That's a great question. I think it That's a great question. I think it leaves out something that we really leaves out something that we really leaves out something that we really don't know much about which is some for don't know much about which is some for don't know much about which is some for these thing these thing these thing these neurotransmitters to be released more or neurotransmitters to be released more or neurotransmitters to be released more or less you have to set expectations. We less you have to set expectations. We less you have to set expectations. We know very little about how expectations know very little about how expectations know very little about how expectations for now are being set the next and being for now are being set the next and being for now are being set the next and being updated from state to state to state and updated from state to state to state and updated from state to state to state and that controls the fluctuations as much that controls the fluctuations as much that controls the fluctuations as much as anything. And so the representations as anything. And so the representations as anything. And so the representations in your brain of how they're held or in your brain of how they're held or in your brain of how they're held or gotten from memory, how they control gotten from memory, how they control gotten from memory, how they control brain states and stuff, that's not brain states and stuff, that's not brain states and stuff, that's not understood very well at all. That's what understood very well at all. That's what understood very well at all. That's what AI is going to help us do in the next 20 AI is going to help us do in the next 20 AI is going to help us do in the next 20 years. &gt;&gt; I love that. I really appreciate your &gt;&gt; I love that. I really appreciate your &gt;&gt; I love that. I really appreciate your answer. And guess what? Grock AI jumped answer. And guess what? Grock AI jumped answer. And guess what? Grock AI jumped in and answered as well. So we can see in and answered as well. So we can see in and answered as well. So we can see what Grock said. what Grock said. what Grock said. &gt;&gt; It answered what that question. &gt;&gt; It answered what that question. &gt;&gt; It answered what that question. &gt;&gt; The same question. Yeah. So these people &gt;&gt; The same question. Yeah. So these people &gt;&gt; The same question. Yeah. So these people are asking questions on So he has Grock are asking questions on So he has Grock are asking questions on So he has Grock running over all the running over all the running over all the &gt;&gt; Grock just jumped in and answered. This &gt;&gt; Grock just jumped in and answered. This &gt;&gt; Grock just jumped in and answered. This person didn't say oh no sorry they person didn't say oh no sorry they person didn't say oh no sorry they tagged Grock. So Grock jumped in and tagged Grock. So Grock jumped in and tagged Grock. So Grock jumped in and answered. If you ask a question on answered. If you ask a question on answered. If you ask a question on action and you tag Grock. So I'll tell action and you tag Grock. So I'll tell action and you tag Grock. So I'll tell you what Grock said. Great question. you what Grock said. Great question. you what Grock said. Great question. Research shows that dopamine drives Research shows that dopamine drives Research shows that dopamine drives persistence grit by reinforcing effort persistence grit by reinforcing effort persistence grit by reinforcing effort and reward anticipation. and reward anticipation. and reward anticipation. But high levels can trap us in sunk cost But high levels can trap us in sunk cost But high levels can trap us in sunk cost fallacies ignoring when to quit. fallacies ignoring when to quit. fallacies ignoring when to quit. Serotonin helps balance by signaling Serotonin helps balance by signaling Serotonin helps balance by signaling outcome valuation. Low ratios may tip outcome valuation. Low ratios may tip outcome valuation. Low ratios may tip toward unhealthy persistence. Studies, toward unhealthy persistence. Studies, toward unhealthy persistence. Studies, and they cite a study, link dopamine and they cite a study, link dopamine and they cite a study, link dopamine surges to overvaluing sunk efforts. surges to overvaluing sunk efforts. surges to overvaluing sunk efforts. Worth exploring with the expert. Big big Worth exploring with the expert. Big big Worth exploring with the expert. Big big exclamation mark. You exclamation mark. You exclamation mark. You &gt;&gt; funny. Wild, right? Yeah. Did How did &gt;&gt; funny. Wild, right? Yeah. Did How did &gt;&gt; funny. Wild, right? Yeah. Did How did Grock do? Grock do? Grock do? &gt;&gt; Grock did well if the brain is only a &gt;&gt; Grock did well if the brain is only a &gt;&gt; Grock did well if the brain is only a chemical machine. Grock left off the chemical machine. Grock left off the chemical machine. Grock left off the fact that it's an electrochemical fact that it's an electrochemical fact that it's an electrochemical machine and that the electrical activity machine and that the electrical activity machine and that the electrical activity in the networks set things like in the networks set things like in the networks set things like expectations which defines when the expectations which defines when the expectations which defines when the release is happening or not. And so uh release is happening or not. And so uh release is happening or not. And so uh that's half the book. What's the one that's half the book. What's the one that's half the book. What's the one thing about dopamine the public seems to thing about dopamine the public seems to thing about dopamine the public seems to always misunderstand? always misunderstand? always misunderstand? &gt;&gt; Dopamine equals pleasure. &gt;&gt; Dopamine equals pleasure. &gt;&gt; Dopamine equals pleasure. &gt;&gt; Is not true. &gt;&gt; Is not true. &gt;&gt; Is not true. &gt;&gt; Is not true. &gt;&gt; Is not true. &gt;&gt; Is not true. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; What's the one thing about serotonin the &gt;&gt; What's the one thing about serotonin the &gt;&gt; What's the one thing about serotonin the public always seems to misunderstand? public always seems to misunderstand? public always seems to misunderstand? you know, I take drugs to increase my you know, I take drugs to increase my you know, I take drugs to increase my serotonin when I'm depressed. What they serotonin when I'm depressed. What they serotonin when I'm depressed. What they don't understand is that um those drugs don't understand is that um those drugs don't understand is that um those drugs are really heterogeneous, often are really heterogeneous, often are really heterogeneous, often pathological, and you know, across pathological, and you know, across pathological, and you know, across decades toxic. Um so, it's an decades toxic. Um so, it's an decades toxic. Um so, it's an unfortunate we're in an unfortunate we're in an unfortunate we're in an unfortunate moment there to reconfigure those that moment there to reconfigure those that moment there to reconfigure those that kind of treatment. I bet you uh because kind of treatment. I bet you uh because kind of treatment. I bet you uh because I know people who swear by SSRI because I know people who swear by SSRI because I know people who swear by SSRI use. I mean just it transform their life use. I mean just it transform their life use. I mean just it transform their life and they don't the side effects are and they don't the side effects are and they don't the side effects are nominal. Um nominal. Um nominal. Um it'd be great to be able to identify it'd be great to be able to identify it'd be great to be able to identify them ahead of time. The candidates for them ahead of time. The candidates for them ahead of time. The candidates for whom that would work. You know a lot of whom that would work. You know a lot of whom that would work. You know a lot of this is a placebo effect. this is a placebo effect. this is a placebo effect. Psychotropic meds when you have a good Psychotropic meds when you have a good Psychotropic meds when you have a good outcome variable outcome variable outcome variable 50 to 80% is a placebo effect. meaning 50 to 80% is a placebo effect. meaning 50 to 80% is a placebo effect. meaning not explained by any you can't explain not explained by any you can't explain not explained by any you can't explain the variance by anything but the variance by anything but the variance by anything but that doesn't mean it's a fake effect that doesn't mean it's a fake effect that doesn't mean it's a fake effect your expectations are set by that um your expectations are set by that um your expectations are set by that um like if you believe something is going like if you believe something is going like if you believe something is going to happen we have very poor to happen we have very poor to happen we have very poor understanding of really how your belief understanding of really how your belief understanding of really how your belief that something is happening your brain that something is happening your brain that something is happening your brain actually marshals it actually marshals it actually marshals it &gt;&gt; this question I am tempted to relate to &gt;&gt; this question I am tempted to relate to &gt;&gt; this question I am tempted to relate to meditation but let's see what you say meditation but let's see what you say meditation but let's see what you say Um, how dopamine responses change when Um, how dopamine responses change when Um, how dopamine responses change when you remove external rewards and rely you remove external rewards and rely you remove external rewards and rely purely on internal satisfaction? purely on internal satisfaction? purely on internal satisfaction? Like so I think of an example like Like so I think of an example like Like so I think of an example like meditation like where you're not maybe meditation like where you're not maybe meditation like where you're not maybe you're not telling people I'm meditating you're not telling people I'm meditating you're not telling people I'm meditating to get praise but just going into a to get praise but just going into a to get praise but just going into a state or maybe drawing because you like state or maybe drawing because you like state or maybe drawing because you like drawing you're never going to show your drawing you're never going to show your drawing you're never going to show your drawings or what is there any idea of drawings or what is there any idea of drawings or what is there any idea of what happens when the what happens when the what happens when the &gt;&gt; No, there's not but it would be &gt;&gt; No, there's not but it would be &gt;&gt; No, there's not but it would be fantastic to measure that. That's a fantastic to measure that. That's a fantastic to measure that. That's a fantastic question. To what degree can fantastic question. To what degree can fantastic question. To what degree can you when cut off from the world, let's you when cut off from the world, let's you when cut off from the world, let's say in a sensory deprivation tank, say in a sensory deprivation tank, say in a sensory deprivation tank, generate internal states that you chase generate internal states that you chase generate internal states that you chase and generate dopamine signals in that and generate dopamine signals in that and generate dopamine signals in that context? That's why I mentioned these context? That's why I mentioned these context? That's why I mentioned these not yet published measurement schemes. not yet published measurement schemes. not yet published measurement schemes. Well, I'm telling um Oliver from the UK, Well, I'm telling um Oliver from the UK, Well, I'm telling um Oliver from the UK, no info, but he said, "Yours is a superb no info, but he said, "Yours is a superb no info, but he said, "Yours is a superb question." Um, question." Um, question." Um, and guess what? That's a lot of external and guess what? That's a lot of external and guess what? That's a lot of external validation. Um, so it kind of runs validation. Um, so it kind of runs validation. Um, so it kind of runs countercurrent to the question, but countercurrent to the question, but countercurrent to the question, but right on Oliver, I don't know you, right on Oliver, I don't know you, right on Oliver, I don't know you, Oliver, but oh, it's interesting. Many Oliver, but oh, it's interesting. Many Oliver, but oh, it's interesting. Many people are asking that same question. people are asking that same question. people are asking that same question. What has a greater influence on dopamine What has a greater influence on dopamine What has a greater influence on dopamine levels? Exogenous or um stim, you know, levels? Exogenous or um stim, you know, levels? Exogenous or um stim, you know, feedback or our psychological framework? feedback or our psychological framework? feedback or our psychological framework? People are thinking about this a lot. People are thinking about this a lot. People are thinking about this a lot. &gt;&gt; Well, they're linked a little bit. My &gt;&gt; Well, they're linked a little bit. My &gt;&gt; Well, they're linked a little bit. My simple answer um betrayed itself in a simple answer um betrayed itself in a simple answer um betrayed itself in a way. They're linked. your ability way. They're linked. your ability way. They're linked. your ability to generate a clear expectation and hold to generate a clear expectation and hold to generate a clear expectation and hold it in mind. Um conscious I guess we're it in mind. Um conscious I guess we're it in mind. Um conscious I guess we're talking about consciously here, right? talking about consciously here, right? talking about consciously here, right? Um it's not really clear how good you are it's not really clear how good you are it's not really clear how good you are at that. at that. at that. &gt;&gt; There are a lot of questions asking &gt;&gt; There are a lot of questions asking &gt;&gt; There are a lot of questions asking about how to uh about how to uh about how to uh create a capacity for persistent create a capacity for persistent create a capacity for persistent motivation &gt;&gt; um under conditions where things aren't &gt;&gt; um under conditions where things aren't &gt;&gt; um under conditions where things aren't going well. You talked earlier about going well. You talked earlier about going well. You talked earlier about running up a hill and puking as a running up a hill and puking as a running up a hill and puking as a self-training. Um, self-training. Um, self-training. Um, &gt;&gt; Friday nights after the football game, &gt;&gt; Friday nights after the football game, &gt;&gt; Friday nights after the football game, &gt;&gt; on Fridays, &gt;&gt; on Fridays, &gt;&gt; on Fridays, &gt;&gt; I just did it because I could. &gt;&gt; I just did it because I could. &gt;&gt; I just did it because I could. &gt;&gt; Till you actually vomited. &gt;&gt; Till you actually vomited. &gt;&gt; Till you actually vomited. &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I mean, I don't know. Snot and &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I mean, I don't know. Snot and &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I mean, I don't know. Snot and vomit. It was It was I was just I would vomit. It was It was I was just I would vomit. It was It was I was just I would go I would go until I couldn't go I would go until I couldn't go I would go until I couldn't go anymore. I would just I didn't go anymore. I would just I didn't go anymore. I would just I didn't really lift weights in high school, but really lift weights in high school, but really lift weights in high school, but I would do um I copied the Russians. I would do um I copied the Russians. I would do um I copied the Russians. I had books, Russian books, because um had books, Russian books, because um had books, Russian books, because um Caucasian sprinters in the Olympics that Caucasian sprinters in the Olympics that Caucasian sprinters in the Olympics that won were only from the Eastern block won were only from the Eastern block won were only from the Eastern block countries. &gt;&gt; Little did I know they were on these &gt;&gt; Little did I know they were on these &gt;&gt; Little did I know they were on these massive steroid campaigns, but they massive steroid campaigns, but they massive steroid campaigns, but they did a lot of plyometrics and weight uh did a lot of plyometrics and weight uh did a lot of plyometrics and weight uh box jumps and stuff. box jumps and stuff. box jumps and stuff. &gt;&gt; Um so I would put weight vest on and do &gt;&gt; Um so I would put weight vest on and do &gt;&gt; Um so I would put weight vest on and do it until I just threw up. I worked out it until I just threw up. I worked out it until I just threw up. I worked out this morning. I felt so nauseated. I this morning. I felt so nauseated. I this morning. I felt so nauseated. I thought, "Oh my god, I don't know." Have thought, "Oh my god, I don't know." Have thought, "Oh my god, I don't know." Have you ever done a like a mellow workout? you ever done a like a mellow workout? you ever done a like a mellow workout? &gt;&gt; No. Your face says it all. We had a guy. &gt;&gt; No. Your face says it all. We had a guy. &gt;&gt; No. Your face says it all. We had a guy. &gt;&gt; It's a It's a It's my moment every day. &gt;&gt; It's a It's a It's my moment every day. &gt;&gt; It's a It's a It's my moment every day. That's why I don't like to work out with That's why I don't like to work out with That's why I don't like to work out with anybody. &gt;&gt; It's my moment. &gt;&gt; It's my moment. &gt;&gt; It's my moment. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Same. Unless I'm working out with &gt;&gt; Yeah. Same. Unless I'm working out with &gt;&gt; Yeah. Same. Unless I'm working out with Dorian Yates. Dorian Yates. Dorian Yates. &gt;&gt; Well, &gt;&gt; Well, &gt;&gt; Well, &gt;&gt; you know, um because he's going to &gt;&gt; you know, um because he's going to &gt;&gt; you know, um because he's going to go, &gt;&gt; you know, when I met uh um Dand. He was &gt;&gt; you know, when I met uh um Dand. He was &gt;&gt; you know, when I met uh um Dand. He was from Dand, Florida. from Dand, Florida. from Dand, Florida. &gt;&gt; Arthur Jones. &gt;&gt; Arthur Jones. &gt;&gt; Arthur Jones. &gt;&gt; I met him at a place in Sandy Springs, &gt;&gt; I met him at a place in Sandy Springs, &gt;&gt; I met him at a place in Sandy Springs, which is in Atlanta. And at the same which is in Atlanta. And at the same which is in Atlanta. And at the same place, I used to work out with a guy place, I used to work out with a guy place, I used to work out with a guy called Isaac Hayes. You ever heard of called Isaac Hayes. You ever heard of called Isaac Hayes. You ever heard of Isaac Hayes? Isaac Hayes? Isaac Hayes? &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Called him Black Moses and &gt;&gt; Called him Black Moses and &gt;&gt; Called him Black Moses and &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; He would have this giant gold thing &gt;&gt; He would have this giant gold thing &gt;&gt; He would have this giant gold thing around and he um I was 12 and I could around and he um I was 12 and I could around and he um I was 12 and I could get in the Nautilus place and, you know, get in the Nautilus place and, you know, get in the Nautilus place and, you know, do a few things. They would let me in do a few things. They would let me in do a few things. They would let me in for any and he was nicest guy to me. for any and he was nicest guy to me. for any and he was nicest guy to me. Isaac Hayes. He was just like He just Isaac Hayes. He was just like He just Isaac Hayes. He was just like He just died not so long ago, right? died not so long ago, right? died not so long ago, right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. I recognize his name and I can &gt;&gt; Yeah. I recognize his name and I can &gt;&gt; Yeah. I recognize his name and I can see his see his see his &gt;&gt; shape head. Yep. He wore dark shades and &gt;&gt; shape head. Yep. He wore dark shades and &gt;&gt; shape head. Yep. He wore dark shades and a giant gold chain around his thing. a giant gold chain around his thing. a giant gold chain around his thing. &gt;&gt; So cool. &gt;&gt; So cool. &gt;&gt; So cool. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean that the high intensity &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean that the high intensity &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean that the high intensity work that Arthur Jones uh encouraged I work that Arthur Jones uh encouraged I work that Arthur Jones uh encouraged I think is the best way to stimulate think is the best way to stimulate think is the best way to stimulate hypertrophy and whatnot. The super hypertrophy and whatnot. The super hypertrophy and whatnot. The super setting and setting and setting and &gt;&gt; Oh, I'm sorry. You had to carry a bucket &gt;&gt; Oh, I'm sorry. You had to carry a bucket &gt;&gt; Oh, I'm sorry. You had to carry a bucket there. &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; Oh, &gt;&gt; because people would throw up so much. &gt;&gt; because people would throw up so much. &gt;&gt; because people would throw up so much. &gt;&gt; Yeah. High rep, high intensity leg day, &gt;&gt; Yeah. High rep, high intensity leg day, &gt;&gt; Yeah. High rep, high intensity leg day, you can definitely puke. A lot of you can definitely puke. A lot of you can definitely puke. A lot of questions about serotonin syndrome. I questions about serotonin syndrome. I questions about serotonin syndrome. I get questions about this all the time. get questions about this all the time. get questions about this all the time. people who feel like because of SSRIs people who feel like because of SSRIs people who feel like because of SSRIs they are dealing with uh sexual side they are dealing with uh sexual side they are dealing with uh sexual side effects, ahidonia, motivational issues. effects, ahidonia, motivational issues. effects, ahidonia, motivational issues. What do you think the cause is of all What do you think the cause is of all What do you think the cause is of all those things? It's it's those drugs are those things? It's it's those drugs are those things? It's it's those drugs are binding to all kinds of receptors is binding to all kinds of receptors is binding to all kinds of receptors is what's happening. And there are all what's happening. And there are all what's happening. And there are all kinds of serotonin receptors. Okay. kinds of serotonin receptors. Okay. kinds of serotonin receptors. Okay. You know, there's not that many You know, there's not that many You know, there's not that many different dopamine there probably what different dopamine there probably what different dopamine there probably what 80 serotonin receptors or something. 80 serotonin receptors or something. 80 serotonin receptors or something. There's there's a there's a great um There's there's a there's a great um There's there's a there's a great um number of them. And so there's just a number of them. And so there's just a number of them. And so there's just a field of dreams of way you can sort of field of dreams of way you can sort of field of dreams of way you can sort of have side effects. Um, also just the have side effects. Um, also just the have side effects. Um, also just the idea that you're on them idea that you're on them idea that you're on them &gt;&gt; is itself an effect. &gt;&gt; is itself an effect. &gt;&gt; is itself an effect. &gt;&gt; I'm on a drug. This is a drug to &gt;&gt; I'm on a drug. This is a drug to &gt;&gt; I'm on a drug. This is a drug to manipulate my mood state. manipulate my mood state. manipulate my mood state. &gt;&gt; That has an effect on your mood state &gt;&gt; That has an effect on your mood state &gt;&gt; That has an effect on your mood state and the way you feel. Thank you for and the way you feel. Thank you for and the way you feel. Thank you for answering those questions. I want to answering those questions. I want to answering those questions. I want to say a couple things. Um, first of all, say a couple things. Um, first of all, say a couple things. Um, first of all, thank you for taking time out of your thank you for taking time out of your thank you for taking time out of your very busy family and work and work out very busy family and work and work out very busy family and work and work out to puke uh often schedule. Um, despite to puke uh often schedule. Um, despite to puke uh often schedule. Um, despite the fact that you don't sleep much, um, the fact that you don't sleep much, um, the fact that you don't sleep much, um, you are very busy and it's a really you are very busy and it's a really you are very busy and it's a really wonderful opportunity that so many wonderful opportunity that so many wonderful opportunity that so many people can learn about dopamine and people can learn about dopamine and people can learn about dopamine and serotonin and neurom modulator dynamics serotonin and neurom modulator dynamics serotonin and neurom modulator dynamics from somebody who really understands the from somebody who really understands the from somebody who really understands the science past, present, and where it's science past, present, and where it's science past, present, and where it's going. Um, these are topics that many, going. Um, these are topics that many, going. Um, these are topics that many, many people hear about and think about many people hear about and think about many people hear about and think about and it's super important that the and it's super important that the and it's super important that the conversation be up-to-date and nuanced conversation be up-to-date and nuanced conversation be up-to-date and nuanced and you you've done that for us today. I and you you've done that for us today. I and you you've done that for us today. I realize it's far from complete so we'll realize it's far from complete so we'll realize it's far from complete so we'll have to have you back. But also I just have to have you back. But also I just have to have you back. But also I just want to say thanks for being uh the want to say thanks for being uh the want to say thanks for being uh the pioneer that you've been and forging a pioneer that you've been and forging a pioneer that you've been and forging a path that at least to my knowledge no path that at least to my knowledge no path that at least to my knowledge no one else in neuroscience is tackling all one else in neuroscience is tackling all one else in neuroscience is tackling all the technical challenges thinking about the technical challenges thinking about the technical challenges thinking about the AI and the computational stuff the AI and the computational stuff the AI and the computational stuff putting people into scanners putting people into scanners putting people into scanners putting wires up people's nose putting wires up people's nose putting wires up people's nose putting wires into people's brains I from the time I into people's brains I from the time I into people's brains I from the time I met you 15 years ago um it was very met you 15 years ago um it was very met you 15 years ago um it was very clear that you have a goal of solving clear that you have a goal of solving clear that you have a goal of solving the answers to particular questions and the answers to particular questions and the answers to particular questions and that you're going to do whatever it that you're going to do whatever it that you're going to do whatever it takes to get those answers and that's takes to get those answers and that's takes to get those answers and that's just awesome. Um it's the spirit of just awesome. Um it's the spirit of just awesome. Um it's the spirit of science uh at its best and uh we'll put science uh at its best and uh we'll put science uh at its best and uh we'll put links to your work and I know you've links to your work and I know you've links to your work and I know you've written some things and given some other written some things and given some other written some things and given some other talks. Um but I'm just so grateful. I talks. Um but I'm just so grateful. I talks. Um but I'm just so grateful. I learned a ton today and I know everyone learned a ton today and I know everyone learned a ton today and I know everyone else has. So um you've done us all a else has. So um you've done us all a else has. So um you've done us all a tremendous service. So thank you. tremendous service. So thank you. tremendous service. So thank you. &gt;&gt; Oh, thanks for having me. It's a blast. &gt;&gt; Oh, thanks for having me. It's a blast. &gt;&gt; Oh, thanks for having me. It's a blast. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Reed Montigue. To discussion with Dr. Reed Montigue. To discussion with Dr. Reed Montigue. To learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see learn more about his work, please see the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If the links in the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page protocols in the form of 1 to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Reed today's discussion with Dr. Reed today's discussion with Dr. Reed Montigue. And last, but certainly not Montigue. And last, but certainly not Montigue. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in least, thank you for your interest in science.