You have a reputation for having risen You have a reputation for having risen You have a reputation for having risen early and gotten to the gym by 5:00 a.m. early and gotten to the gym by 5:00 a.m. early and gotten to the gym by 5:00 a.m. for two hours, day in after day out. for two hours, day in after day out. for two hours, day in after day out. Tell us about that ritual. And uh do you Tell us about that ritual. And uh do you Tell us about that ritual. And uh do you still enjoy it? still enjoy it? still enjoy it? &gt;&gt; It's not a ritual and I never enjoyed &gt;&gt; It's not a ritual and I never enjoyed &gt;&gt; It's not a ritual and I never enjoyed it. It's a reality. And uh you do it it. It's a reality. And uh you do it it. It's a reality. And uh you do it because you need an instrument that you because you need an instrument that you because you need an instrument that you can challenge. Just set the mechanism can challenge. Just set the mechanism can challenge. Just set the mechanism for the day you're going to have to do for the day you're going to have to do for the day you're going to have to do it. It's kind of boring and it's kind of it. It's kind of boring and it's kind of it. It's kind of boring and it's kind of losome. Could you give us a bit of losome. Could you give us a bit of losome. Could you give us a bit of insight into your inner dialogue around insight into your inner dialogue around insight into your inner dialogue around days when you don't want to go? Is there days when you don't want to go? Is there days when you don't want to go? Is there a selft talk or have you learned to push a selft talk or have you learned to push a selft talk or have you learned to push aside the voice that says maybe not aside the voice that says maybe not aside the voice that says maybe not today? &gt;&gt; It's simple. It if you don't work when &gt;&gt; It's simple. It if you don't work when &gt;&gt; It's simple. It if you don't work when you don't want to work, you're not going you don't want to work, you're not going you don't want to work, you're not going to be able to work when you do want to be able to work when you do want to be able to work when you do want to work. &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast &gt;&gt; Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science [music] and where we discuss science [music] and where we discuss science [music] and science-based tools for everyday life. science-based tools for everyday life. science-based tools for everyday life. &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor &gt;&gt; I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is Twilight Tharp. Twila Tharp is today is Twilight Tharp. Twila Tharp is today is Twilight Tharp. Twila Tharp is a worldrenowned dancer and a worldrenowned dancer and a worldrenowned dancer and choreographer. Her onstage and film choreographer. Her onstage and film choreographer. Her onstage and film works easily place her not just in the works easily place her not just in the works easily place her not just in the top 1% of all choreographers of all top 1% of all choreographers of all top 1% of all choreographers of all time, but also among the top tier of all time, but also among the top tier of all time, but also among the top tier of all creative artists, past and present. I creative artists, past and present. I creative artists, past and present. I knew I wanted to host Twilight on this knew I wanted to host Twilight on this knew I wanted to host Twilight on this podcast after listening to her book, The podcast after listening to her book, The podcast after listening to her book, The Creative Habit, where she spells out how Creative Habit, where she spells out how Creative Habit, where she spells out how to build a schedule, habits, and to build a schedule, habits, and to build a schedule, habits, and routines that make your best creative routines that make your best creative routines that make your best creative expressions come to life. What I love expressions come to life. What I love expressions come to life. What I love about it is it's direct and it's about it is it's direct and it's about it is it's direct and it's actionoriented. There's nothing mystical actionoriented. There's nothing mystical actionoriented. There's nothing mystical about it. She explains in her book how about it. She explains in her book how about it. She explains in her book how even for people that have just one hour even for people that have just one hour even for people that have just one hour a day to write or sing or draw or paint a day to write or sing or draw or paint a day to write or sing or draw or paint or whatever to get the most from that or whatever to get the most from that or whatever to get the most from that time in terms of creative output. Then, time in terms of creative output. Then, time in terms of creative output. Then, as I learned more about her, I was also as I learned more about her, I was also as I learned more about her, I was also super impressed that even in her 60s, by super impressed that even in her 60s, by super impressed that even in her 60s, by the way, she's 84 now, she could the way, she's 84 now, she could the way, she's 84 now, she could deadlift more than 200 pounds, which is deadlift more than 200 pounds, which is deadlift more than 200 pounds, which is more than twice her body weight, bench more than twice her body weight, bench more than twice her body weight, bench press her body weight for three clean press her body weight for three clean press her body weight for three clean repetitions, and was taking up boxing to repetitions, and was taking up boxing to repetitions, and was taking up boxing to keep her movement and reflexes sharp. As keep her movement and reflexes sharp. As keep her movement and reflexes sharp. As you'll see today, she is a phenom, and you'll see today, she is a phenom, and you'll see today, she is a phenom, and it comes by way of hard work. She's it comes by way of hard work. She's it comes by way of hard work. She's still in the gym every single morning at still in the gym every single morning at still in the gym every single morning at 5:00 a.m. for two full hours. Today we 5:00 a.m. for two full hours. Today we 5:00 a.m. for two full hours. Today we discuss how to build self-discipline in discuss how to build self-discipline in discuss how to build self-discipline in and around your creative mind. And we and around your creative mind. And we and around your creative mind. And we discuss movement as a language. There's discuss movement as a language. There's discuss movement as a language. There's this new idea emerging in neuroscience this new idea emerging in neuroscience this new idea emerging in neuroscience that bodily movement, then music, and that bodily movement, then music, and that bodily movement, then music, and then speech is how humans came to then speech is how humans came to then speech is how humans came to communicate with each other. We communicate with each other. We communicate with each other. We discussed that and how movement can help discussed that and how movement can help discussed that and how movement can help us process and explain our emotions and us process and explain our emotions and us process and explain our emotions and our ideas. We also discussed Twilight's our ideas. We also discussed Twilight's our ideas. We also discussed Twilight's life growing up on a farm and how that life growing up on a farm and how that life growing up on a farm and how that shaped her mindset about work and shaped her mindset about work and shaped her mindset about work and community. And we also talk about what community. And we also talk about what community. And we also talk about what it means to have and express your unique it means to have and express your unique it means to have and express your unique creativity and how to evolve your sense creativity and how to evolve your sense creativity and how to evolve your sense of taste. Oh yeah, and we also discuss of taste. Oh yeah, and we also discuss of taste. Oh yeah, and we also discuss telepathy. You'll notice the rapport telepathy. You'll notice the rapport telepathy. You'll notice the rapport between Twilight and I is very different between Twilight and I is very different between Twilight and I is very different than is typical for other Hubberman Lab than is typical for other Hubberman Lab than is typical for other Hubberman Lab podcasts I've done. She is a real podcasts I've done. She is a real podcasts I've done. She is a real firecracker and we had a ton of fun firecracker and we had a ton of fun firecracker and we had a ton of fun exploring and challenging ideas, mostly exploring and challenging ideas, mostly exploring and challenging ideas, mostly her challenging me. It was a true honor her challenging me. It was a true honor her challenging me. It was a true honor and pleasure to learn from such a and pleasure to learn from such a and pleasure to learn from such a virtuoso of the arts and frankly of virtuoso of the arts and frankly of virtuoso of the arts and frankly of life. And as you'll soon learn, we can life. And as you'll soon learn, we can life. And as you'll soon learn, we can all learn a lot from Twilight. Before we all learn a lot from Twilight. Before we all learn a lot from Twilight. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools about science and science related tools about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with to the general public. In keeping with that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include that theme, today's episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with sponsors. And now for my discussion with Twilight Tharp. Twilight Tharp, welcome. Twilight Tharp. Twilight Tharp, welcome. Twilight Tharp. Twilight Tharp, welcome. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Huge fan. Huge, huge fan. and &gt;&gt; Huge fan. Huge, huge fan. and &gt;&gt; Huge fan. Huge, huge fan. and [clears throat] love your [clears throat] love your [clears throat] love your book. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; The creative habit. It's just an &gt;&gt; The creative habit. It's just an &gt;&gt; The creative habit. It's just an incredible book and it's taught me so incredible book and it's taught me so incredible book and it's taught me so much and I want to talk about that much and I want to talk about that much and I want to talk about that today. But I want to talk about a bunch today. But I want to talk about a bunch today. But I want to talk about a bunch of things. of things. of things. Let's start with Let's start with Let's start with what a spine is. I think this is such an what a spine is. I think this is such an what a spine is. I think this is such an important component of the book and this important component of the book and this important component of the book and this concept of a spine. And the way I think concept of a spine. And the way I think concept of a spine. And the way I think about this is that many people about this is that many people about this is that many people feel they might have something inside feel they might have something inside feel they might have something inside them that they want to put into the them that they want to put into the them that they want to put into the world. They want to access their world. They want to access their world. They want to access their creativity or they're creative and creativity or they're creative and creativity or they're creative and there's so much information out there there's so much information out there there's so much information out there about how to go about that. about how to go about that. about how to go about that. But this notion of a spine is really But this notion of a spine is really But this notion of a spine is really critical because it keeps us on track. critical because it keeps us on track. critical because it keeps us on track. Otherwise, it can be a wandering in the Otherwise, it can be a wandering in the Otherwise, it can be a wandering in the desert. Suddenly, you're swimming in the desert. Suddenly, you're swimming in the desert. Suddenly, you're swimming in the ocean. And suddenly the phone you get a ocean. And suddenly the phone you get a ocean. And suddenly the phone you get a text and please explain what a spine is text and please explain what a spine is text and please explain what a spine is and why this is such a vital concept for and why this is such a vital concept for and why this is such a vital concept for anyone that wants to create anything. anyone that wants to create anything. anyone that wants to create anything. &gt;&gt; Spine means focus. Spine means &gt;&gt; Spine means focus. Spine means &gt;&gt; Spine means focus. Spine means concentration. If you think about it concentration. If you think about it concentration. If you think about it geometrically, spine is the center both geometrically, spine is the center both geometrically, spine is the center both laterally and vertically. laterally and vertically. laterally and vertically. So if we're talking physically, you have So if we're talking physically, you have So if we're talking physically, you have a right and a left side. You have a top a right and a left side. You have a top a right and a left side. You have a top and you have a bottom. And these and you have a bottom. And these and you have a bottom. And these elements are connected through the elements are connected through the elements are connected through the center, right? So, uh, they have to be center, right? So, uh, they have to be center, right? So, uh, they have to be coordinated. You simply cannot function. coordinated. You simply cannot function. coordinated. You simply cannot function. If your right side is going one way and If your right side is going one way and If your right side is going one way and then your left side's going this other then your left side's going this other then your left side's going this other way, you're going nowhere. So, you have way, you're going nowhere. So, you have way, you're going nowhere. So, you have to move off your center in terms of how to move off your center in terms of how to move off your center in terms of how you organize information. There's also a you organize information. There's also a you organize information. There's also a center to it. It's like okay over here center to it. It's like okay over here center to it. It's like okay over here you have this and this and you can you have this and this and you can you have this and this and you can transfer what you understand from this transfer what you understand from this transfer what you understand from this arena to inform this side but it has to arena to inform this side but it has to arena to inform this side but it has to pass through a common point and that pass through a common point and that pass through a common point and that common point is the center and until you common point is the center and until you common point is the center and until you feel that or one anyone working either feel that or one anyone working either feel that or one anyone working either physically or let's just use the word physically or let's just use the word physically or let's just use the word very broadly and generically very broadly and generically very broadly and generically artistically until you know where you artistically until you know where you artistically until you know where you are grounded where you feel the most are grounded where you feel the most are grounded where you feel the most confident that you are what you said you're at sea that you are what you said you're at sea that you are what you said you're at sea you could be going this way that way you could be going this way that way you could be going this way that way unless you know how to navigate from the unless you know how to navigate from the unless you know how to navigate from the stars which few people do anymore you're stars which few people do anymore you're stars which few people do anymore you're screwed &gt;&gt; so when I think about a spine in a like &gt;&gt; so when I think about a spine in a like &gt;&gt; so when I think about a spine in a like a scientific paper I was taught there a scientific paper I was taught there a scientific paper I was taught there can only really be one major conclusion can only really be one major conclusion can only really be one major conclusion maybe two but one major conclusion of maybe two but one major conclusion of maybe two but one major conclusion of any paper even though the data set any paper even though the data set any paper even though the data set probably points to 50 different things probably points to 50 different things probably points to 50 different things that are potentially interesting in that are potentially interesting in that are potentially interesting in terms of a podcast or a movie or a book. terms of a podcast or a movie or a book. terms of a podcast or a movie or a book. It's sometimes not obvious to the reader It's sometimes not obvious to the reader It's sometimes not obvious to the reader or to the listener or to the observer or to the listener or to the observer or to the listener or to the observer what the spine is, but my understanding what the spine is, but my understanding what the spine is, but my understanding is that the creator has to understand is that the creator has to understand is that the creator has to understand what the spine is going into it. So what the spine is going into it. So what the spine is going into it. So could you give a couple of examples from could you give a couple of examples from could you give a couple of examples from your own work and maybe if they come to your own work and maybe if they come to your own work and maybe if they come to mind a couple of examples from visual mind a couple of examples from visual mind a couple of examples from visual arts or movies or something where arts or movies or something where arts or movies or something where it's clear to the creator what the spine it's clear to the creator what the spine it's clear to the creator what the spine is but it might not be entirely clear to is but it might not be entirely clear to is but it might not be entirely clear to the person watching or consuming the person watching or consuming the person watching or consuming the content. &gt;&gt; I am a great fan of Agatha Christie and &gt;&gt; I am a great fan of Agatha Christie and &gt;&gt; I am a great fan of Agatha Christie and Jonathan Car. Okay. And the reason why is because Car. Okay. And the reason why is because Car. Okay. And the reason why is because from the get-go, you know, there is one from the get-go, you know, there is one from the get-go, you know, there is one conclusion, but that their job is to keep you away but that their job is to keep you away but that their job is to keep you away from that conclusion for as long as from that conclusion for as long as from that conclusion for as long as possible. &gt;&gt; Who did the crime? &gt;&gt; Who did the crime? &gt;&gt; Who did the crime? &gt;&gt; Who did the crime? Who's the killer? &gt;&gt; Who did the crime? Who's the killer? &gt;&gt; Who did the crime? Who's the killer? Who? What a what a what is the crime for Who? What a what a what is the crime for Who? What a what a what is the crime for starters? and they'll delay as long as starters? and they'll delay as long as starters? and they'll delay as long as they can in their singular, you know, they can in their singular, you know, they can in their singular, you know, style definite u modes. I mean, Agatha Christie has her u modes. I mean, Agatha Christie has her u modes. I mean, Agatha Christie has her format is practically that of a sonnet. format is practically that of a sonnet. format is practically that of a sonnet. I'm sure you could actually count I'm sure you could actually count I'm sure you could actually count words and I've never seen a study that words and I've never seen a study that words and I've never seen a study that show a long Okay, she's going to do red show a long Okay, she's going to do red show a long Okay, she's going to do red herring number one X words in and this herring number one X words in and this herring number one X words in and this is where she's going to throw in the is where she's going to throw in the is where she's going to throw in the extra crime to push the tension up to extra crime to push the tension up to extra crime to push the tension up to get it to go to here. But we all know get it to go to here. But we all know get it to go to here. But we all know we're playing the same game. Uh I think we're playing the same game. Uh I think we're playing the same game. Uh I think that anyone who is successful in that anyone who is successful in that anyone who is successful in communicating to other people gains communicating to other people gains communicating to other people gains their trust, gains their confidence that their trust, gains their confidence that their trust, gains their confidence that you're not going to screw them. How much you're not going to screw them. How much you're not going to screw them. How much do you think it's important to get into do you think it's important to get into do you think it's important to get into the audience's mind about what they want the audience's mind about what they want the audience's mind about what they want or is the spine coming from the solely or is the spine coming from the solely or is the spine coming from the solely from the creator? Is it is it about the from the creator? Is it is it about the from the creator? Is it is it about the creator's relationship to the work or creator's relationship to the work or creator's relationship to the work or are you thinking about what the audience are you thinking about what the audience are you thinking about what the audience wants and what they need? wants and what they need? wants and what they need? &gt;&gt; The question about audience and &gt;&gt; The question about audience and &gt;&gt; The question about audience and intention is a is sort of sensitive one intention is a is sort of sensitive one intention is a is sort of sensitive one because it's okay. Are you manipulating because it's okay. Are you manipulating because it's okay. Are you manipulating the audience? And are you there just to the audience? And are you there just to the audience? And are you there just to take advantage of them? Or at the other take advantage of them? Or at the other take advantage of them? Or at the other extreme of that spectrum, are you doing extreme of that spectrum, are you doing extreme of that spectrum, are you doing it because you're in an ivory tower and it because you're in an ivory tower and it because you're in an ivory tower and you're off here doing your own you're off here doing your own you're off here doing your own investigations? And maybe they connect, investigations? And maybe they connect, investigations? And maybe they connect, maybe they don't. Who cares? Right? maybe they don't. Who cares? Right? maybe they don't. Who cares? Right? Those are the two extremes. Total Those are the two extremes. Total Those are the two extremes. Total manipulation of audience, total manipulation of audience, total manipulation of audience, total disregard of audience. And depending on disregard of audience. And depending on disregard of audience. And depending on who I'm working for or with, I do both. who I'm working for or with, I do both. who I'm working for or with, I do both. To me, it seems like it's one of the To me, it seems like it's one of the To me, it seems like it's one of the toughest things as a creator to both toughest things as a creator to both toughest things as a creator to both want to honor your audience's wishes, want to honor your audience's wishes, want to honor your audience's wishes, but you also have to have something that but you also have to have something that but you also have to have something that you want to communicate. And you want to communicate. And you want to communicate. And we never know how things are going to we never know how things are going to we never know how things are going to land. But for somebody who wants to land. But for somebody who wants to land. But for somebody who wants to create something, maybe we could orient create something, maybe we could orient create something, maybe we could orient them toward their own spine like or to them toward their own spine like or to them toward their own spine like or to the o the spine of the work. What where the o the spine of the work. What where the o the spine of the work. What where does that start? Well, I think that uh does that start? Well, I think that uh does that start? Well, I think that uh the word intention which is you know so the word intention which is you know so the word intention which is you know so vague these days uh but why are you vague these days uh but why are you vague these days uh but why are you doing this? What is your purpose in doing this? What is your purpose in doing this? What is your purpose in doing it? What's your interest? Why do doing it? What's your interest? Why do doing it? What's your interest? Why do you want to do this? What's what's in it you want to do this? What's what's in it you want to do this? What's what's in it for you? Are you to learn? Are you uh is for you? Are you to learn? Are you uh is for you? Are you to learn? Are you uh is this a contract signed? Do you have an this a contract signed? Do you have an this a contract signed? Do you have an obligation to be successful to a obligation to be successful to a obligation to be successful to a producer who's investing a lot of money? producer who's investing a lot of money? producer who's investing a lot of money? And that's a given going in. that's And that's a given going in. that's And that's a given going in. that's going to determine a range of going to determine a range of going to determine a range of possibilities for you, right? And unfortunately, the for you, right? And unfortunately, the for you, right? And unfortunately, the bottom line controls a lot of this bottom line controls a lot of this bottom line controls a lot of this issue. At least for me, it's given if issue. At least for me, it's given if issue. At least for me, it's given if I've signed a contract to deliver a I've signed a contract to deliver a I've signed a contract to deliver a specific result. That's what I'm doing. specific result. That's what I'm doing. specific result. That's what I'm doing. It doesn't matter what I want. It's do I It doesn't matter what I want. It's do I It doesn't matter what I want. It's do I get that accomplished or not. It's in a get that accomplished or not. It's in a get that accomplished or not. It's in a way a kind of sacred bond. Okay. you way a kind of sacred bond. Okay. you way a kind of sacred bond. Okay. you honor your contracts. On the other hand, honor your contracts. On the other hand, honor your contracts. On the other hand, if I am not in a singular position of if I am not in a singular position of if I am not in a singular position of earning any money, I can do anything I earning any money, I can do anything I earning any money, I can do anything I want or anything not that I want but want or anything not that I want but want or anything not that I want but anything that I think is important. anything that I think is important. anything that I think is important. Okay. So, how do you determine the Okay. So, how do you determine the Okay. So, how do you determine the parameters of important because that parameters of important because that parameters of important because that helps with intention in the olden days helps with intention in the olden days helps with intention in the olden days which dates as in before 1979. Anything before 79 is the olden days. In Anything before 79 is the olden days. In Anything before 79 is the olden days. In the olden days, that would include the olden days, that would include the olden days, that would include the 60s. We did things because we wanted to 60s. We did things because we wanted to 60s. We did things because we wanted to change the direction the earth rotated. change the direction the earth rotated. change the direction the earth rotated. End of story. Good luck. End of story. Good luck. End of story. Good luck. &gt;&gt; Tell me more about that. &gt;&gt; Tell me more about that. &gt;&gt; Tell me more about that. &gt;&gt; It simply meant that whoever the &gt;&gt; It simply meant that whoever the &gt;&gt; It simply meant that whoever the practitioner was completely exposed practitioner was completely exposed practitioner was completely exposed to everything. Say you're a painter. to everything. Say you're a painter. to everything. Say you're a painter. you're completely exposed to everything you're completely exposed to everything you're completely exposed to everything everybody is doing and you see another everybody is doing and you see another everybody is doing and you see another way of going about it and you do that way of going about it and you do that way of going about it and you do that everybody is plugged in to that same everybody is plugged in to that same everybody is plugged in to that same mechanism and if they swerve into your mechanism and if they swerve into your mechanism and if they swerve into your area you shift again you have to area you shift again you have to area you shift again you have to continuously be altering perception as continuously be altering perception as continuously be altering perception as an artist that notion does not seem so an artist that notion does not seem so an artist that notion does not seem so relevant these days perhaps relevant these days perhaps relevant these days perhaps &gt;&gt; why do you think that is because &gt;&gt; why do you think that is because &gt;&gt; why do you think that is because uh you could live cheaper in the 60s. uh you could live cheaper in the 60s. uh you could live cheaper in the 60s. You could live very cheap. Now you You could live very cheap. Now you You could live very cheap. Now you cannot live very cheaply as a as an cannot live very cheaply as a as an cannot live very cheaply as a as an artistic force. You're paying bills, artistic force. You're paying bills, artistic force. You're paying bills, lots of bills. lots of bills. lots of bills. &gt;&gt; I've long thought that the best work &gt;&gt; I've long thought that the best work &gt;&gt; I've long thought that the best work that people do is at the beginning when that people do is at the beginning when that people do is at the beginning when they don't have any feedback yet and they don't have any feedback yet and they don't have any feedback yet and they're just being themselves. It's hard they're just being themselves. It's hard they're just being themselves. It's hard to stay connected to that early to stay connected to that early to stay connected to that early energy of uh just being one oneself energy of uh just being one oneself energy of uh just being one oneself without the notion of contracts and without the notion of contracts and without the notion of contracts and feedback and per you know perception of feedback and per you know perception of feedback and per you know perception of feedback. Do you think it's important? feedback. Do you think it's important? feedback. Do you think it's important? &gt;&gt; I've never been of the persuasion that &gt;&gt; I've never been of the persuasion that &gt;&gt; I've never been of the persuasion that my understanding was the greatest when I my understanding was the greatest when I my understanding was the greatest when I knew nothing as when I knew more. knew nothing as when I knew more. knew nothing as when I knew more. &gt;&gt; I've always been of the persuasion that &gt;&gt; I've always been of the persuasion that &gt;&gt; I've always been of the persuasion that the more you know, the bigger your the more you know, the bigger your the more you know, the bigger your challenge. If one looks at lives uh of artists uh If one looks at lives uh of artists uh If one looks at lives uh of artists uh for example Beethoven take Beethoven for example Beethoven take Beethoven for example Beethoven take Beethoven early work take Beethoven late work very early work take Beethoven late work very early work take Beethoven late work very different challenges um there different challenges um there different challenges um there is argument to be made depending on your is argument to be made depending on your is argument to be made depending on your particular set uh of the coherency of the set uh of the coherency of the set uh of the coherency of the classicism of the earlier quartets as classicism of the earlier quartets as classicism of the earlier quartets as opposed to the late quartets and the opposed to the late quartets and the opposed to the late quartets and the total disillusion that he was able to total disillusion that he was able to total disillusion that he was able to accomplish at the end of his career accomplish at the end of his career accomplish at the end of his career totally taking the sound world apart totally taking the sound world apart totally taking the sound world apart uh that he could only actually do uh that he could only actually do uh that he could only actually do because he was deaf. He had developed uh because he was deaf. He had developed uh because he was deaf. He had developed uh during the course unfortunately of a during the course unfortunately of a during the course unfortunately of a very long time, decades, the awareness very long time, decades, the awareness very long time, decades, the awareness that he was losing his hearing and by that he was losing his hearing and by that he was losing his hearing and by the end he genuinely basically was the end he genuinely basically was the end he genuinely basically was completely deaf which forced him into completely deaf which forced him into completely deaf which forced him into his own world and there he looked at his own world and there he looked at his own world and there he looked at himself across the ages. himself across the ages. himself across the ages. So in a piece I think of the Diabelli uh So in a piece I think of the Diabelli uh So in a piece I think of the Diabelli uh which is the last thing he wrote for which is the last thing he wrote for which is the last thing he wrote for keyboard after the sonatas and he keyboard after the sonatas and he keyboard after the sonatas and he actually had started the diabelli 15 actually had started the diabelli 15 actually had started the diabelli 15 maybe even I'm forgetting my details maybe even I'm forgetting my details maybe even I'm forgetting my details here but 15 years earlier than when he here but 15 years earlier than when he here but 15 years earlier than when he came back to complete it and he got came back to complete it and he got came back to complete it and he got bored with it initially because to a bored with it initially because to a bored with it initially because to a younger composer it wasn't challenging younger composer it wasn't challenging younger composer it wasn't challenging ing enough ing enough ing enough when he came back to it later. He had a when he came back to it later. He had a when he came back to it later. He had a humility about him that said that theme humility about him that said that theme humility about him that said that theme which I used to poo because it's which I used to poo because it's which I used to poo because it's like you're kidding like you're kidding like you're kidding up yada up count in half drop it up yada up count in half drop it up yada up count in half drop it back down ya da de he's going what and back down ya da de he's going what and back down ya da de he's going what and later he comes back and he says later he comes back and he says later he comes back and he says right not stupid simple I could never right not stupid simple I could never right not stupid simple I could never have written anything that simple or have written anything that simple or have written anything that simple or that useful full and he finished it and that useful full and he finished it and that useful full and he finished it and it's arguably the greatest set of it's arguably the greatest set of it's arguably the greatest set of keyboard variations in the entire keyboard variations in the entire keyboard variations in the entire repertoire. Which do you want? The earlier Which do you want? The earlier Which do you want? The earlier Beethoven, the Beethoven who has passed Beethoven, the Beethoven who has passed Beethoven, the Beethoven who has passed way through many different works, a way through many different works, a way through many different works, a mass, an opera, many quartets, and mass, an opera, many quartets, and mass, an opera, many quartets, and returns to it with this new information returns to it with this new information returns to it with this new information to look at it again. to look at it again. to look at it again. &gt;&gt; Fascinating. There's something about the &gt;&gt; Fascinating. There's something about the &gt;&gt; Fascinating. There's something about the more you know the bigger your challenge more you know the bigger your challenge more you know the bigger your challenge but &gt;&gt; totally &gt;&gt; totally &gt;&gt; totally &gt;&gt; if I may from what you just said maybe &gt;&gt; if I may from what you just said maybe &gt;&gt; if I may from what you just said maybe also the bigger the opportunity. also the bigger the opportunity. also the bigger the opportunity. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; Totally. &gt;&gt; But the more kind of distracting it is &gt;&gt; But the more kind of distracting it is &gt;&gt; But the more kind of distracting it is and the harder it is to focus. Part of and the harder it is to focus. Part of and the harder it is to focus. Part of that's physical that's physical that's physical uh but part of it is also that there are uh but part of it is also that there are uh but part of it is also that there are many more options available many more options available many more options available uh with accomplishment if you will but uh with accomplishment if you will but uh with accomplishment if you will but you have to be selective about what you have to be selective about what you have to be selective about what you have available to you to work with. In have available to you to work with. In have available to you to work with. In the earlier phase, you'll take what you the earlier phase, you'll take what you the earlier phase, you'll take what you can get. And now, if you take what you can get. And now, if you take what you can get. And now, if you take what you can get, you will be very wildly can get, you will be very wildly can get, you will be very wildly distracted by everything. distracted by everything. distracted by everything. I'd like to take a quick break to I'd like to take a quick break to I'd like to take a quick break to acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Our acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Our acknowledge our sponsor, Our Place. Our Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and Place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever compounds such as PASES or forever compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of chemicals are still found in 80% of chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans, as well as utensils, non-stick pans, as well as utensils, non-stick pans, as well as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen appliances, and countless other kitchen appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've discussed before on products. As I've discussed before on products. As I've discussed before on this podcast, these PASES or forever this podcast, these PASES or forever this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked chemicals like Teflon have been linked chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone to major health issues such as hormone to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's very important to problems. So, it's very important to problems. So, it's very important to avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace. Ourplace products are made of ourplace. Ourplace products are made of ourplace. Ourplace products are made with the highest quality materials and with the highest quality materials and with the highest quality materials and are all PAS and toxin-free. I are all PAS and toxin-free. I are all PAS and toxin-free. I particularly love their Titanium Always particularly love their Titanium Always particularly love their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero made with zero chemicals and zero made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful forever This means it has no harmful forever This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose chemicals and does not degrade or lose chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's its non-stick effect over time. It's its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost in my titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows for the every morning. The design allows for the every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking eggs to cook perfectly without sticking eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and to the pan. I also cook burgers and to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it, and it always puts a steaks in it, and it always puts a steaks in it, and it always puts a really nice sear on the meat. But again, really nice sear on the meat. But again, really nice sear on the meat. But again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it, and I use it safe. I love it, and I use it safe. I love it, and I use it constantly. Ourplace now has a full line constantly. Ourplace now has a full line constantly. Ourplace now has a full line of titanium pro cookware that uses the of titanium pro cookware that uses the of titanium pro cookware that uses the firstofits-kind titanium non-stick firstofits-kind titanium non-stick firstofits-kind titanium non-stick technology. For a limited time, ourplace technology. For a limited time, ourplace technology. For a limited time, ourplace is offering an extra 10% off their is offering an extra 10% off their is offering an extra 10% off their current holiday sale on their titanium current holiday sale on their titanium current holiday sale on their titanium cookware. Visit cookware. Visit cookware. Visit fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code save hubman10 to claim and use the code save hubman10 to claim and use the code save hubman10 to claim the offer. With a 100-day risk-free the offer. With a 100-day risk-free the offer. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, trial, free shipping, and free returns, trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can try this fantastic cookware with you can try this fantastic cookware with you can try this fantastic cookware with zero risk. Today's episode is also zero risk. Today's episode is also zero risk. Today's episode is also brought to us by EightLe. Eightle makes brought to us by EightLe. Eightle makes brought to us by EightLe. Eightle makes smart mattress covers with cooling, smart mattress covers with cooling, smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. heating, and sleep tracking capacity. heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the best ways to ensure you get a One of the best ways to ensure you get a One of the best ways to ensure you get a great night's sleep is to make sure that great night's sleep is to make sure that great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping the temperature of your sleeping the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's environment is correct. And that's environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall asleep and stay because in order to fall asleep and stay because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your throughout the night according to your unique needs. I've been sleeping on an unique needs. I've been sleeping on an unique needs. I've been sleeping on an eightle mattress cover for nearly 5 eightle mattress cover for nearly 5 eightle mattress cover for nearly 5 years now and it has completely years now and it has completely years now and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of transformed and improved the quality of transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. The latest eightle model is my sleep. The latest eightle model is my sleep. The latest eightle model is the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping the Pod 5. This is what I'm now sleeping on and I absolutely love it. It has so on and I absolutely love it. It has so on and I absolutely love it. It has so many incredible features. For instance, many incredible features. For instance, many incredible features. For instance, the Pod 5 has a feature called autopilot the Pod 5 has a feature called autopilot the Pod 5 has a feature called autopilot which is an AI engine that learns your which is an AI engine that learns your which is an AI engine that learns your sleep patterns and then adjusts the sleep patterns and then adjusts the sleep patterns and then adjusts the temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment temperature of your sleeping environment across different sleep stages. It'll across different sleep stages. It'll across different sleep stages. It'll even elevate your head if you're snoring even elevate your head if you're snoring even elevate your head if you're snoring and it makes other shifts to optimize and it makes other shifts to optimize and it makes other shifts to optimize your sleep. If you would like to try your sleep. If you would like to try your sleep. If you would like to try eight, go to eightsleep.com/huberman eight, go to eightsleep.com/huberman eight, go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get $450 off the pod 5 Ultra. This is to get $450 off the pod 5 Ultra. This is to get $450 off the pod 5 Ultra. This is part of eight's extended holiday sale, part of eight's extended holiday sale, part of eight's extended holiday sale, which goes from now until December 31st, which goes from now until December 31st, which goes from now until December 31st, 2025. Eightlee ships to many countries 2025. Eightlee ships to many countries 2025. Eightlee ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman Again, that's eight.com/huberman Again, that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $450 now through December to save up to $450 now through December to save up to $450 now through December 31st, 2025. 31st, 2025. 31st, 2025. Recently, I listened to a conversation Recently, I listened to a conversation Recently, I listened to a conversation between my good friend Rick Rubin. We between my good friend Rick Rubin. We between my good friend Rick Rubin. We were talking about earlier, who's a big were talking about earlier, who's a big were talking about earlier, who's a big fan of yours. You inspired his book and fan of yours. You inspired his book and fan of yours. You inspired his book and he wanted me to tell you that. he wanted me to tell you that. he wanted me to tell you that. &gt;&gt; Thank you. and he was speaking with um &gt;&gt; Thank you. and he was speaking with um &gt;&gt; Thank you. and he was speaking with um Gwennneth Paltro who's a you know of Gwennneth Paltro who's a you know of Gwennneth Paltro who's a you know of course an actress and um has done course an actress and um has done course an actress and um has done incredible things in health and wellness incredible things in health and wellness incredible things in health and wellness business etc. And she said something business etc. And she said something business etc. And she said something very interesting. She said, "People very interesting. She said, "People very interesting. She said, "People generally like to keep you where they generally like to keep you where they generally like to keep you where they found you." And it's an interesting found you." And it's an interesting found you." And it's an interesting statement uh that I think taps into statement uh that I think taps into statement uh that I think taps into something that again that as a creator something that again that as a creator something that again that as a creator or as a consumer of creative content or as a consumer of creative content or as a consumer of creative content feels very true that we encounter feels very true that we encounter feels very true that we encounter somebody like somebody goes to one of somebody like somebody goes to one of somebody like somebody goes to one of your dances or we see a great movie with your dances or we see a great movie with your dances or we see a great movie with Gary Oldman in it or something. You see Gary Oldman in it or something. You see Gary Oldman in it or something. You see a Bos for the first time and it either a Bos for the first time and it either a Bos for the first time and it either impacts you or it doesn't. But if it impacts you or it doesn't. But if it impacts you or it doesn't. But if it does, there's this tendency to want to does, there's this tendency to want to does, there's this tendency to want to keep that person and the work they do in keep that person and the work they do in keep that person and the work they do in that place. It's like we think we own that place. It's like we think we own that place. It's like we think we own the creator in some way and the work and the creator in some way and the work and the creator in some way and the work and in this very naive and selfish way. in this very naive and selfish way. in this very naive and selfish way. Do you think that creates a real Do you think that creates a real Do you think that creates a real problem for anyone that's trying to put problem for anyone that's trying to put problem for anyone that's trying to put things into the world? Because as you things into the world? Because as you things into the world? Because as you stated, with time the creator gains stated, with time the creator gains stated, with time the creator gains knowledge, you evolve your craft, but knowledge, you evolve your craft, but knowledge, you evolve your craft, but your fan base, the people that love you, they fan base, the people that love you, they fan base, the people that love you, they love you for something that you're not love you for something that you're not love you for something that you're not really any longer. You're evolving really any longer. You're evolving really any longer. You're evolving &gt;&gt; cuz Somewhere over the rainbow syndrome, &gt;&gt; cuz Somewhere over the rainbow syndrome, &gt;&gt; cuz Somewhere over the rainbow syndrome, right? Uh Garland always was asked for right? Uh Garland always was asked for right? Uh Garland always was asked for one song or Elvis John anyone is always one song or Elvis John anyone is always one song or Elvis John anyone is always asked for their hit because everyone asked for their hit because everyone asked for their hit because everyone wants to touch upon that which seems to wants to touch upon that which seems to wants to touch upon that which seems to somehow be their greatest somehow be their greatest somehow be their greatest accomplishment. Um it's aggravating. I accomplishment. Um it's aggravating. I accomplishment. Um it's aggravating. I mean obviously it's called cubby mean obviously it's called cubby mean obviously it's called cubby hauling. Um and you for the person doing hauling. Um and you for the person doing hauling. Um and you for the person doing the work the work the work there are artists who work serially there are artists who work serially there are artists who work serially right who work in series and who make right who work in series and who make right who work in series and who make incremental changes and they kind of incremental changes and they kind of incremental changes and they kind of have in a way a stab at the best of all have in a way a stab at the best of all have in a way a stab at the best of all possible worlds. But there are others possible worlds. But there are others possible worlds. But there are others who feel that okay you got that I got to who feel that okay you got that I got to who feel that okay you got that I got to go over here. Uh and that's because in a go over here. Uh and that's because in a go over here. Uh and that's because in a way they're right because if you want to way they're right because if you want to way they're right because if you want to constantly be gain it's a game. You want constantly be gain it's a game. You want constantly be gain it's a game. You want to be gaining the attention you do it by to be gaining the attention you do it by to be gaining the attention you do it by change. You don't do it by reinforcing change. You don't do it by reinforcing change. You don't do it by reinforcing that just creates a comfort zone and it that just creates a comfort zone and it that just creates a comfort zone and it can build a reputation. It can build a can build a reputation. It can build a can build a reputation. It can build a career that it gives you more and career that it gives you more and career that it gives you more and more of what you expect. Uh, but for the more of what you expect. Uh, but for the more of what you expect. Uh, but for the person who's making the work, that can person who's making the work, that can person who's making the work, that can kind of be deadly. kind of be deadly. kind of be deadly. &gt;&gt; Did you know Jean Michelle Bosia? You &gt;&gt; Did you know Jean Michelle Bosia? You &gt;&gt; Did you know Jean Michelle Bosia? You &gt;&gt; No. Okay. &gt;&gt; No. Okay. &gt;&gt; No. Okay. &gt;&gt; Uh, a different generation. I knew the &gt;&gt; Uh, a different generation. I knew the &gt;&gt; Uh, a different generation. I knew the painters, the downtown painters in the painters, the downtown painters in the painters, the downtown painters in the 60s. &gt;&gt; Could you give me some examples of &gt;&gt; Could you give me some examples of &gt;&gt; Could you give me some examples of &gt;&gt; Oh, you want to know the famous names? &gt;&gt; Oh, you want to know the famous names? &gt;&gt; Oh, you want to know the famous names? &gt;&gt; No, I don't want to know the names. I &gt;&gt; No, I don't want to know the names. I &gt;&gt; No, I don't want to know the names. I just have a question about just have a question about just have a question about &gt;&gt; Tony Smith, Frank Stella, Motherwell. &gt;&gt; Tony Smith, Frank Stella, Motherwell. &gt;&gt; Tony Smith, Frank Stella, Motherwell. &gt;&gt; Okay. I The reason I ask is &gt;&gt; Okay. I The reason I ask is &gt;&gt; Okay. I The reason I ask is &gt;&gt; Reinhardt. The reason I ask is that um &gt;&gt; Reinhardt. The reason I ask is that um &gt;&gt; Reinhardt. The reason I ask is that um earlier you were saying that there's a earlier you were saying that there's a earlier you were saying that there's a time or there was a time when a given time or there was a time when a given time or there was a time when a given field everyone knew each other and what field everyone knew each other and what field everyone knew each other and what they were doing and I like Boss. I'm they were doing and I like Boss. I'm they were doing and I like Boss. I'm not like obsessed with them or anything not like obsessed with them or anything not like obsessed with them or anything that there's a wonderful scene in the that there's a wonderful scene in the that there's a wonderful scene in the movie Bosia with him and Benicio del movie Bosia with him and Benicio del movie Bosia with him and Benicio del Toro or the actor playing him and Benio Toro or the actor playing him and Benio Toro or the actor playing him and Benio Del Toro about this notion of fame. Del Toro about this notion of fame. Del Toro about this notion of fame. We'll put a link to it in the caption so We'll put a link to it in the caption so We'll put a link to it in the caption so people can see it. And it's just a people can see it. And it's just a people can see it. And it's just a wonderful example of how people will wonderful example of how people will wonderful example of how people will love you, then they'll hate you for how love you, then they'll hate you for how love you, then they'll hate you for how you change, then they'll love you for you change, then they'll love you for you change, then they'll love you for how you were, and then it it's a how you were, and then it it's a how you were, and then it it's a hilarious and um again, for a hilarious and um again, for a hilarious and um again, for a consumer of content, it's perhaps consumer of content, it's perhaps consumer of content, it's perhaps even more interesting than somebody even more interesting than somebody even more interesting than somebody who's a creative. But uh the point being who's a creative. But uh the point being who's a creative. But uh the point being that nowadays, I feel like there's so that nowadays, I feel like there's so that nowadays, I feel like there's so much stuff out there, art and music and much stuff out there, art and music and much stuff out there, art and music and dance and Instagram dance and Instagram dance and Instagram puts it all on, you know, smorgesborg puts it all on, you know, smorgesborg puts it all on, you know, smorgesborg display for us. display for us. display for us. And it's kind of harder to know where And it's kind of harder to know where And it's kind of harder to know where one sits in a community of creators. And one sits in a community of creators. And one sits in a community of creators. And so to what extent do you think that so to what extent do you think that so to what extent do you think that being surrounded by other creators like being surrounded by other creators like being surrounded by other creators like visual artists or other dancers visual artists or other dancers visual artists or other dancers then versus now was or is useful? then versus now was or is useful? then versus now was or is useful? &gt;&gt; Yeah, the early era also age is a factor &gt;&gt; Yeah, the early era also age is a factor &gt;&gt; Yeah, the early era also age is a factor here. I was very young. I was just out here. I was very young. I was just out here. I was very young. I was just out of college. Um and uh I felt very much of college. Um and uh I felt very much of college. Um and uh I felt very much the student. the student. the student. Uh it's a different deal now and it's a Uh it's a different deal now and it's a Uh it's a different deal now and it's a different kind of responsibility different kind of responsibility different kind of responsibility and the work's going to be different. In and the work's going to be different. In and the work's going to be different. In the early era went to see absolutely the early era went to see absolutely the early era went to see absolutely everything. Now I go to see absolutely everything. Now I go to see absolutely everything. Now I go to see absolutely nothing. Uh and it is nothing. Uh and it is nothing. Uh and it is partially a matter of time but more importantly it's an awareness but more importantly it's an awareness but more importantly it's an awareness that you want to that you want to that you want to feel isolated in a way because you are feel isolated in a way because you are feel isolated in a way because you are and that's the truth. So you need to and that's the truth. So you need to and that's the truth. So you need to operate from a truthful place. Um, and operate from a truthful place. Um, and operate from a truthful place. Um, and when you talk about this plethora of when you talk about this plethora of when you talk about this plethora of information that is out there, I do try information that is out there, I do try information that is out there, I do try to inform myself to some degree about to inform myself to some degree about to inform myself to some degree about different areas of different areas of different areas of culture. Uh, but I do it through a media culture. Uh, but I do it through a media culture. Uh, but I do it through a media perspective because that's how the perspective because that's how the perspective because that's how the consumer is receiving it. Consumer is consumer is receiving it. Consumer is consumer is receiving it. Consumer is not at the individual exhibition or at not at the individual exhibition or at not at the individual exhibition or at the individual performance. They're the individual performance. They're the individual performance. They're getting it through media. So in looking getting it through media. So in looking getting it through media. So in looking at it through media, I already have a at it through media, I already have a at it through media, I already have a double perspective on it. I have the double perspective on it. I have the double perspective on it. I have the artists perspective, but I have the artists perspective, but I have the artists perspective, but I have the journalists, if for lack of a better journalists, if for lack of a better journalists, if for lack of a better word, we'll call podcasting journalism. word, we'll call podcasting journalism. word, we'll call podcasting journalism. Will we be forgiven? Will we be forgiven? Will we be forgiven? &gt;&gt; Sure. Podcasting is a weird thing. We &gt;&gt; Sure. Podcasting is a weird thing. We &gt;&gt; Sure. Podcasting is a weird thing. We could talk about later what it is and could talk about later what it is and could talk about later what it is and what it isn't. what it isn't. what it isn't. &gt;&gt; Okay. We'll wait till this is off to &gt;&gt; Okay. We'll wait till this is off to &gt;&gt; Okay. We'll wait till this is off to discuss that, right? discuss that, right? discuss that, right? &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; But the uh the challenge for me becomes, &gt;&gt; But the uh the challenge for me becomes, &gt;&gt; But the uh the challenge for me becomes, okay, in all of this swirl of stuff, okay, in all of this swirl of stuff, okay, in all of this swirl of stuff, what do you believe? what do you believe? what do you believe? &gt;&gt; Forget who. You can't believe anyone. &gt;&gt; Forget who. You can't believe anyone. &gt;&gt; Forget who. You can't believe anyone. But what can you believe? What is But what can you believe? What is But what can you believe? What is really grounded uh in a way that's really grounded uh in a way that's really grounded uh in a way that's productive? Um and uh in thinking I you productive? Um and uh in thinking I you productive? Um and uh in thinking I you know I've just come off if you'll know I've just come off if you'll know I've just come off if you'll forgive me for diverging here for a forgive me for diverging here for a forgive me for diverging here for a moment two really hard years of working. moment two really hard years of working. moment two really hard years of working. uh a 60th anniversary tour uh that uh a 60th anniversary tour uh that uh a 60th anniversary tour uh that uh was a very big culmination was a very big culmination was a very big culmination of a long working process um which of a long working process um which of a long working process um which put a lot on the line and which was put a lot on the line and which was put a lot on the line and which was unfortunately very successful because unfortunately very successful because unfortunately very successful because success is much harder to follow than success is much harder to follow than success is much harder to follow than failure. So here you said, "Okay, babe, failure. So here you said, "Okay, babe, failure. So here you said, "Okay, babe, you've done it all. Now what?" And so you've done it all. Now what?" And so you've done it all. Now what?" And so where do you go? where do you go? where do you go? And you don't go around asking other And you don't go around asking other And you don't go around asking other people for the answer to your question. people for the answer to your question. people for the answer to your question. One has to find a way of rerouting One has to find a way of rerouting One has to find a way of rerouting without abandoning without abandoning without abandoning who you are and what you believe in who you are and what you believe in who you are and what you believe in order to just make change. Really, how order to just make change. Really, how order to just make change. Really, how does that work? So it's an extremely does that work? So it's an extremely does that work? So it's an extremely um attenuated place to be. attenuated place to be. attenuated place to be. Not many people make it this far. Not many people make it this far. Not many people make it this far. Not many people are looking at their 61st many people are looking at their 61st many people are looking at their 61st year of work, year of work, year of work, right? So that's like, okay, so show us. right? So that's like, okay, so show us. right? So that's like, okay, so show us. Well, maybe I don't want to. Well, maybe I don't want to. Well, maybe I don't want to. Maybe I will. Who knows? Maybe I will. Who knows? Maybe I will. Who knows? &gt;&gt; You said that um coming off of a success &gt;&gt; You said that um coming off of a success &gt;&gt; You said that um coming off of a success is much more challenging than come off is much more challenging than come off is much more challenging than come off coming off of a failure. I think that uh coming off of a failure. I think that uh coming off of a failure. I think that uh will surprise a number of people uh will surprise a number of people uh will surprise a number of people uh because people myself included probably because people myself included probably because people myself included probably feel like when you do well you get the feel like when you do well you get the feel like when you do well you get the confidence that you can do well again. confidence that you can do well again. confidence that you can do well again. There's that also whereas when you fail There's that also whereas when you fail There's that also whereas when you fail you're like uh like you're like uh like you're like uh like &gt;&gt; you can do that again too. [laughter] &gt;&gt; you can do that again too. [laughter] &gt;&gt; you can do that again too. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Do you tell your dancers that? &gt;&gt; Do you tell your dancers that? &gt;&gt; Do you tell your dancers that? &gt;&gt; No, because my dancers don't fail. M &gt;&gt; No, because my dancers don't fail. M &gt;&gt; No, because my dancers don't fail. M &gt;&gt; that's why I work with dancers who want &gt;&gt; that's why I work with dancers who want &gt;&gt; that's why I work with dancers who want to work as hard as I do. to work as hard as I do. to work as hard as I do. &gt;&gt; Let's talk more about that process. In &gt;&gt; Let's talk more about that process. In &gt;&gt; Let's talk more about that process. In your book, you talked about failure your book, you talked about failure your book, you talked about failure being critical, failing a lot a lot in being critical, failing a lot a lot in being critical, failing a lot a lot in private. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; That had a big impact on me. &gt;&gt; That had a big impact on me. &gt;&gt; That had a big impact on me. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; I think that the this notion of making &gt;&gt; I think that the this notion of making &gt;&gt; I think that the this notion of making lots and lots of failures and mistakes lots and lots of failures and mistakes lots and lots of failures and mistakes &gt;&gt; Yeah. privately. When you're working, &gt;&gt; Yeah. privately. When you're working, &gt;&gt; Yeah. privately. When you're working, you don't know if it's a failure or not. you don't know if it's a failure or not. you don't know if it's a failure or not. You only know if it's useful. You know You only know if it's useful. You know You only know if it's useful. You know if it's exciting. You know if it if it's exciting. You know if it if it's exciting. You know if it generates a next question. That's generates a next question. That's generates a next question. That's useful. You don't know if it's good or useful. You don't know if it's good or useful. You don't know if it's good or bad. &gt;&gt; Let's go back to your dancers and &gt;&gt; Let's go back to your dancers and &gt;&gt; Let's go back to your dancers and how you put them through uh the paces, how you put them through uh the paces, how you put them through uh the paces, so to speak, because I think it also so to speak, because I think it also so to speak, because I think it also frames up this notion of rituals very frames up this notion of rituals very frames up this notion of rituals very nicely. For the uninformed like very nicely. For the uninformed like very nicely. For the uninformed like myself, give us an example of your day myself, give us an example of your day myself, give us an example of your day and a day in the studio. the top contour and a day in the studio. the top contour and a day in the studio. the top contour of that of that of that &gt;&gt; it depends on where you are in this &gt;&gt; it depends on where you are in this &gt;&gt; it depends on where you are in this wonderful word called process if you are wonderful word called process if you are wonderful word called process if you are uh at the beginning it's all more fluid uh at the beginning it's all more fluid uh at the beginning it's all more fluid um and while the one key ingredient I um and while the one key ingredient I um and while the one key ingredient I have always found to doing work is you have always found to doing work is you have always found to doing work is you got to be able to do a schedule you got to be able to do a schedule you got to be able to do a schedule you got to be able to tell people what time to be able to tell people what time to be able to tell people what time they're coming and what shoes to bring they're coming and what shoes to bring they're coming and what shoes to bring okay that's already actually made a lot okay that's already actually made a lot okay that's already actually made a lot of choices is for you. Uh, and that's of choices is for you. Uh, and that's of choices is for you. Uh, and that's that I think is a good thing. I mean, that I think is a good thing. I mean, that I think is a good thing. I mean, there's no point in just saying, "Oh, there's no point in just saying, "Oh, there's no point in just saying, "Oh, we'll work whenever you get here and you we'll work whenever you get here and you we'll work whenever you get here and you know, bring whatever." Whatever is not know, bring whatever." Whatever is not know, bring whatever." Whatever is not my favorite word. my favorite word. my favorite word. So, choices get made. Uh, and a schedule So, choices get made. Uh, and a schedule So, choices get made. Uh, and a schedule gets done. And ordinarily, uh, again, it gets done. And ordinarily, uh, again, it gets done. And ordinarily, uh, again, it depends on what the project is, but, uh, depends on what the project is, but, uh, depends on what the project is, but, uh, if it's, let's just give as much range if it's, let's just give as much range if it's, let's just give as much range here as possible. If it's uh me making a here as possible. If it's uh me making a here as possible. If it's uh me making a new piece, I will set a schedule. new piece, I will set a schedule. new piece, I will set a schedule. Dancers come in, they will have done Dancers come in, they will have done Dancers come in, they will have done class themselves. They will come warm. class themselves. They will come warm. class themselves. They will come warm. Okay, that is not a part of my day. I Okay, that is not a part of my day. I Okay, that is not a part of my day. I have my own work to do in preparing for have my own work to do in preparing for have my own work to do in preparing for that rehearsal, but in also that rehearsal, but in also that rehearsal, but in also maintaining my own physical instrument maintaining my own physical instrument maintaining my own physical instrument to the degree that I can because the to the degree that I can because the to the degree that I can because the more I can bring into the studio, the more I can bring into the studio, the more I can bring into the studio, the more I can give them and the more I can more I can give them and the more I can more I can give them and the more I can expect them to bring in. So I have a expect them to bring in. So I have a expect them to bring in. So I have a tandem path going on here with the tandem path going on here with the tandem path going on here with the dancers and we meet up, we join um and I dancers and we meet up, we join um and I dancers and we meet up, we join um and I usually will come with a certain preset usually will come with a certain preset usually will come with a certain preset sense of where we're going with this sense of where we're going with this sense of where we're going with this thing and then see how it actually works thing and then see how it actually works thing and then see how it actually works in real time in real space which is a in real time in real space which is a in real time in real space which is a very um useful and tough mistress very um useful and tough mistress very um useful and tough mistress uh and eliminates a lot of fantasy very uh and eliminates a lot of fantasy very uh and eliminates a lot of fantasy very quickly. Who decides who gets to work with you? Who decides who gets to work with you? Who decides who gets to work with you? &gt;&gt; I do. Well, that's actually not true. In &gt;&gt; I do. Well, that's actually not true. In &gt;&gt; I do. Well, that's actually not true. In a way, they do. The dancers that uh I a way, they do. The dancers that uh I a way, they do. The dancers that uh I work with, I obviously audition, but I work with, I obviously audition, but I work with, I obviously audition, but I also screen from the perspective of who also screen from the perspective of who also screen from the perspective of who wants to work with me, wants to work with me, wants to work with me, &gt;&gt; who's going to come and say, "Yeah, I'll &gt;&gt; who's going to come and say, "Yeah, I'll &gt;&gt; who's going to come and say, "Yeah, I'll go through that wall. Is that what we're go through that wall. Is that what we're go through that wall. Is that what we're doing? I'll go through the wall." And doing? I'll go through the wall." And doing? I'll go through the wall." And you want to know that you have that in you want to know that you have that in you want to know that you have that in the room. you're not going to ask them the room. you're not going to ask them the room. you're not going to ask them to go through the wall all the time, but to go through the wall all the time, but to go through the wall all the time, but you know, if it seemed like it was an you know, if it seemed like it was an you know, if it seemed like it was an approach that was going to be useful, approach that was going to be useful, approach that was going to be useful, you got to know that commitment is you got to know that commitment is you got to know that commitment is really solid and that's best indicated really solid and that's best indicated really solid and that's best indicated by their desire, not your finding them by their desire, not your finding them by their desire, not your finding them totally appropriate, but their desire. totally appropriate, but their desire. totally appropriate, but their desire. &gt;&gt; Are most dancers uh living with the &gt;&gt; Are most dancers uh living with the &gt;&gt; Are most dancers uh living with the understanding that it's going to be very understanding that it's going to be very understanding that it's going to be very long hours and probably very little very long hours and probably very little very long hours and probably very little pay for a while? pay for a while? pay for a while? &gt;&gt; For sure. very little pay and forever &gt;&gt; For sure. very little pay and forever &gt;&gt; For sure. very little pay and forever &gt;&gt; wild world &gt;&gt; wild world &gt;&gt; wild world &gt;&gt; crazy and to my way of thinking &gt;&gt; crazy and to my way of thinking &gt;&gt; crazy and to my way of thinking not acceptable because you know I'm all not acceptable because you know I'm all not acceptable because you know I'm all in favor of the folks who do the work in favor of the folks who do the work in favor of the folks who do the work and the training to accomplish and the training to accomplish and the training to accomplish physically and I don't make a clear physically and I don't make a clear physically and I don't make a clear distinction between either folks who are distinction between either folks who are distinction between either folks who are in business or athletes to me it is all in business or athletes to me it is all in business or athletes to me it is all the same enterprise but dancers have the same enterprise but dancers have the same enterprise but dancers have nowhere near the uh possibility ility of nowhere near the uh possibility ility of nowhere near the uh possibility ility of uh earning a living that a great athlete uh earning a living that a great athlete uh earning a living that a great athlete has not even sort of kind of in the has not even sort of kind of in the has not even sort of kind of in the ballpark, not even in the parking lot, ballpark, not even in the parking lot, ballpark, not even in the parking lot, not even on the highway to the ball not even on the highway to the ball not even on the highway to the ball game. How did this happen and why does it How did this happen and why does it How did this happen and why does it continue? &gt;&gt; It raises interesting questions how we &gt;&gt; It raises interesting questions how we &gt;&gt; It raises interesting questions how we support the arts or don't support the support the arts or don't support the support the arts or don't support the arts. I think arts. I think arts. I think &gt;&gt; are we taking over your show for the &gt;&gt; are we taking over your show for the &gt;&gt; are we taking over your show for the next two and a half years? if we next two and a half years? if we next two and a half years? if we must, you know, this conversation no must, you know, this conversation no must, you know, this conversation no doubt will draw some additional doubt will draw some additional doubt will draw some additional attention to dance. But the larger attention to dance. But the larger attention to dance. But the larger issue of issue of issue of &gt;&gt; of you know, people being able to make &gt;&gt; of you know, people being able to make &gt;&gt; of you know, people being able to make it in the arts as not just as a as a it in the arts as not just as a as a it in the arts as not just as a as a luxury, but as a like critical piece of luxury, but as a like critical piece of luxury, but as a like critical piece of culture and life. I mean, I love culture and life. I mean, I love culture and life. I mean, I love beautiful things. I love beautiful dogs. beautiful things. I love beautiful dogs. beautiful things. I love beautiful dogs. Most all dogs are beautiful. Um, even Most all dogs are beautiful. Um, even Most all dogs are beautiful. Um, even the bulldogs. Uh, but I love beautiful the bulldogs. Uh, but I love beautiful the bulldogs. Uh, but I love beautiful things. And it and it enriches life in things. And it and it enriches life in things. And it and it enriches life in more ways than just feeling delighted. I more ways than just feeling delighted. I more ways than just feeling delighted. I think there's immense carryover from uh think there's immense carryover from uh think there's immense carryover from uh the arts to other areas of culture. the arts to other areas of culture. the arts to other areas of culture. And uh so we could make an economic And uh so we could make an economic And uh so we could make an economic argument about that, but it's part of argument about that, but it's part of argument about that, but it's part of the reason you're here. But just sort of the reason you're here. But just sort of the reason you're here. But just sort of return to the this business of return to the this business of return to the this business of ritual. &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you before you go there? &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you before you go there? &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you before you go there? Because I'd like to take up two things. Because I'd like to take up two things. Because I'd like to take up two things. One is the notion of the reality being One is the notion of the reality being One is the notion of the reality being that when we do a successful that when we do a successful that when we do a successful performance, I measure it by did that performance, I measure it by did that performance, I measure it by did that audience leave in a better frame of mind audience leave in a better frame of mind audience leave in a better frame of mind than it came in with. In other words, we than it came in with. In other words, we than it came in with. In other words, we provide a service provide a service provide a service &gt;&gt; and we provide a service that gives them &gt;&gt; and we provide a service that gives them &gt;&gt; and we provide a service that gives them a sense of optimism a sense of optimism a sense of optimism uh yay verily I might even go to joy uh yay verily I might even go to joy uh yay verily I might even go to joy uh to the belief that they have that they to the belief that they have that they to the belief that they have that they too occupy this body that does these too occupy this body that does these too occupy this body that does these phenomenal things and thank you Lord phenomenal things and thank you Lord phenomenal things and thank you Lord &gt;&gt; okay that's a service &gt;&gt; okay that's a service &gt;&gt; okay that's a service [clears throat] [clears throat] [clears throat] &gt;&gt; I think dancers should be paid more for &gt;&gt; I think dancers should be paid more for &gt;&gt; I think dancers should be paid more for that service and that it needs to be that service and that it needs to be that service and that it needs to be acknowledged the other point that I want acknowledged the other point that I want acknowledged the other point that I want to bring up is you've used it twice now. to bring up is you've used it twice now. to bring up is you've used it twice now. I didn't stop you the first word. I didn't stop you the first word. I didn't stop you the first word. Beauty. What is this? Beauty. What is this? Beauty. What is this? &gt;&gt; It could be something I see or hear that &gt;&gt; It could be something I see or hear that &gt;&gt; It could be something I see or hear that um it stirs a some set of emotions in me um it stirs a some set of emotions in me um it stirs a some set of emotions in me that carries forward. And what you just that carries forward. And what you just that carries forward. And what you just said a moment ago about the audience said a moment ago about the audience said a moment ago about the audience leaves in a different state. I mean, leaves in a different state. I mean, leaves in a different state. I mean, it's the word that came to mind was like it's the word that came to mind was like it's the word that came to mind was like it's like really great therapy, but it's like really great therapy, but it's like really great therapy, but it's in some sense it's better than that in some sense it's better than that in some sense it's better than that because um because um because um I was also thinking that perhaps in the I was also thinking that perhaps in the I was also thinking that perhaps in the top 10 of all my favorite memories are top 10 of all my favorite memories are top 10 of all my favorite memories are several live performances that I which I several live performances that I which I several live performances that I which I was the observer. It's like those things was the observer. It's like those things was the observer. It's like those things really stick with us and I think they really stick with us and I think they really stick with us and I think they change us in meaningful ways, change us in meaningful ways, change us in meaningful ways, especially when we're in the audience especially when we're in the audience especially when we're in the audience with other people, not just watching on with other people, not just watching on with other people, not just watching on a on a screen. They can be a on a screen. They can be a on a screen. They can be transformative for sure. And in a live transformative for sure. And in a live transformative for sure. And in a live audience becomes of course a whole audience becomes of course a whole audience becomes of course a whole another thing about cost and another thing about cost and another thing about cost and expenditures, but that it confirms that expenditures, but that it confirms that expenditures, but that it confirms that not only do you feel a new that not only do you feel a new that not only do you feel a new righteousness for yourself by a righteousness for yourself by a righteousness for yourself by a performance, but that you sense others performance, but that you sense others performance, but that you sense others do as well. And that creates a community do as well. And that creates a community do as well. And that creates a community uh bonding. And you know, okay, football uh bonding. And you know, okay, football uh bonding. And you know, okay, football games, you know, everybody is very rowdy games, you know, everybody is very rowdy games, you know, everybody is very rowdy about it. Uh most performances people about it. Uh most performances people about it. Uh most performances people are not. But that doesn't mean that it are not. But that doesn't mean that it are not. But that doesn't mean that it still doesn't take that hold of people still doesn't take that hold of people still doesn't take that hold of people who are experiencing the same thing in who are experiencing the same thing in who are experiencing the same thing in real time. We tend to dismiss that which real time. We tend to dismiss that which real time. We tend to dismiss that which is familiar is familiar is familiar [clears throat] [clears throat] [clears throat] &gt;&gt; and that sense &gt;&gt; and that sense &gt;&gt; and that sense is actually not all that familiar but it is actually not all that familiar but it is actually not all that familiar but it feels very intimate and it is uh but it feels very intimate and it is uh but it feels very intimate and it is uh but it actually is quite rare and the rarer a actually is quite rare and the rarer a actually is quite rare and the rarer a piece of art and I will call a piece of art and I will call a piece of art and I will call a performance a piece of art is the more performance a piece of art is the more performance a piece of art is the more value it has and the more that is value it has and the more that is value it has and the more that is compensated for culturally and compensated for culturally and compensated for culturally and economically. There should be a price economically. There should be a price economically. There should be a price point on beauty. Let's put it that way. point on beauty. Let's put it that way. point on beauty. Let's put it that way. &gt;&gt; Well, there is for everything else. &gt;&gt; Well, there is for everything else. &gt;&gt; Well, there is for everything else. &gt;&gt; Well, I know. &gt;&gt; Well, I know. &gt;&gt; Well, I know. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, there is a price point &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, there is a price point &gt;&gt; Yeah. You know, there is a price point for beauty in terms of people could say, for beauty in terms of people could say, for beauty in terms of people could say, "Well, the sunrise is free and the "Well, the sunrise is free and the "Well, the sunrise is free and the sunrise is beautiful, but seeing it in sunrise is beautiful, but seeing it in sunrise is beautiful, but seeing it in certain locations costs a lot more money certain locations costs a lot more money certain locations costs a lot more money than seeing it in other locations." than seeing it in other locations." than seeing it in other locations." That's for sure. That's for sure. That's for sure. &gt;&gt; Right. And that brings up another &gt;&gt; Right. And that brings up another &gt;&gt; Right. And that brings up another thing because in a way it's a kind of thing because in a way it's a kind of thing because in a way it's a kind of horrible thinking to go, "Yeah, it's a horrible thinking to go, "Yeah, it's a horrible thinking to go, "Yeah, it's a privilege. You know what? You can't pay privilege. You know what? You can't pay privilege. You know what? You can't pay me. you can't bite me. I don't have a me. you can't bite me. I don't have a me. you can't bite me. I don't have a price. And that I'm sure is one of the price. And that I'm sure is one of the price. And that I'm sure is one of the things in great dancers who are things in great dancers who are things in great dancers who are certainly not paid as I've said before certainly not paid as I've said before certainly not paid as I've said before and I'll say at least 300,000 times more and I'll say at least 300,000 times more and I'll say at least 300,000 times more commensurate with a great athlete. That commensurate with a great athlete. That commensurate with a great athlete. That is probably one and I've never actually is probably one and I've never actually is probably one and I've never actually I never brought it up directly with a I never brought it up directly with a I never brought it up directly with a great dancer. How much is it your own great dancer. How much is it your own great dancer. How much is it your own sense of independence and liberty that sense of independence and liberty that sense of independence and liberty that makes you the artist that you are? makes you the artist that you are? makes you the artist that you are? &gt;&gt; I think the name that most people &gt;&gt; I think the name that most people &gt;&gt; I think the name that most people probably associate with dance is probably associate with dance is probably associate with dance is probably Berishnikov. If they don't know probably Berishnikov. If they don't know probably Berishnikov. If they don't know much about dance, they know that name or much about dance, they know that name or much about dance, they know that name or it they it's familiar to them. What was it they it's familiar to them. What was it they it's familiar to them. What was it about Mikuel Berishnikov that sort of it about Mikuel Berishnikov that sort of it about Mikuel Berishnikov that sort of had him break through the common had him break through the common had him break through the common consciousness that way? consciousness that way? consciousness that way? First of all, Misha uh Moore these days First of all, Misha uh Moore these days First of all, Misha uh Moore these days actually is remembered by younger actually is remembered by younger actually is remembered by younger generations from his later cultural generations from his later cultural generations from his later cultural input, i.e. Sex in the City than he is input, i.e. Sex in the City than he is input, i.e. Sex in the City than he is as a classical ballet artist. All right, as a classical ballet artist. All right, as a classical ballet artist. All right, let's just start there let's just start there let's just start there &gt;&gt; because he showed up in Sex in the City &gt;&gt; because he showed up in Sex in the City &gt;&gt; because he showed up in Sex in the City as a as a character. as a as a character. as a as a character. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. And that's and that's how he is often And that's and that's how he is often And that's and that's how he is often recognized by younger audiences, recognized by younger audiences, recognized by younger audiences, younger, you know, folk. Uh what was he younger, you know, folk. Uh what was he younger, you know, folk. Uh what was he in the beginning? He was actually there in the beginning? He was actually there in the beginning? He was actually there was a chalice, then there was Nuraf and was a chalice, then there was Nuraf and was a chalice, then there was Nuraf and then Misha. He politically he came then Misha. He politically he came then Misha. He politically he came across the line. It was Russia, America. across the line. It was Russia, America. across the line. It was Russia, America. He chose America. He's our hero. Plus He chose America. He's our hero. Plus He chose America. He's our hero. Plus which he was gorgeous. which he was gorgeous. which he was gorgeous. He's unquestionably, in my opinion, in He's unquestionably, in my opinion, in He's unquestionably, in my opinion, in that era, the that era, the that era, the possessor of a technique that was a possessor of a technique that was a possessor of a technique that was a culmination of the 20th century and that culmination of the 20th century and that culmination of the 20th century and that will never be matched. And to see him will never be matched. And to see him will never be matched. And to see him work at the bar or to see him in the uh work at the bar or to see him in the uh work at the bar or to see him in the uh absolute interior realm of what the absolute interior realm of what the absolute interior realm of what the classical ballet was an unbelievable classical ballet was an unbelievable classical ballet was an unbelievable privilege. But not many people saw that. Not many But not many people saw that. Not many But not many people saw that. Not many people saw him at the bar. Uh which is people saw him at the bar. Uh which is people saw him at the bar. Uh which is where you build your chops. Okay. where you build your chops. Okay. where you build your chops. Okay. He also was capable of taking those He also was capable of taking those He also was capable of taking those chops and expanding on them, breaking chops and expanding on them, breaking chops and expanding on them, breaking through their boundaries, trying it this through their boundaries, trying it this through their boundaries, trying it this way, do it that way, but utilizing the way, do it that way, but utilizing the way, do it that way, but utilizing the power that he had from that simple power that he had from that simple power that he had from that simple classical base to take it outward. Lots classical base to take it outward. Lots classical base to take it outward. Lots of inventiveness in that regard. And the of inventiveness in that regard. And the of inventiveness in that regard. And the guy was gorgeous. What can I tell you? guy was gorgeous. What can I tell you? guy was gorgeous. What can I tell you? &gt;&gt; His his looks. &gt;&gt; His his looks. &gt;&gt; His his looks. &gt;&gt; What does that mean? But what does that &gt;&gt; What does that mean? But what does that &gt;&gt; What does that mean? But what does that mean? It means a mean? It means a mean? It means a wide ranging interest that you feel wide ranging interest that you feel wide ranging interest that you feel includes you as you the spectator. You includes you as you the spectator. You includes you as you the spectator. You feel he's including you in his wideness feel he's including you in his wideness feel he's including you in his wideness of vision. Where does that come from? of vision. Where does that come from? of vision. Where does that come from? from the intellect, from his musicality, from the intellect, from his musicality, from the intellect, from his musicality, from his training, from his personality, from his training, from his personality, from his training, from his personality, uh from his cultural breeding, Latvian. uh from his cultural breeding, Latvian. uh from his cultural breeding, Latvian. Uh and it is a singular commodification, Uh and it is a singular commodification, Uh and it is a singular commodification, one of my favorite words that drives one of my favorite words that drives one of my favorite words that drives people up the walls when I use that word people up the walls when I use that word people up the walls when I use that word in relation to the arts of performing. in relation to the arts of performing. in relation to the arts of performing. Um but he was very Um but he was very Um but he was very astute in many different areas starting astute in many different areas starting astute in many different areas starting from uh an athletic ability through to a from uh an athletic ability through to a from uh an athletic ability through to a poetic sensibility. poetic sensibility. poetic sensibility. &gt;&gt; It's interesting you said that because &gt;&gt; It's interesting you said that because &gt;&gt; It's interesting you said that because uh he was attractive that people felt uh he was attractive that people felt uh he was attractive that people felt that they were a part of it in a way that they were a part of it in a way that they were a part of it in a way that was not that was not that was not &gt;&gt; we all want to be godly. We all want to &gt;&gt; we all want to be godly. We all want to &gt;&gt; we all want to be godly. We all want to be a part of the sublime. be a part of the sublime. be a part of the sublime. Few can give us that. Few can give us that. Few can give us that. &gt;&gt; So when they say, you know, artists or I &gt;&gt; So when they say, you know, artists or I &gt;&gt; So when they say, you know, artists or I include dancers, I just broadly speaking include dancers, I just broadly speaking include dancers, I just broadly speaking artists are like portals. artists are like portals. artists are like portals. Is that what you mean? Is that what you mean? Is that what you mean? &gt;&gt; I would accept that. &gt;&gt; I would accept that. &gt;&gt; I would accept that. &gt;&gt; Years ago, I went to a Philip Glass &gt;&gt; Years ago, I went to a Philip Glass &gt;&gt; Years ago, I went to a Philip Glass concert at UC Berkeley. I'll be honest, concert at UC Berkeley. I'll be honest, concert at UC Berkeley. I'll be honest, I didn't understand it. I left there in I didn't understand it. I left there in I didn't understand it. I left there in a different state mostly of a confusion a different state mostly of a confusion a different state mostly of a confusion um that people were willing to pay for um that people were willing to pay for um that people were willing to pay for that. I'm sorry if I'm insulting any that. I'm sorry if I'm insulting any that. I'm sorry if I'm insulting any Philip Glass fans, but this is my Philip Glass fans, but this is my Philip Glass fans, but this is my podcast. I'm going to be very direct. podcast. I'm going to be very direct. podcast. I'm going to be very direct. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; I was told I maybe hadn't seen the right &gt;&gt; I was told I maybe hadn't seen the right &gt;&gt; I was told I maybe hadn't seen the right Philip Glass concert. I was very Philip Glass concert. I was very Philip Glass concert. I was very confused. &gt;&gt; Why? &gt;&gt; Why? &gt;&gt; Why? &gt;&gt; You know, I'm not a musician. I'm not um &gt;&gt; You know, I'm not a musician. I'm not um &gt;&gt; You know, I'm not a musician. I'm not um but when I like something, I know I but when I like something, I know I but when I like something, I know I like it and I tend to really like it. like it and I tend to really like it. like it and I tend to really like it. But it it's rare for me to encounter But it it's rare for me to encounter But it it's rare for me to encounter something that's like it just felt like something that's like it just felt like something that's like it just felt like um it felt extremely experimental at um it felt extremely experimental at um it felt extremely experimental at every at every part of it. And I and I every at every part of it. And I and I every at every part of it. And I and I couldn't tell whether or not people were couldn't tell whether or not people were couldn't tell whether or not people were telling themselves that they liked it telling themselves that they liked it telling themselves that they liked it because it was him because it was him because it was him or whether they really liked it. or whether they really liked it. or whether they really liked it. &gt;&gt; What year is this that you went to this &gt;&gt; What year is this that you went to this &gt;&gt; What year is this that you went to this concert? &gt;&gt; Gosh, this must have been 200 &gt;&gt; eight. 2007 2008 &gt;&gt; eight. 2007 2008 &gt;&gt; eight. 2007 2008 &gt;&gt; that's very late okay so Phil obviously &gt;&gt; that's very late okay so Phil obviously &gt;&gt; that's very late okay so Phil obviously has been working uh since the 60s and has been working uh since the 60s and has been working uh since the 60s and I've done one major collaboration with I've done one major collaboration with I've done one major collaboration with Phil and one recent collaboration Phil and one recent collaboration Phil and one recent collaboration um and in the beginning uh the audience um and in the beginning uh the audience um and in the beginning uh the audience for minimalism for minimalism for minimalism right uh Reich Riley glass uh came right uh Reich Riley glass uh came right uh Reich Riley glass uh came gradually and so when the initial piece called in and so when the initial piece called in and so when the initial piece called in the upper room was done. Uh it had a the upper room was done. Uh it had a the upper room was done. Uh it had a power and a force that involved also power and a force that involved also power and a force that involved also discovery. Now the later piece which is discovery. Now the later piece which is discovery. Now the later piece which is called slactide called slactide called slactide fills a known commodity and fills a known commodity and fills a known commodity and was addressed slightly differently uh was addressed slightly differently uh was addressed slightly differently uh rather than I mean you know Phil it's percussive the lyric element has it's percussive the lyric element has it's percussive the lyric element has been reduced okay and you're a sensitive been reduced okay and you're a sensitive been reduced okay and you're a sensitive soul you think of the word beauty and soul you think of the word beauty and soul you think of the word beauty and that does not mean total elimination that does not mean total elimination that does not mean total elimination Boom, boom, boom. It Boom, boom, boom. It Boom, boom, boom. It means inclusion. Uh, and so the later means inclusion. Uh, and so the later means inclusion. Uh, and so the later glass work was done in conjunction with glass work was done in conjunction with glass work was done in conjunction with a Chicago percussion group called Third a Chicago percussion group called Third a Chicago percussion group called Third Coast, who Phil's worked with a lot and Coast, who Phil's worked with a lot and Coast, who Phil's worked with a lot and who he trusts to do iterations, if you who he trusts to do iterations, if you who he trusts to do iterations, if you will, on the work. And we iterated with will, on the work. And we iterated with will, on the work. And we iterated with a flute. Flutes don't do this. a flute. Flutes don't do this. a flute. Flutes don't do this. [applause] &gt;&gt; Flutes do this. So we put a stream on &gt;&gt; Flutes do this. So we put a stream on &gt;&gt; Flutes do this. So we put a stream on top of that that's in the music. I mean top of that that's in the music. I mean top of that that's in the music. I mean iterations are a study in and of iterations are a study in and of iterations are a study in and of themselves, right? What makes something themselves, right? What makes something themselves, right? What makes something different from and yet still the same as different from and yet still the same as different from and yet still the same as Good luck with that one. Uh but that Good luck with that one. Uh but that Good luck with that one. Uh but that was the different range. I dare say that was the different range. I dare say that was the different range. I dare say if you go and look at because Third if you go and look at because Third if you go and look at because Third Coast is uh produced a recording of this Coast is uh produced a recording of this Coast is uh produced a recording of this work, you listen to Slack Tide and then work, you listen to Slack Tide and then work, you listen to Slack Tide and then tell me your response to Glass. But but tell me your response to Glass. But but tell me your response to Glass. But but basically minimalism took uh the lyric basically minimalism took uh the lyric basically minimalism took uh the lyric element uh and reduced it to just the element uh and reduced it to just the element uh and reduced it to just the temporal passage in time. What's temporal passage in time. What's temporal passage in time. What's interesting, because of all the concerts interesting, because of all the concerts interesting, because of all the concerts I've seen, this one still sticks with me I've seen, this one still sticks with me I've seen, this one still sticks with me as like a stimulus to learn more. as like a stimulus to learn more. as like a stimulus to learn more. Because one thing that I'm totally Because one thing that I'm totally Because one thing that I'm totally fascinated by and perplexed by is that fascinated by and perplexed by is that fascinated by and perplexed by is that with the exception of comedy, the more with the exception of comedy, the more with the exception of comedy, the more one learns about something, the artists, one learns about something, the artists, one learns about something, the artists, what went into the art, the dance, what went into the art, the dance, what went into the art, the dance, what went into it, typically the more one went into it, typically the more one went into it, typically the more one likes that piece or that genre. Like the likes that piece or that genre. Like the likes that piece or that genre. Like the more I learn about something, then the more I learn about something, then the more I learn about something, then the then I can listen to it with a different then I can listen to it with a different then I can listen to it with a different ear. I can watch it with it with a ear. I can watch it with it with a ear. I can watch it with it with a different eye. Comedy is the exception. different eye. Comedy is the exception. different eye. Comedy is the exception. If it's not funny, learning about the If it's not funny, learning about the If it's not funny, learning about the origins of the joke don't make it any origins of the joke don't make it any origins of the joke don't make it any funnier. Learning about the comedian funnier. Learning about the comedian funnier. Learning about the comedian doesn't make it funnier. It just it sort doesn't make it funnier. It just it sort doesn't make it funnier. It just it sort of just like falls further and further. of just like falls further and further. of just like falls further and further. &gt;&gt; See, I think that's true of your other &gt;&gt; See, I think that's true of your other &gt;&gt; See, I think that's true of your other art forms, too. I think you're art forms, too. I think you're art forms, too. I think you're confusing, forgive me, knowledge with confusing, forgive me, knowledge with confusing, forgive me, knowledge with instinct. I mean, instinctively you're instinct. I mean, instinctively you're instinct. I mean, instinctively you're responding to the humor, but responding to the humor, but responding to the humor, but instinctively, uh, a piece of art can instinctively, uh, a piece of art can instinctively, uh, a piece of art can reach you, but you can be baffled by can reach you, but you can be baffled by can reach you, but you can be baffled by it. But we don't like confusion. So, we it. But we don't like confusion. So, we it. But we don't like confusion. So, we might call that something we should might call that something we should might call that something we should learn about before we can acknowledge learn about before we can acknowledge learn about before we can acknowledge liking it. liking it. liking it. &gt;&gt; That's one of the things that is, I &gt;&gt; That's one of the things that is, I &gt;&gt; That's one of the things that is, I think, really difficult and something I think, really difficult and something I think, really difficult and something I think a lot about, which is, uh, not think a lot about, which is, uh, not think a lot about, which is, uh, not only protecting but refining instinct. only protecting but refining instinct. only protecting but refining instinct. &gt;&gt; Tell me more about that. I know. It's &gt;&gt; Tell me more about that. I know. It's &gt;&gt; Tell me more about that. I know. It's fascinating, isn't it? I can't tell you fascinating, isn't it? I can't tell you fascinating, isn't it? I can't tell you about it because I could be writing a about it because I could be writing a about it because I could be writing a book. &gt;&gt; Oh, well, Rick Rubin, um, who I feel, &gt;&gt; Oh, well, Rick Rubin, um, who I feel, &gt;&gt; Oh, well, Rick Rubin, um, who I feel, even though you haven't met yet, you even though you haven't met yet, you even though you haven't met yet, you share a certain kinship with, talks share a certain kinship with, talks share a certain kinship with, talks about taste all the time about this, about taste all the time about this, about taste all the time about this, &gt;&gt; you know, a sense of taste and trusting &gt;&gt; you know, a sense of taste and trusting &gt;&gt; you know, a sense of taste and trusting your own sense of taste as a consumer your own sense of taste as a consumer your own sense of taste as a consumer and as a creator, right, and as a creator, right, and as a creator, right, &gt;&gt; is so key. That's why I brought up the &gt;&gt; is so key. That's why I brought up the &gt;&gt; is so key. That's why I brought up the Philip Glass thing because I'm not Philip Glass thing because I'm not Philip Glass thing because I'm not writing off Glass on the basis of one writing off Glass on the basis of one writing off Glass on the basis of one concert. But I didn't walk out of one concert. But I didn't walk out of one concert. But I didn't walk out of there thinking like maybe I'm an idiot. there thinking like maybe I'm an idiot. there thinking like maybe I'm an idiot. Maybe I didn't get it. I thought and I Maybe I didn't get it. I thought and I Maybe I didn't get it. I thought and I didn't think they're all idiots. I just didn't think they're all idiots. I just didn't think they're all idiots. I just thought I guess I'm just different thought I guess I'm just different thought I guess I'm just different because everyone else here seems to because everyone else here seems to because everyone else here seems to really love this. And this is like I really love this. And this is like I really love this. And this is like I just doesn't hit me right. It's like a I just doesn't hit me right. It's like a I just doesn't hit me right. It's like a I don't like sardines. [laughter] Never don't like sardines. [laughter] Never don't like sardines. [laughter] Never like sardines. You give me a 100 like sardines. You give me a 100 like sardines. You give me a 100 sardines, I'm going to hate them 100 sardines, I'm going to hate them 100 sardines, I'm going to hate them 100 times more than the first sardine. I times more than the first sardine. I times more than the first sardine. I promise. Because I've eaten a hundred promise. Because I've eaten a hundred promise. Because I've eaten a hundred sardines. It's just But I don't care sardines. It's just But I don't care sardines. It's just But I don't care that I don't like sardines. You just I'm that I don't like sardines. You just I'm that I don't like sardines. You just I'm over it. I was over it from the I'm over it. I was over it from the I'm over it. I was over it from the first sardine. first sardine. first sardine. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; Right. Phil's on the cusp of the avant guard. Phil's on the cusp of the avant guard. Phil's on the cusp of the avant guard. The avant guard is a smug place to be The avant guard is a smug place to be The avant guard is a smug place to be and can be very aggravating and can also and can be very aggravating and can also and can be very aggravating and can also be not that bright and very indulgent. be not that bright and very indulgent. be not that bright and very indulgent. There might have been some sense of that There might have been some sense of that There might have been some sense of that to it. The avantgard can confuse itself to it. The avantgard can confuse itself to it. The avantgard can confuse itself with originality and vice versa. with originality and vice versa. with originality and vice versa. &gt;&gt; Do you think it's important for dancers &gt;&gt; Do you think it's important for dancers &gt;&gt; Do you think it's important for dancers to be classically trained before they to be classically trained before they to be classically trained before they get into other forms? get into other forms? get into other forms? &gt;&gt; To be classically trained, absolutely. &gt;&gt; To be classically trained, absolutely. &gt;&gt; To be classically trained, absolutely. You want to be a musician and not You want to be a musician and not You want to be a musician and not understand the circle of fifths, the understand the circle of fifths, the understand the circle of fifths, the harmonies of construction of all music. harmonies of construction of all music. harmonies of construction of all music. No. Ballet is a format for the human No. Ballet is a format for the human No. Ballet is a format for the human body moving in space that has evolved body moving in space that has evolved body moving in space that has evolved over many centuries and has got a head over many centuries and has got a head over many centuries and has got a head start on us. And if you want to learn start on us. And if you want to learn start on us. And if you want to learn about how you move, you might as well about how you move, you might as well about how you move, you might as well try and jump a little further forward by try and jump a little further forward by try and jump a little further forward by studying ballet. I don't care ultimately studying ballet. I don't care ultimately studying ballet. I don't care ultimately if you're arabesque, which is one leg if you're arabesque, which is one leg if you're arabesque, which is one leg behind, one leg under, right? if your behind, one leg under, right? if your behind, one leg under, right? if your arabesque is aligned in a perfectly arabesque is aligned in a perfectly arabesque is aligned in a perfectly classical manner unless it's a perfectly classical manner unless it's a perfectly classical manner unless it's a perfectly classical ballet. But I do care you have classical ballet. But I do care you have classical ballet. But I do care you have that gear and you can reference it in that gear and you can reference it in that gear and you can reference it in terms of where's the leg going to move terms of where's the leg going to move terms of where's the leg going to move from and does it get to that point. Can from and does it get to that point. Can from and does it get to that point. Can it stop right on its center or not? it stop right on its center or not? it stop right on its center or not? That's what ballet can do. If there's a That's what ballet can do. If there's a That's what ballet can do. If there's a proper way for a movement to be done, proper way for a movement to be done, proper way for a movement to be done, the limb, the every element within the limb, the every element within the limb, the every element within the limb has to move from point A to point B limb has to move from point A to point B limb has to move from point A to point B in a certain trajectory. in a certain trajectory. in a certain trajectory. And people come in different sizes and And people come in different sizes and And people come in different sizes and shapes and you've got multiple dancers shapes and you've got multiple dancers shapes and you've got multiple dancers on stage. How do you reconcile that? on stage. How do you reconcile that? on stage. How do you reconcile that? &gt;&gt; You don't. Uh, and the word is properly. &gt;&gt; You don't. Uh, and the word is properly. &gt;&gt; You don't. Uh, and the word is properly. Properly. What is proper? Uh Properly. What is proper? Uh Properly. What is proper? Uh [sighs] I had the experience of working with I had the experience of working with I had the experience of working with the Kira off uh in St. Petersburg and I the Kira off uh in St. Petersburg and I the Kira off uh in St. Petersburg and I went to their school went to their school went to their school and uh the children are lined up and uh the children are lined up and uh the children are lined up and they are exact replicas and they have a they are exact replicas and they have a they are exact replicas and they have a huge selection mechanism throughout the huge selection mechanism throughout the huge selection mechanism throughout the country for picking those 10 or 12 kids country for picking those 10 or 12 kids country for picking those 10 or 12 kids that are going to be in there of that are going to be in there of that are going to be in there of whatever age. Um, and I saw one group of whatever age. Um, and I saw one group of whatever age. Um, and I saw one group of little boys, uh, less than eight little boys, uh, less than eight little boys, uh, less than eight years old. There were probably eight or years old. There were probably eight or years old. There were probably eight or nine of them in their little black nine of them in their little black nine of them in their little black shorts, their little white shirts. And, shorts, their little white shirts. And, shorts, their little white shirts. And, uh, I just came in briefly and they were uh, I just came in briefly and they were uh, I just came in briefly and they were being, you know, as they do. It's a part being, you know, as they do. It's a part being, you know, as they do. It's a part of the tradition. It's wonderful. Uh, of the tradition. It's wonderful. Uh, of the tradition. It's wonderful. Uh, they're being very respectful and it was they're being very respectful and it was they're being very respectful and it was like, oh, come in and you will sit here like, oh, come in and you will sit here like, oh, come in and you will sit here and they will continue and then we're and they will continue and then we're and they will continue and then we're getting moved to the next class. And one getting moved to the next class. And one getting moved to the next class. And one little boy came out and said, "No, no, little boy came out and said, "No, no, little boy came out and said, "No, no, no. We want to do more." So we went back no. We want to do more." So we went back no. We want to do more." So we went back and they started jumping out of sequence and they started jumping out of sequence and they started jumping out of sequence because the ballet class is very because the ballet class is very because the ballet class is very carefully constructed to warm up the carefully constructed to warm up the carefully constructed to warm up the body and also to develop the training. body and also to develop the training. body and also to develop the training. So you're working both laterally and in So you're working both laterally and in So you're working both laterally and in depth in every technique class. They depth in every technique class. They depth in every technique class. They went out of sequence so the boys could went out of sequence so the boys could went out of sequence so the boys could jump, which is usually not done till the jump, which is usually not done till the jump, which is usually not done till the very end of class. And this little guy very end of class. And this little guy very end of class. And this little guy had real what we call bowel. He could go had real what we call bowel. He could go had real what we call bowel. He could go up and he could like for moments just it up and he could like for moments just it up and he could like for moments just it seems like he's able to suspend. He knew seems like he's able to suspend. He knew seems like he's able to suspend. He knew he had that and he knew I wouldn't see he had that and he knew I wouldn't see he had that and he knew I wouldn't see that at the bar. So he wanted to but he that at the bar. So he wanted to but he that at the bar. So he wanted to but he was [clears throat] what we call was [clears throat] what we call was [clears throat] what we call pronated. His feet were hyperextended to pronated. His feet were hyperextended to pronated. His feet were hyperextended to the outside. So he's not going straight the outside. So he's not going straight the outside. So he's not going straight up through the metatarsal. He's going up through the metatarsal. He's going up through the metatarsal. He's going up through the outside of the leg. And uh through the outside of the leg. And uh through the outside of the leg. And uh you know I pulled the teacher out and I you know I pulled the teacher out and I you know I pulled the teacher out and I said, "You know that kid's phenomenally said, "You know that kid's phenomenally said, "You know that kid's phenomenally talented." And he said, "Yeah, we know." Uh, and he And he said, "Yeah, we know." Uh, and he And he said, "Yeah, we know." Uh, and he said, "But he's pronated." He said, "We said, "But he's pronated." He said, "We said, "But he's pronated." He said, "We know that, too, but we have eight other know that, too, but we have eight other know that, too, but we have eight other ones." Like, we if he doesn't figure ones." Like, we if he doesn't figure ones." Like, we if he doesn't figure that out, he's out and we'll bring in that out, he's out and we'll bring in that out, he's out and we'll bring in another one. And this can be the another one. And this can be the another one. And this can be the difference between a child who grows difference between a child who grows difference between a child who grows into an adult with a career and a life into an adult with a career and a life into an adult with a career and a life and one who's lost. So, parents are very and one who's lost. So, parents are very and one who's lost. So, parents are very protective of trying to get this protective of trying to get this protective of trying to get this opportunity for their kids. And it's opportunity for their kids. And it's opportunity for their kids. And it's heartbreaking. And the way they are heartbreaking. And the way they are heartbreaking. And the way they are trained is they are wrenched into these trained is they are wrenched into these trained is they are wrenched into these positions. And I saw in an older class positions. And I saw in an older class positions. And I saw in an older class of young girls uh an arabesque and one of young girls uh an arabesque and one of young girls uh an arabesque and one leg was not slightly behind. The teacher leg was not slightly behind. The teacher leg was not slightly behind. The teacher came and literally pinned the leg behind came and literally pinned the leg behind came and literally pinned the leg behind with one arm and drew the shoulder out with one arm and drew the shoulder out with one arm and drew the shoulder out this way. Literally pushed her and then this way. Literally pushed her and then this way. Literally pushed her and then released her. And that's how they teach. released her. And that's how they teach. released her. And that's how they teach. You think that's going to happen in You think that's going to happen in You think that's going to happen in America? I don't think so. And that's America? I don't think so. And that's America? I don't think so. And that's what it takes to create a line of people what it takes to create a line of people what it takes to create a line of people who at the bar hit exactly the same who at the bar hit exactly the same who at the bar hit exactly the same arabesque. It's both a thing of extraordinary It's both a thing of extraordinary It's both a thing of extraordinary beauty and a thing of incredible beauty and a thing of incredible beauty and a thing of incredible lack of choice because that arabesque is lack of choice because that arabesque is lack of choice because that arabesque is going to be set for life in that one going to be set for life in that one going to be set for life in that one angular demarcation, right? And you angular demarcation, right? And you angular demarcation, right? And you know, heaven knows here in the west we know, heaven knows here in the west we know, heaven knows here in the west we like to encourage all kinds of like to encourage all kinds of like to encourage all kinds of wanderings around which is hard to get wanderings around which is hard to get wanderings around which is hard to get through the head of a child who's been through the head of a child who's been through the head of a child who's been trained in this way to stay within those trained in this way to stay within those trained in this way to stay within those parameters. And it says something also parameters. And it says something also parameters. And it says something also obviously about the political situation, obviously about the political situation, obviously about the political situation, right? Those kids don't have a lot of right? Those kids don't have a lot of right? Those kids don't have a lot of choice. They tow the line. choice. They tow the line. choice. They tow the line. &gt;&gt; So is the goal to get that uniformity? &gt;&gt; So is the goal to get that uniformity? &gt;&gt; So is the goal to get that uniformity? &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Uh and it's a I mean for &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Uh and it's a I mean for &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Uh and it's a I mean for a person who works sometimes to what's a person who works sometimes to what's a person who works sometimes to what's called unison, there are times when you called unison, there are times when you called unison, there are times when you want I don't do it that often. It's a want I don't do it that often. It's a want I don't do it that often. It's a lot of work and I don't like what it lot of work and I don't like what it lot of work and I don't like what it says about democracy. But if you need to says about democracy. But if you need to says about democracy. But if you need to have unison, you want unison and that have unison, you want unison and that have unison, you want unison and that means an exact agreement on time and means an exact agreement on time and means an exact agreement on time and space. Now your other question about space. Now your other question about space. Now your other question about what about different body types and so what about different body types and so what about different body types and so forth. I can accommodate that uh because forth. I can accommodate that uh because forth. I can accommodate that uh because I can gain my unison from the center. I can gain my unison from the center. I can gain my unison from the center. What we're talking about the ballet here What we're talking about the ballet here What we're talking about the ballet here it gains it from the periphery from the it gains it from the periphery from the it gains it from the periphery from the exterior point from the broad reach. exterior point from the broad reach. exterior point from the broad reach. I'll accept my broad reach is not going I'll accept my broad reach is not going I'll accept my broad reach is not going to be actually in uniform but my center to be actually in uniform but my center to be actually in uniform but my center is going to be and I'll make that comp. is going to be and I'll make that comp. is going to be and I'll make that comp. It's a compromise of sorts. It's not It's a compromise of sorts. It's not It's a compromise of sorts. It's not really a compromise. It's an agreement. really a compromise. It's an agreement. really a compromise. It's an agreement. I'll make that definition because I want I'll make that definition because I want I'll make that definition because I want them to work from an interior purpose them to work from an interior purpose them to work from an interior purpose and the visuals of it are your problem. and the visuals of it are your problem. and the visuals of it are your problem. &gt;&gt; By now, I'm sure that many of you have &gt;&gt; By now, I'm sure that many of you have &gt;&gt; By now, I'm sure that many of you have heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 heard me say that I've been taking AG1 for more than a decade. And indeed, for more than a decade. And indeed, for more than a decade. And indeed, that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking that's true. The reason I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why AG1 way back in 2012, and the reason why I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single I still continue to take it every single day, is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day, is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, day, is because AG1 is, to my knowledge, the highest quality and most the highest quality and most the highest quality and most comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational comprehensive of the foundational nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. nutritional supplements on the market. What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not What that means is that it contains not just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also just vitamins and minerals, but also probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens probiotics, prebiotics, and adaptogens to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in to cover any gaps that you might have in your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support your diet while also providing support for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the for a demanding life. Given the probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it probiotics and prebiotics in AG1, it also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut also helps support a healthy gut microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists microbiome. The gut microbiome consists of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms of trillions of little microorganisms that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune impact things such as your immune status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your status, your metabolic health, your hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking hormone health, and much more. Taking AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, AG1 consistently helps my digestion, keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it keeps my immune system strong, and it ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus ensures that my mood and mental focus are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now are always at their best. AG1 is now available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, available in three new flavors: berry, citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've citrus, and tropical. And while I've always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, always loved the AG1 original flavor, especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice especially with a bit of lemon juice added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry added, I'm really enjoying the new berry flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. flavor in particular. It tastes great. But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the But then again, I do love all the flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and flavors. If you'd like to try AG1 and try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to try these new flavors, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Just go to claim a special offer. Just go to claim a special offer. Just go to drinkag1.com/huberman to get started. I'm going to ask a to get started. I'm going to ask a to get started. I'm going to ask a couple of questions in the frame of couple of questions in the frame of couple of questions in the frame of biology. &gt;&gt; Okay, &gt;&gt; Okay, &gt;&gt; Okay, &gt;&gt; that I think um I'm hoping you might &gt;&gt; that I think um I'm hoping you might &gt;&gt; that I think um I'm hoping you might find interesting, but I you certainly find interesting, but I you certainly find interesting, but I you certainly have the information that I'm seeking have the information that I'm seeking have the information that I'm seeking here. First off, uh you may know this uh but First off, uh you may know this uh but First off, uh you may know this uh but if you don't, there's a great Nobel if you don't, there's a great Nobel if you don't, there's a great Nobel Prizewinning physiologist, his name was Prizewinning physiologist, his name was Prizewinning physiologist, his name was Sharington, and he said the final common Sharington, and he said the final common Sharington, and he said the final common path is movement. That basically the path is movement. That basically the path is movement. That basically the movement of an organism, especially movement of an organism, especially movement of an organism, especially mammals, is really what the nervous mammals, is really what the nervous mammals, is really what the nervous system is constructed for. And you know system is constructed for. And you know system is constructed for. And you know more modern theories are that you know more modern theories are that you know more modern theories are that you know movement came and dance came then song movement came and dance came then song movement came and dance came then song then language you know but that then language you know but that then language you know but that movement is the foundation of movement is the foundation of movement is the foundation of everything as it relates to evolution of a species as it relates to evolution of a species as it relates to evolution of a species finding mates finding food. finding mates finding food. finding mates finding food. &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you &gt;&gt; Can I interrupt you &gt;&gt; please? It is even more basic because &gt;&gt; please? It is even more basic because &gt;&gt; please? It is even more basic because movement is the first thing we're going movement is the first thing we're going movement is the first thing we're going to do. And you don't make any sound to do. And you don't make any sound to do. And you don't make any sound until you can move parts of you. You until you can move parts of you. You until you can move parts of you. You don't feed yourself until you can move don't feed yourself until you can move don't feed yourself until you can move that hand. You don't write anything, that hand. You don't write anything, that hand. You don't write anything, language, music or nada without language, music or nada without language, music or nada without movement. Why do we therefore stick movement. Why do we therefore stick movement. Why do we therefore stick movement way down here under the bottom movement way down here under the bottom movement way down here under the bottom of our cultural heap as somehow shameful of our cultural heap as somehow shameful of our cultural heap as somehow shameful or what? What is it with the aspect of or what? What is it with the aspect of or what? What is it with the aspect of dance that makes it a less kind of dance that makes it a less kind of dance that makes it a less kind of revered format than sculpture or revered format than sculpture or revered format than sculpture or painting or music? A secondary painting or music? A secondary painting or music? A secondary handmaiden to the arts really. handmaiden to the arts really. handmaiden to the arts really. &gt;&gt; Well, I certainly appreciate movement &gt;&gt; Well, I certainly appreciate movement &gt;&gt; Well, I certainly appreciate movement and I know that um and I like to think and I know that um and I like to think and I know that um and I like to think that people's obsession with athleticism that people's obsession with athleticism that people's obsession with athleticism in some sense reflects that too. in some sense reflects that too. in some sense reflects that too. &gt;&gt; Totally. I've been wanting to ask you &gt;&gt; Totally. I've been wanting to ask you &gt;&gt; Totally. I've been wanting to ask you this question for a very long time uh this question for a very long time uh this question for a very long time uh since I heard your book even though it's since I heard your book even though it's since I heard your book even though it's not about the creative process and not about the creative process and not about the creative process and here goes here goes here goes uh I'm going to keep this as brief as uh I'm going to keep this as brief as uh I'm going to keep this as brief as possible um just to give the raw possible um just to give the raw possible um just to give the raw materials for your uh response. So materials for your uh response. So materials for your uh response. So the motor neurons, the neurons that the motor neurons, the neurons that the motor neurons, the neurons that control movement, uh they control movement, uh they control movement, uh they control movement of the trunk, they control movement of the trunk, they control movement of the trunk, they control movement of the fine digits of the movement of the fine digits of the movement of the fine digits of the fingers that are the fingers, the digits fingers that are the fingers, the digits fingers that are the fingers, the digits as we call them in science, right? Nerds as we call them in science, right? Nerds as we call them in science, right? Nerds speak, the wrists, everything. So we say speak, the wrists, everything. So we say speak, the wrists, everything. So we say from proximal to distal like from center from proximal to distal like from center from proximal to distal like from center out there's this incredible thing that's out there's this incredible thing that's out there's this incredible thing that's been discovered over the last 20 years been discovered over the last 20 years been discovered over the last 20 years or so which is that the molecular or so which is that the molecular or so which is that the molecular identities of the neurons that control identities of the neurons that control identities of the neurons that control the movement of my trunk and your trunk the movement of my trunk and your trunk the movement of my trunk and your trunk forward and back and side to side are forward and back and side to side are forward and back and side to side are exactly the same as the neurons that exactly the same as the neurons that exactly the same as the neurons that control undulation in a fish. control undulation in a fish. control undulation in a fish. The neurons that control the movement of The neurons that control the movement of The neurons that control the movement of the proximal limbs, like the upper arms the proximal limbs, like the upper arms the proximal limbs, like the upper arms and the thighs, and the thighs, and the thighs, are molecularly identical are molecularly identical are molecularly identical to the neurons that exist to control fin to the neurons that exist to control fin to the neurons that exist to control fin movement in fish. And that what evolved movement in fish. And that what evolved movement in fish. And that what evolved was progressively more and more motor was progressively more and more motor was progressively more and more motor neurons so that we as old world primates neurons so that we as old world primates neurons so that we as old world primates can manipulate the fine digits in like can manipulate the fine digits in like can manipulate the fine digits in like so. Okay, so that's fine. And that just so. Okay, so that's fine. And that just so. Okay, so that's fine. And that just tells you that there's this kind of tells you that there's this kind of tells you that there's this kind of primitive to more evolved structure of primitive to more evolved structure of primitive to more evolved structure of neurons that control movement from neurons that control movement from neurons that control movement from center up. center up. center up. What's fascinating to me is that while What's fascinating to me is that while What's fascinating to me is that while I'm sure there are people who can move I'm sure there are people who can move I'm sure there are people who can move their trunk at very high frequency, you their trunk at very high frequency, you their trunk at very high frequency, you know, undulate very high frequency, know, undulate very high frequency, know, undulate very high frequency, that's a hard thing to do. That that that's a hard thing to do. That that that's a hard thing to do. That that generally has to be learned. Like I can generally has to be learned. Like I can generally has to be learned. Like I can move my trunk slowly from side to side, move my trunk slowly from side to side, move my trunk slowly from side to side, but it's hard to move it very fast from but it's hard to move it very fast from but it's hard to move it very fast from side to side, but I can move my fingers side to side, but I can move my fingers side to side, but I can move my fingers very fast. And so there's very fast. And so there's very fast. And so there's basically a frequency map basically a frequency map basically a frequency map from the center out on the body. So now from the center out on the body. So now from the center out on the body. So now when I look at the way people move I when I look at the way people move I when I look at the way people move I think because I'm a neuroscientist and I think because I'm a neuroscientist and I think because I'm a neuroscientist and I have this knowledge in my head like have this knowledge in my head like have this knowledge in my head like they're communicating frequency they're communicating frequency they're communicating frequency and frequency in the visual in photon and frequency in the visual in photon and frequency in the visual in photon space gives you very interesting you space gives you very interesting you space gives you very interesting you know wave we have wavelength we have know wave we have wavelength we have know wave we have wavelength we have also frequency like we in sound you also frequency like we in sound you also frequency like we in sound you have high low and high pitches low to have high low and high pitches low to have high low and high pitches low to high pitch and in other domains you also high pitch and in other domains you also high pitch and in other domains you also have this and so to me first of all I'd have this and so to me first of all I'd have this and so to me first of all I'd love your thoughts on this. I'm not I'm love your thoughts on this. I'm not I'm love your thoughts on this. I'm not I'm not asking for validation of a theory. not asking for validation of a theory. not asking for validation of a theory. This is just is what it is. I didn't This is just is what it is. I didn't This is just is what it is. I didn't come up with this. But I wonder whether come up with this. But I wonder whether come up with this. But I wonder whether or not consciously or unconsciously when or not consciously or unconsciously when or not consciously or unconsciously when you've choreographed dance, whether or you've choreographed dance, whether or you've choreographed dance, whether or not you're making music with movement in not you're making music with movement in not you're making music with movement in a way that maps on to this idea of a way that maps on to this idea of a way that maps on to this idea of a frequency map from center out. Maybe in frequency map from center out. Maybe in frequency map from center out. Maybe in part, no. Sweetness, my love. Did we not part, no. Sweetness, my love. Did we not part, no. Sweetness, my love. Did we not discuss already much earlier the discuss already much earlier the discuss already much earlier the importance and um specifity specificity importance and um specifity specificity importance and um specifity specificity of center. of center. of center. Now what you're saying about the Now what you're saying about the Now what you're saying about the different rates of the different rates of the different rates of the tendrils, the neurons, the cellular tendrils, the neurons, the cellular tendrils, the neurons, the cellular &gt;&gt; Yeah. the neurons that control the &gt;&gt; Yeah. the neurons that control the &gt;&gt; Yeah. the neurons that control the trunk versus the upper arms versus the trunk versus the upper arms versus the trunk versus the upper arms versus the &gt;&gt; Yeah. that this is this is got more &gt;&gt; Yeah. that this is this is got more &gt;&gt; Yeah. that this is this is got more uh choice can make more choice than this uh choice can make more choice than this uh choice can make more choice than this can make. Mhm. can make. Mhm. can make. Mhm. &gt;&gt; Do I think about the parts of the body &gt;&gt; Do I think about the parts of the body &gt;&gt; Do I think about the parts of the body as sometimes in other words the legs can as sometimes in other words the legs can as sometimes in other words the legs can be working at one rate of speed say half be working at one rate of speed say half be working at one rate of speed say half time of what the uh the arm is doing and time of what the uh the arm is doing and time of what the uh the arm is doing and they'll be on the same metronomic base they'll be on the same metronomic base they'll be on the same metronomic base but they'll be operating at a different but they'll be operating at a different but they'll be operating at a different speed certainly I would think of that uh speed certainly I would think of that uh speed certainly I would think of that uh what I think about power uh that what I think about power uh that what I think about power uh that sometimes uh you can isolate through the sometimes uh you can isolate through the sometimes uh you can isolate through the center and there'll be like a huge center and there'll be like a huge center and there'll be like a huge impact from the top but that the body impact from the top but that the body impact from the top but that the body the lower body will be fluid sometimes. the lower body will be fluid sometimes. the lower body will be fluid sometimes. I mean, I've ripped off Tai Chi forever. I mean, I've ripped off Tai Chi forever. I mean, I've ripped off Tai Chi forever. It's okay. Uh, so we're doing Taichi and It's okay. Uh, so we're doing Taichi and It's okay. Uh, so we're doing Taichi and suddenly and then we're back into it, right? Uh, and then we're back into it, right? Uh, and then we're back into it, right? Uh, so it's like just like a jolt goes so it's like just like a jolt goes so it's like just like a jolt goes through it and I suppose that's a change through it and I suppose that's a change through it and I suppose that's a change in your neurological construct. I mean, in your neurological construct. I mean, in your neurological construct. I mean, what interests me in what you're saying what interests me in what you're saying what interests me in what you're saying is a part of the nightmare of my life, is a part of the nightmare of my life, is a part of the nightmare of my life, which is dance has difficulty. And one which is dance has difficulty. And one which is dance has difficulty. And one of the reasons it has difficulty in of the reasons it has difficulty in of the reasons it has difficulty in being registered by many people in our being registered by many people in our being registered by many people in our culture is that it doesn't have easy culture is that it doesn't have easy culture is that it doesn't have easy access to being documented and recorded access to being documented and recorded access to being documented and recorded in the way that music does or language in the way that music does or language in the way that music does or language does. What you're saying, I've argued does. What you're saying, I've argued does. What you're saying, I've argued for many years, should be a way of for many years, should be a way of for many years, should be a way of documenting movement that people could documenting movement that people could documenting movement that people could read and then they could read the dance read and then they could read the dance read and then they could read the dance and then they would feel grounded in and then they would feel grounded in and then they would feel grounded in that tradition and understanding of that tradition and understanding of that tradition and understanding of that tradition. They could under they could tradition. They could under they could tradition. They could under they could study that tradition. That's not now study that tradition. That's not now study that tradition. That's not now possible. I'd like to talk about the possible. I'd like to talk about the possible. I'd like to talk about the creative process a bit in a way that creative process a bit in a way that creative process a bit in a way that perhaps people can, you know, structure perhaps people can, you know, structure perhaps people can, you know, structure uh some of their own creative pursuits. uh some of their own creative pursuits. uh some of their own creative pursuits. At what point do you know the spine? At what point do you know the spine? At what point do you know the spine? &gt;&gt; The beginning and the end. &gt;&gt; The beginning and the end. &gt;&gt; The beginning and the end. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. What do I mean? In the beginning, &gt;&gt; Okay. What do I mean? In the beginning, &gt;&gt; Okay. What do I mean? In the beginning, uh you hope for it. Uh and you have a uh you hope for it. Uh and you have a uh you hope for it. Uh and you have a little taste of it or you wouldn't be little taste of it or you wouldn't be little taste of it or you wouldn't be able to I wouldn't be able to start uh able to I wouldn't be able to start uh able to I wouldn't be able to start uh without the tiniest little indication without the tiniest little indication without the tiniest little indication there's something there that's actually there's something there that's actually there's something there that's actually going to hook in. And that's going to going to hook in. And that's going to going to hook in. And that's going to allow me to start building. And this is allow me to start building. And this is allow me to start building. And this is where process becomes very reassuring. where process becomes very reassuring. where process becomes very reassuring. You start building the wall. You're just You start building the wall. You're just You start building the wall. You're just mixing the mortar and putting the brick mixing the mortar and putting the brick mixing the mortar and putting the brick in. Mixing the mortar, putting the and in. Mixing the mortar, putting the and in. Mixing the mortar, putting the and the wall grows and it develops all of the wall grows and it develops all of the wall grows and it develops all of this stuff happening and you're just this stuff happening and you're just this stuff happening and you're just doing the mortar and the brick and it's doing the mortar and the brick and it's doing the mortar and the brick and it's very not menacing and extraordinarily very not menacing and extraordinarily very not menacing and extraordinarily rewarding in the place you want to live. rewarding in the place you want to live. rewarding in the place you want to live. But you can't because you got to finish But you can't because you got to finish But you can't because you got to finish the work and let it go. a dismal moment. the work and let it go. a dismal moment. the work and let it go. a dismal moment. &gt;&gt; Maybe we put this into example. Let's &gt;&gt; Maybe we put this into example. Let's &gt;&gt; Maybe we put this into example. Let's say I want to write a short story. say I want to write a short story. say I want to write a short story. I realize you're a choreographer, not a I realize you're a choreographer, not a I realize you're a choreographer, not a writing instructor, but we say like writing instructor, but we say like writing instructor, but we say like what's the would you say? And then you what's the would you say? And then you what's the would you say? And then you say, well, someone says that they want say, well, someone says that they want say, well, someone says that they want to write stories or books. So, what's to write stories or books. So, what's to write stories or books. So, what's the spine? the spine? the spine? &gt;&gt; The first thing is what's the idea? The &gt;&gt; The first thing is what's the idea? The &gt;&gt; The first thing is what's the idea? The first thing is where is the first thing is where is the first thing is where is the where's the story? I mean, some writers where's the story? I mean, some writers where's the story? I mean, some writers have to know the end before they can have to know the end before they can have to know the end before they can start at the beginning. Others want start at the beginning. Others want start at the beginning. Others want nothing to do with the end until they've nothing to do with the end until they've nothing to do with the end until they've at least reached the middle because they at least reached the middle because they at least reached the middle because they want the work to find itself. Uh that want the work to find itself. Uh that want the work to find itself. Uh that all is, you know, that's a part of the all is, you know, that's a part of the all is, you know, that's a part of the privilege of being a writer and the pain privilege of being a writer and the pain privilege of being a writer and the pain of being a writer. Um but the uh of being a writer. Um but the uh of being a writer. Um but the uh construct of starting sometimes it's construct of starting sometimes it's construct of starting sometimes it's simply habit and discipline. Um, and uh simply habit and discipline. Um, and uh simply habit and discipline. Um, and uh you are going to go in and you are going you are going to go in and you are going you are going to go in and you are going to start at let's say 6:45 every morning to start at let's say 6:45 every morning to start at let's say 6:45 every morning and you're going to give yourself you've and you're going to give yourself you've and you're going to give yourself you've only got an hour and a half. Okay? I'm only got an hour and a half. Okay? I'm only got an hour and a half. Okay? I'm not talking about you're a professional not talking about you're a professional not talking about you're a professional writer. I'm talking about you're a writer. I'm talking about you're a writer. I'm talking about you're a person uh who maybe wants to become a person uh who maybe wants to become a person uh who maybe wants to become a professional writer but who's got at professional writer but who's got at professional writer but who's got at least one other job and maybe two and least one other job and maybe two and least one other job and maybe two and probably a kid to deal with. An hour and probably a kid to deal with. An hour and probably a kid to deal with. An hour and a half is a lot of time for in that a half is a lot of time for in that a half is a lot of time for in that life. So starting you got to start with life. So starting you got to start with life. So starting you got to start with something and either there's an idea something and either there's an idea something and either there's an idea that you're that you really are uh that you're that you really are uh that you're that you really are uh energized by or just you know you start energized by or just you know you start energized by or just you know you start writing something gets something on the writing something gets something on the writing something gets something on the page and bit by bit it becomes a habit page and bit by bit it becomes a habit page and bit by bit it becomes a habit and maybe that habit evolves and maybe and maybe that habit evolves and maybe and maybe that habit evolves and maybe it doesn't and maybe you give it up and it doesn't and maybe you give it up and it doesn't and maybe you give it up and maybe you find that you then you get an maybe you find that you then you get an maybe you find that you then you get an idea you find something you keep idea you find something you keep idea you find something you keep returning to and it pulls fles you. It returning to and it pulls fles you. It returning to and it pulls fles you. It hypnotizes you. Uh it makes you want It hypnotizes you. Uh it makes you want It hypnotizes you. Uh it makes you want to follow it, see where it will go to, to follow it, see where it will go to, to follow it, see where it will go to, see how it will develop and then at a see how it will develop and then at a see how it will develop and then at a certain point it's done. It's it's certain point it's done. It's it's certain point it's done. It's it's played out. Uh maybe you can guide that played out. Uh maybe you can guide that played out. Uh maybe you can guide that so that it becomes more exciting and you so that it becomes more exciting and you so that it becomes more exciting and you learn how to build as you're going along learn how to build as you're going along learn how to build as you're going along and you learn how to direct it so that and you learn how to direct it so that and you learn how to direct it so that it's going to get to either a surprising it's going to get to either a surprising it's going to get to either a surprising end where it has to end and the reader end where it has to end and the reader end where it has to end and the reader is going to say, "I should have seen is going to say, "I should have seen is going to say, "I should have seen that." or you're going to say, "I should that." or you're going to say, "I should that." or you're going to say, "I should have seen that." Or you're going to go, have seen that." Or you're going to go, have seen that." Or you're going to go, "No way. You're a liar. I'm not going to "No way. You're a liar. I'm not going to "No way. You're a liar. I'm not going to buy this book." buy this book." buy this book." &gt;&gt; But the showing up at 6:45 consistently &gt;&gt; But the showing up at 6:45 consistently &gt;&gt; But the showing up at 6:45 consistently is the is the is the brick laying is the is the is the brick laying is the is the is the brick laying that's essential. that's essential. that's essential. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because it allows you to think &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because it allows you to think &gt;&gt; Yeah. Because it allows you to think that you could be a writer. that you could be a writer. that you could be a writer. &gt;&gt; Sort of living into a delusion that &gt;&gt; Sort of living into a delusion that &gt;&gt; Sort of living into a delusion that could be a reality. could be a reality. could be a reality. &gt;&gt; Could be. &gt;&gt; Could be. &gt;&gt; Could be. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And maybe it's not a delusion because And maybe it's not a delusion because And maybe it's not a delusion because maybe what you start to write maybe what you start to write maybe what you start to write immediately is a very interesting immediately is a very interesting immediately is a very interesting sentence or two. sentence or two. sentence or two. &gt;&gt; Some days maybe &gt;&gt; Some days maybe &gt;&gt; Some days maybe &gt;&gt; some days. Yeah. You can't expect a good &gt;&gt; some days. Yeah. You can't expect a good &gt;&gt; some days. Yeah. You can't expect a good time every day. time every day. time every day. &gt;&gt; You might want to quote me on that. &gt;&gt; You might want to quote me on that. &gt;&gt; You might want to quote me on that. You have a reputation for having uh You have a reputation for having uh You have a reputation for having uh risen early and gotten to the gym by risen early and gotten to the gym by risen early and gotten to the gym by 5:00 a.m. for two hours, eating three 5:00 a.m. for two hours, eating three 5:00 a.m. for two hours, eating three hard-boiled eggs postworkout, day in hard-boiled eggs postworkout, day in hard-boiled eggs postworkout, day in after day out for a very long time. Uh after day out for a very long time. Uh after day out for a very long time. Uh tell us about that ritual and uh do you tell us about that ritual and uh do you tell us about that ritual and uh do you still enjoy it? still enjoy it? still enjoy it? &gt;&gt; It's not a ritual and I never enjoyed &gt;&gt; It's not a ritual and I never enjoyed &gt;&gt; It's not a ritual and I never enjoyed it. It's a reality and uh you do it it. It's a reality and uh you do it it. It's a reality and uh you do it because you need an instrument that you because you need an instrument that you because you need an instrument that you can challenge and in order to challenge can challenge and in order to challenge can challenge and in order to challenge something you got to know how it stands. something you got to know how it stands. something you got to know how it stands. I mean I could challenge you wouldn't I mean I could challenge you wouldn't I mean I could challenge you wouldn't want me to the centering of this but I want me to the centering of this but I want me to the centering of this but I can only do it if it's already grounded can only do it if it's already grounded can only do it if it's already grounded then I can try to throw it off. You then I can try to throw it off. You then I can try to throw it off. You can't just throw things off. They've got can't just throw things off. They've got can't just throw things off. They've got to be set before you can throw them off. to be set before you can throw them off. to be set before you can throw them off. Right? So that is you just set the Right? So that is you just set the Right? So that is you just set the mechanism for the day you're going to mechanism for the day you're going to mechanism for the day you're going to have to do it. have to do it. have to do it. It's kind of boring and it's kind of It's kind of boring and it's kind of It's kind of boring and it's kind of lonesome. I would rather go to the gym lonesome. I would rather go to the gym lonesome. I would rather go to the gym than brush my teeth. I'll tell you that. than brush my teeth. I'll tell you that. than brush my teeth. I'll tell you that. &gt;&gt; Could you give us a bit of insight into &gt;&gt; Could you give us a bit of insight into &gt;&gt; Could you give us a bit of insight into your inner dialogue around days when you your inner dialogue around days when you your inner dialogue around days when you don't want to go? Is there a selft talk don't want to go? Is there a selft talk don't want to go? Is there a selft talk or have you learned to push aside the or have you learned to push aside the or have you learned to push aside the voice that says maybe not today? the voice that says maybe not today? the voice that says maybe not today? &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, no, no. Uh it's simple. If &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, no, no. Uh it's simple. If &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, no, no. Uh it's simple. If you don't work when you don't want to you don't work when you don't want to you don't work when you don't want to work, you're not going to be able to work, you're not going to be able to work, you're not going to be able to work when you do want to work. work when you do want to work. work when you do want to work. End of story. End of story. End of story. &gt;&gt; Were you always like this? &gt;&gt; Were you always like this? &gt;&gt; Were you always like this? &gt;&gt; What do you mean like this? &gt;&gt; What do you mean like this? &gt;&gt; What do you mean like this? &gt;&gt; I didn't [laughter] mean that in that &gt;&gt; I didn't [laughter] mean that in that &gt;&gt; I didn't [laughter] mean that in that sense. And you know, I didn't. sense. And you know, I didn't. sense. And you know, I didn't. &gt;&gt; I don't. &gt;&gt; I don't. &gt;&gt; I don't. &gt;&gt; You know, I didn't. You know, I didn't. &gt;&gt; You know, I didn't. You know, I didn't. &gt;&gt; You know, I didn't. You know, I didn't. I meant were have you always been this I meant were have you always been this I meant were have you always been this disciplined and had this uh this clear disciplined and had this uh this clear disciplined and had this uh this clear view of the necessity for hard work. view of the necessity for hard work. view of the necessity for hard work. &gt;&gt; My mother was an extraordinary force in &gt;&gt; My mother was an extraordinary force in &gt;&gt; My mother was an extraordinary force in anybody's life. She happened to be in anybody's life. She happened to be in anybody's life. She happened to be in mine. Okay. I was trained as a very mine. Okay. I was trained as a very mine. Okay. I was trained as a very young child to practice. young child to practice. young child to practice. Uh whether anything everything had to be Uh whether anything everything had to be Uh whether anything everything had to be practiced. It had to be scheduled to be practiced. It had to be scheduled to be practiced. It had to be scheduled to be practiced and time is limited and you practiced and time is limited and you practiced and time is limited and you don't waste it and you work very hard don't waste it and you work very hard don't waste it and you work very hard and you try to maximize that period of and you try to maximize that period of and you try to maximize that period of time because otherwise you're being time because otherwise you're being time because otherwise you're being wasteful. And while I said I'm from San wasteful. And while I said I'm from San wasteful. And while I said I'm from San Burdue, I am, but I'm not. I am from the Burdue, I am, but I'm not. I am from the Burdue, I am, but I'm not. I am from the Midwest. I was born in Indiana um and Midwest. I was born in Indiana um and Midwest. I was born in Indiana um and left when I was eight. Uh but up until left when I was eight. Uh but up until left when I was eight. Uh but up until that point I had the extraordinary good that point I had the extraordinary good that point I had the extraordinary good fortune of being on my grandparents' fortune of being on my grandparents' fortune of being on my grandparents' farm uh for long stretches of time farm uh for long stretches of time farm uh for long stretches of time without my parents and these farms were without my parents and these farms were without my parents and these farms were in uh Amish territory and the family's in uh Amish territory and the family's in uh Amish territory and the family's Quaker and the land was the land period. Quaker and the land was the land period. Quaker and the land was the land period. There was no electricity. There were no There was no electricity. There were no There was no electricity. There were no phones. There was plant the seed, grow phones. There was plant the seed, grow phones. There was plant the seed, grow the seed, kill the hogs, ring the check the seed, kill the hogs, ring the check the seed, kill the hogs, ring the check chicken's neck, and you work or you chicken's neck, and you work or you chicken's neck, and you work or you don't eat. Yeah. The Midwest sensibility don't eat. Yeah. The Midwest sensibility don't eat. Yeah. The Midwest sensibility is something to behold. I have a lot of is something to behold. I have a lot of is something to behold. I have a lot of friends from the Midwest. There's a real friends from the Midwest. There's a real friends from the Midwest. There's a real decency out there in terms of how people decency out there in terms of how people decency out there in terms of how people communicate with one another, who they communicate with one another, who they communicate with one another, who they do and don't know. And there's a real do and don't know. And there's a real do and don't know. And there's a real thing to farmers. at Stanford uh when I thing to farmers. at Stanford uh when I thing to farmers. at Stanford uh when I was a posttock there was a MD PhD was a posttock there was a MD PhD was a posttock there was a MD PhD student in the laboratory she had grown student in the laboratory she had grown student in the laboratory she had grown up on a mushroom farm not the psilocybin up on a mushroom farm not the psilocybin up on a mushroom farm not the psilocybin mushrooms the kind you eat and don't mushrooms the kind you eat and don't mushrooms the kind you eat and don't hallucinate on a mushroom farm in rural hallucinate on a mushroom farm in rural hallucinate on a mushroom farm in rural Pennsylvania and her work ethic and this Pennsylvania and her work ethic and this Pennsylvania and her work ethic and this is at Stanford school of medicine where is at Stanford school of medicine where is at Stanford school of medicine where people are very driven not just on people are very driven not just on people are very driven not just on average but average but average but &gt;&gt; her work ethic was unbelievable &gt;&gt; her work ethic was unbelievable &gt;&gt; her work ethic was unbelievable &gt;&gt; and her cheerfulness about it was also &gt;&gt; and her cheerfulness about it was also &gt;&gt; and her cheerfulness about it was also unbelievable. &gt;&gt; It was spectacular. &gt;&gt; It was spectacular. &gt;&gt; It was spectacular. &gt;&gt; The delight in fact. &gt;&gt; The delight in fact. &gt;&gt; The delight in fact. &gt;&gt; Yeah. She had a bike accident on a few &gt;&gt; Yeah. She had a bike accident on a few &gt;&gt; Yeah. She had a bike accident on a few people will know who this is. She had a people will know who this is. She had a people will know who this is. She had a horrible bike accident on campus. horrible bike accident on campus. horrible bike accident on campus. Knocked out all her teeth. Someone had Knocked out all her teeth. Someone had Knocked out all her teeth. Someone had stepped out in front of her with at stepped out in front of her with at stepped out in front of her with at &gt;&gt; she was back in the laboratory with &gt;&gt; she was back in the laboratory with &gt;&gt; she was back in the laboratory with falsies in and working. I think within falsies in and working. I think within falsies in and working. I think within like 48 hours. This would have put like 48 hours. This would have put like 48 hours. This would have put anyone else out for a much longer time. anyone else out for a much longer time. anyone else out for a much longer time. I haven't kept up with her, but I'm sure I haven't kept up with her, but I'm sure I haven't kept up with her, but I'm sure that she's a spectacular physician uh that she's a spectacular physician uh that she's a spectacular physician uh scientist wherever she is. But there's scientist wherever she is. But there's scientist wherever she is. But there's really something to the farming really something to the farming really something to the farming piece. &gt;&gt; It is communal and it is the sense that &gt;&gt; It is communal and it is the sense that &gt;&gt; It is communal and it is the sense that while these farms are very isolated, I while these farms are very isolated, I while these farms are very isolated, I mean, you know, 100 acre plots that are mean, you know, 100 acre plots that are mean, you know, 100 acre plots that are divided by tree barriers from one divided by tree barriers from one divided by tree barriers from one another, uh [clears throat] that another, uh [clears throat] that another, uh [clears throat] that somebody has your back all the time. I somebody has your back all the time. I somebody has your back all the time. I still have my grandmother's quilting still have my grandmother's quilting still have my grandmother's quilting frames and the they uh when established frames and the they uh when established frames and the they uh when established it require eight women, a four to a side it require eight women, a four to a side it require eight women, a four to a side and the quilt gets done and then you and the quilt gets done and then you and the quilt gets done and then you make eight of them and each one gets a make eight of them and each one gets a make eight of them and each one gets a quilt. Uh and you know that to do quilt. Uh and you know that to do quilt. Uh and you know that to do the big job, the barn that's got to get the big job, the barn that's got to get the big job, the barn that's got to get up, you have to utilize forces up, you have to utilize forces up, you have to utilize forces outside yourself uh in order to outside yourself uh in order to outside yourself uh in order to accomplish this. and that you owe you accomplish this. and that you owe you accomplish this. and that you owe you owe them and you want to it it's not an owe them and you want to it it's not an owe them and you want to it it's not an obligation it's a sharing and you obligation it's a sharing and you obligation it's a sharing and you understand okay I'm getting that barn I understand okay I'm getting that barn I understand okay I'm getting that barn I owe services here for seven more barns owe services here for seven more barns owe services here for seven more barns or whatever or whatever or whatever this is an excellent thing this is an excellent thing this is an excellent thing and I do try to think of dance that way and I do try to think of dance that way and I do try to think of dance that way and I do think a well-made dance is a and I do think a well-made dance is a and I do think a well-made dance is a good community good community good community It's society as it ought to be. It's society as it ought to be. It's society as it ought to be. &gt;&gt; It works the way we should work &gt;&gt; It works the way we should work &gt;&gt; It works the way we should work together. &gt;&gt; You mentioned Quaker. &gt;&gt; You mentioned Quaker. &gt;&gt; You mentioned Quaker. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; I've been to a couple Quaker meetings. &gt;&gt; I've been to a couple Quaker meetings. &gt;&gt; I've been to a couple Quaker meetings. &gt;&gt; Silent meetings. &gt;&gt; Silent meetings. &gt;&gt; Silent meetings. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Every once in a while someone &gt;&gt; Yeah. Every once in a while someone &gt;&gt; Yeah. Every once in a while someone would stand up and say something at a would stand up and say something at a would stand up and say something at a friend who was a there's a Quaker house friend who was a there's a Quaker house friend who was a there's a Quaker house near where I used to live when I was near where I used to live when I was near where I used to live when I was finishing my masters and I got became finishing my masters and I got became finishing my masters and I got became friendly with a guy outside because we friendly with a guy outside because we friendly with a guy outside because we would drink coffee the same coffee shop would drink coffee the same coffee shop would drink coffee the same coffee shop and chat and he was like you should come and chat and he was like you should come and chat and he was like you should come to a meeting. You might find it to a meeting. You might find it to a meeting. You might find it interesting. And I knew I was in a interesting. And I knew I was in a interesting. And I knew I was in a benevolent place when I walked in benevolent place when I walked in benevolent place when I walked in because you know in Berkeley, because you know in Berkeley, because you know in Berkeley, California, if somebody says, "Hey, you California, if somebody says, "Hey, you California, if somebody says, "Hey, you should come to a meeting." And you're should come to a meeting." And you're should come to a meeting." And you're like, [laughter] like, you know, like like, [laughter] like, you know, like like, [laughter] like, you know, like you don't know what you're getting into, you don't know what you're getting into, you don't know what you're getting into, right? Um but they had a picture of right? Um but they had a picture of right? Um but they had a picture of the Quaker Oats uh guy on the wall as a the Quaker Oats uh guy on the wall as a the Quaker Oats uh guy on the wall as a joke. I knew like, okay, these they can joke. I knew like, okay, these they can joke. I knew like, okay, these they can poke some fun at themselves. So yeah, poke some fun at themselves. So yeah, poke some fun at themselves. So yeah, someone would stand up every once in a someone would stand up every once in a someone would stand up every once in a while, say something, there was some while, say something, there was some while, say something, there was some reflection, and then at the end, reflection, and then at the end, reflection, and then at the end, everyone kind of like said goodbye and everyone kind of like said goodbye and everyone kind of like said goodbye and took off. It was it was it was took off. It was it was it was took off. It was it was it was interesting. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That those in &gt;&gt; Yeah. That those in &gt;&gt; Yeah. That those in those days for me were Wednesday those days for me were Wednesday those days for me were Wednesday evenings and they were silent meetings evenings and they were silent meetings evenings and they were silent meetings and there would be meetings where no one and there would be meetings where no one and there would be meetings where no one had anyone to say any anything to say. had anyone to say any anything to say. had anyone to say any anything to say. They were silent meetings and simply They were silent meetings and simply They were silent meetings and simply you can help me out here. They were not you can help me out here. They were not you can help me out here. They were not using language, but surely neural rays using language, but surely neural rays using language, but surely neural rays were going out. And probably if there were going out. And probably if there were going out. And probably if there had been a catastrophe in the culture, had been a catastrophe in the culture, had been a catastrophe in the culture, you know, some kind of huge fire or you know, some kind of huge fire or you know, some kind of huge fire or something awful, you know, that people something awful, you know, that people something awful, you know, that people are thinking, you have a sense of what are thinking, you have a sense of what are thinking, you have a sense of what that thinking is. And that there was and that thinking is. And that there was and that thinking is. And that there was and is and can be a kind of nonverbal is and can be a kind of nonverbal is and can be a kind of nonverbal communication. That's not even a communication. That's not even a communication. That's not even a physical. You're not using sign language physical. You're not using sign language physical. You're not using sign language to communicate. Uh but that you have a to communicate. Uh but that you have a to communicate. Uh but that you have a sense of what we called in the day in sense of what we called in the day in sense of what we called in the day in the air. In the air the air. In the air the air. In the air and that is a very powerful form of and that is a very powerful form of and that is a very powerful form of communication that we don't really communication that we don't really communication that we don't really respect anymore. And how potent is it anymore. And how potent is it anymore. And how potent is it neurologically? &gt;&gt; This last year um the podcast series &gt;&gt; This last year um the podcast series &gt;&gt; This last year um the podcast series telepathy tapes was very popular. I telepathy tapes was very popular. I telepathy tapes was very popular. I haven't had a chance to watch it in haven't had a chance to watch it in haven't had a chance to watch it in full. I listened to a little bit of it. full. I listened to a little bit of it. full. I listened to a little bit of it. It's about how kids who are non-verbal It's about how kids who are non-verbal It's about how kids who are non-verbal perhaps can tap into this and it's perhaps can tap into this and it's perhaps can tap into this and it's gotten some criticism from the standard gotten some criticism from the standard gotten some criticism from the standard scientific community, but also less than scientific community, but also less than scientific community, but also less than you would have anticipated if it had all you would have anticipated if it had all you would have anticipated if it had all been complete BS. So, I think there's, been complete BS. So, I think there's, been complete BS. So, I think there's, you know, it's gotten partial you know, it's gotten partial you know, it's gotten partial acceptance there. Um, this brings us acceptance there. Um, this brings us acceptance there. Um, this brings us back to the notion of a center. Believe back to the notion of a center. Believe back to the notion of a center. Believe it or not, fish have lateral lines. They it or not, fish have lateral lines. They it or not, fish have lateral lines. They sense the electrical fields of other sense the electrical fields of other sense the electrical fields of other fish and other things near them. Um, I fish and other things near them. Um, I fish and other things near them. Um, I mean, there's many, many examples from mean, there's many, many examples from mean, there's many, many examples from the animal kingdom of, you know, like the animal kingdom of, you know, like the animal kingdom of, you know, like the platypus with its uh electric it the platypus with its uh electric it the platypus with its uh electric it people call it an electric sensing bill, people call it an electric sensing bill, people call it an electric sensing bill, but it sends out these electrical fields but it sends out these electrical fields but it sends out these electrical fields that then it can detect things in its that then it can detect things in its that then it can detect things in its environment because its vision is very environment because its vision is very environment because its vision is very poor. M poor. M poor. M &gt;&gt; um somebody once said uh Ed Yong the &gt;&gt; um somebody once said uh Ed Yong the &gt;&gt; um somebody once said uh Ed Yong the writer said that so many animals rely on writer said that so many animals rely on writer said that so many animals rely on smell. We sort of smell with our eyes smell. We sort of smell with our eyes smell. We sort of smell with our eyes which sounds crazy but we use our eyes which sounds crazy but we use our eyes which sounds crazy but we use our eyes the way that other animals use their the way that other animals use their the way that other animals use their noses and that gives you an insight into noses and that gives you an insight into noses and that gives you an insight into how they use their noses. But most how they use their noses. But most how they use their noses. But most animals have a sense of how close or far animals have a sense of how close or far animals have a sense of how close or far other members of their species and other members of their species and other members of their species and other things are. We tend not to think about things are. We tend not to think about things are. We tend not to think about that unless you live in a big open space that unless you live in a big open space that unless you live in a big open space and you get on the New York subway and you get on the New York subway and you get on the New York subway and like suddenly you're like, "Whoa, this like suddenly you're like, "Whoa, this like suddenly you're like, "Whoa, this is pretty, you know, this is different." is pretty, you know, this is different." is pretty, you know, this is different." Um, but we have these, we don't really Um, but we have these, we don't really Um, but we have these, we don't really have a lateral line, but we have a lateral line, but we have a lateral line, but we have remnants of things that are similar. remnants of things that are similar. remnants of things that are similar. They're beautiful studies showing that They're beautiful studies showing that They're beautiful studies showing that if you look for in an experimental if you look for in an experimental if you look for in an experimental context magneetto reception in the human context magneetto reception in the human context magneetto reception in the human brain, people perform above chance. In brain, people perform above chance. In brain, people perform above chance. In other words, we can detect magnetic other words, we can detect magnetic other words, we can detect magnetic fields. People are going to think I'm fields. People are going to think I'm fields. People are going to think I'm crazy, but this is published in Science crazy, but this is published in Science crazy, but this is published in Science magazine. Yeah, we can sense electric magazine. Yeah, we can sense electric magazine. Yeah, we can sense electric fields, but we sort of have to train fields, but we sort of have to train fields, but we sort of have to train ourselves to do it. And perhaps some ourselves to do it. And perhaps some ourselves to do it. And perhaps some people are just naturally leaning that people are just naturally leaning that people are just naturally leaning that way. So, there absolutely way. So, there absolutely way. So, there absolutely is, when I say energetic, neural is, when I say energetic, neural is, when I say energetic, neural communication across space that isn't communication across space that isn't communication across space that isn't just words, sounds, sound waves, and just words, sounds, sound waves, and just words, sounds, sound waves, and vision, uh, photons. So, vision, uh, photons. So, vision, uh, photons. So, there's stuff happening at a distance there's stuff happening at a distance there's stuff happening at a distance and smell. I think we vastly uh you and smell. I think we vastly uh you and smell. I think we vastly uh you know underestimate the extent to which know underestimate the extent to which know underestimate the extent to which pherommones and odors of people who are pherommones and odors of people who are pherommones and odors of people who are upset or you know there's a study upset or you know there's a study upset or you know there's a study showing that human tears of affect showing that human tears of affect showing that human tears of affect hormones and people around them. hormones and people around them. hormones and people around them. &gt;&gt; You need to have a 16-year-old boy &gt;&gt; You need to have a 16-year-old boy &gt;&gt; You need to have a 16-year-old boy around you when it comes to the around you when it comes to the around you when it comes to the sensitivity to smell and [laughter] sensitivity to smell and [laughter] sensitivity to smell and [laughter] perfumes being sold commercially these perfumes being sold commercially these perfumes being sold commercially these days. &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. But the thing about &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. But the thing about &gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. But the thing about distance is something that I'm very distance is something that I'm very distance is something that I'm very interested in. I mean the awareness is interested in. I mean the awareness is interested in. I mean the awareness is mostly visual for dancers. Uh and it's mostly visual for dancers. Uh and it's mostly visual for dancers. Uh and it's usually established again in class. If usually established again in class. If usually established again in class. If you have a crow crowded class, you the you have a crow crowded class, you the you have a crow crowded class, you the distance can be the next one would be distance can be the next one would be distance can be the next one would be out here from this point. out here from this point. out here from this point. &gt;&gt; But a really crowded class, the distance &gt;&gt; But a really crowded class, the distance &gt;&gt; But a really crowded class, the distance might be out here. In which case, you're might be out here. In which case, you're might be out here. In which case, you're going to be angling yourself to the going to be angling yourself to the going to be angling yourself to the diagonal. So you're able to get full diagonal. So you're able to get full diagonal. So you're able to get full reach which is going to impact on full reach which is going to impact on full reach which is going to impact on design right uh but there are also ways design right uh but there are also ways design right uh but there are also ways and it's very demanding actually and it and it's very demanding actually and it and it's very demanding actually and it requires a lot of trust on everybody's requires a lot of trust on everybody's requires a lot of trust on everybody's part where I can get dancers to work part where I can get dancers to work part where I can get dancers to work very close together and that has a real very close together and that has a real very close together and that has a real visual impact and it becomes a physical visual impact and it becomes a physical visual impact and it becomes a physical sensation of the person watching it can sensation of the person watching it can sensation of the person watching it can become an anxiety oh don't step on the become an anxiety oh don't step on the become an anxiety oh don't step on the she's going to get stepped on and it she's going to get stepped on and it she's going to get stepped on and it you know there I'm kind of using it you know there I'm kind of using it you know there I'm kind of using it crassly and but it it's interesting to crassly and but it it's interesting to crassly and but it it's interesting to push people in uh into what's called one push people in uh into what's called one push people in uh into what's called one another's space uh and be able to another's space uh and be able to another's space uh and be able to condense the amount of area that people condense the amount of area that people condense the amount of area that people feel comfortable in or require which feel comfortable in or require which feel comfortable in or require which could be a very good thing culturally could be a very good thing culturally could be a very good thing culturally speaking because we got less and less speaking because we got less and less speaking because we got less and less space. Yeah, it's interesting that the space. Yeah, it's interesting that the space. Yeah, it's interesting that the this notion of communication across the this notion of communication across the this notion of communication across space. If we could just continue down space. If we could just continue down space. If we could just continue down this path a bit. Last year I had the this path a bit. Last year I had the this path a bit. Last year I had the great honor really to do a lecture about great honor really to do a lecture about great honor really to do a lecture about music in the brain with Renee Fleming, music in the brain with Renee Fleming, music in the brain with Renee Fleming, the great opera singer. And we the great opera singer. And we the great opera singer. And we got on to this topic of the fact that got on to this topic of the fact that got on to this topic of the fact that the opera singers will capture an the opera singers will capture an the opera singers will capture an emotion. They're using their diaphragm emotion. They're using their diaphragm emotion. They're using their diaphragm in a very particular way, getting a in a very particular way, getting a in a very particular way, getting a certain frequency of vibration in their certain frequency of vibration in their certain frequency of vibration in their body, obviously using air, you know, body, obviously using air, you know, body, obviously using air, you know, shaping the air as it leaves their shaping the air as it leaves their shaping the air as it leaves their lungs to sing and how maybe that's lungs to sing and how maybe that's lungs to sing and how maybe that's actually impacting the same sets of actually impacting the same sets of actually impacting the same sets of neurons in the audience, but they're not neurons in the audience, but they're not neurons in the audience, but they're not singing. Okay. This is kind of singing. Okay. This is kind of singing. Okay. This is kind of interesting idea that we're you're interesting idea that we're you're interesting idea that we're you're feeling the emotion of the singer feeling the emotion of the singer feeling the emotion of the singer because your frenic nerve, the because your frenic nerve, the because your frenic nerve, the nerve that controls the diaphragm, it nerve that controls the diaphragm, it nerve that controls the diaphragm, it might be vibrating at a similar might be vibrating at a similar might be vibrating at a similar frequency. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. &gt;&gt; This gets back to this like more I don't &gt;&gt; This gets back to this like more I don't &gt;&gt; This gets back to this like more I don't want to call them primitive but more want to call them primitive but more want to call them primitive but more fundamental aspects of language and fundamental aspects of language and fundamental aspects of language and communication. &gt;&gt; Yes. I wonder with dance &gt;&gt; Yes. I wonder with dance &gt;&gt; Yes. I wonder with dance and perhaps with athleticism too, like and perhaps with athleticism too, like and perhaps with athleticism too, like on a football field, when we see on a football field, when we see on a football field, when we see somebody move or people move in a somebody move or people move in a somebody move or people move in a certain way, whether or not there we certain way, whether or not there we certain way, whether or not there we don't realize it perhaps, but that don't realize it perhaps, but that don't realize it perhaps, but that there's almost the illusion that we're there's almost the illusion that we're there's almost the illusion that we're moving like that. moving like that. moving like that. &gt;&gt; Like we're accessing this idea of a &gt;&gt; Like we're accessing this idea of a &gt;&gt; Like we're accessing this idea of a portals like art as portals that we're portals like art as portals that we're portals like art as portals that we're actually sensing at some level we're actually sensing at some level we're actually sensing at some level what it would be like to move like that. what it would be like to move like that. what it would be like to move like that. And of course, I can't And of course, I can't And of course, I can't &gt;&gt; absolutely. I mean, you know these &gt;&gt; absolutely. I mean, you know these &gt;&gt; absolutely. I mean, you know these ocular glasses, right? That you believe ocular glasses, right? That you believe ocular glasses, right? That you believe that you're projecting yourself into that you're projecting yourself into that you're projecting yourself into that item up there and actually feeling it. item up there and actually feeling it. item up there and actually feeling it. Hello. Right. [clears throat] Hello. Right. [clears throat] Hello. Right. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; That must be what is working, what's &gt;&gt; That must be what is working, what's &gt;&gt; That must be what is working, what's creating that illusion. You're not creating that illusion. You're not creating that illusion. You're not really inside that item, but you feel really inside that item, but you feel really inside that item, but you feel and believe as though you are. and believe as though you are. and believe as though you are. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've done a VR where it's a you &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've done a VR where it's a you &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've done a VR where it's a you think you're in a different body. It's think you're in a different body. It's think you're in a different body. It's &gt;&gt; right. &gt;&gt; right. &gt;&gt; right. &gt;&gt; Really weird and kind of cool, &gt;&gt; Really weird and kind of cool, &gt;&gt; Really weird and kind of cool, &gt;&gt; I guess. So I I'm a little terrified &gt;&gt; I guess. So I I'm a little terrified &gt;&gt; I guess. So I I'm a little terrified to deal with it or also I haven't taken to deal with it or also I haven't taken to deal with it or also I haven't taken the time to really expose myself to it. the time to really expose myself to it. the time to really expose myself to it. Um it definitely is of interest, but you Um it definitely is of interest, but you Um it definitely is of interest, but you know, when you talk about soccer or an know, when you talk about soccer or an know, when you talk about soccer or an athletic event, you know, you can athletic event, you know, you can athletic event, you know, you can feel in boxing, you can feel the impact. feel in boxing, you can feel the impact. feel in boxing, you can feel the impact. You can feel how much poundage is behind You can feel how much poundage is behind You can feel how much poundage is behind that punch. that punch. that punch. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You boxed. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You boxed. &gt;&gt; Yeah. You boxed. &gt;&gt; Yeah. with Teddy Atlas as your trainer. &gt;&gt; Yeah. with Teddy Atlas as your trainer. &gt;&gt; Yeah. with Teddy Atlas as your trainer. &gt;&gt; We have some friends of Teddy Atlas &gt;&gt; We have some friends of Teddy Atlas &gt;&gt; We have some friends of Teddy Atlas around here. around here. around here. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Uh what motivated that? &gt;&gt; Uh what motivated that? &gt;&gt; Uh what motivated that? &gt;&gt; I was in my early 40s and uh the &gt;&gt; I was in my early 40s and uh the &gt;&gt; I was in my early 40s and uh the Olympics were in LA and I was making a Olympics were in LA and I was making a Olympics were in LA and I was making a new piece and I wanted to compete. Uh new piece and I wanted to compete. Uh new piece and I wanted to compete. Uh but there are no competitions for what I but there are no competitions for what I but there are no competitions for what I do. I mean a dancer's range is much more do. I mean a dancer's range is much more do. I mean a dancer's range is much more than um and athletes not to the same than um and athletes not to the same than um and athletes not to the same degree in specialization but across the degree in specialization but across the degree in specialization but across the border speed flexibility uh you know border speed flexibility uh you know border speed flexibility uh you know maneuverability in air uh coordination maneuverability in air uh coordination maneuverability in air uh coordination flexibility dancers got all of these flexibility dancers got all of these flexibility dancers got all of these components to a very high degree. So no components to a very high degree. So no components to a very high degree. So no events for uh me at the Olympics. uh but events for uh me at the Olympics. uh but events for uh me at the Olympics. uh but I could make a piece that would be I could make a piece that would be I could make a piece that would be highly athletic and I wanted to be in highly athletic and I wanted to be in highly athletic and I wanted to be in the very best possible shape I could be the very best possible shape I could be the very best possible shape I could be in. Uh so uh I decided uh that the in. Uh so uh I decided uh that the in. Uh so uh I decided uh that the training that was involved in a boxer training that was involved in a boxer training that was involved in a boxer being in shape uh was more extreme than being in shape uh was more extreme than being in shape uh was more extreme than what I was doing with my dancing what I was doing with my dancing what I was doing with my dancing regimen. Uh and that the you know the regimen. Uh and that the you know the regimen. Uh and that the you know the rope coordination, the stamina being rope coordination, the stamina being rope coordination, the stamina being involved, the power coming off the involved, the power coming off the involved, the power coming off the punch, the uh grounding of the body so punch, the uh grounding of the body so punch, the uh grounding of the body so that you had a punch, uh the willingness that you had a punch, uh the willingness that you had a punch, uh the willingness to take the blow in exchange for the to take the blow in exchange for the to take the blow in exchange for the unwillingness to go down. You would not unwillingness to go down. You would not unwillingness to go down. You would not go down. You're not going down. go down. You're not going down. go down. You're not going down. And we don't do that in dance. So I And we don't do that in dance. So I And we don't do that in dance. So I figured, well, I'll go where they do figured, well, I'll go where they do figured, well, I'll go where they do that. So Teddy, we were running steps that. So Teddy, we were running steps that. So Teddy, we were running steps backwards. This is a very good thing. I backwards. This is a very good thing. I backwards. This is a very good thing. I mean, you know, uh and the shadow mean, you know, uh and the shadow mean, you know, uh and the shadow boxing, it's a great training boxing, it's a great training boxing, it's a great training format. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree. Um you know, as a &gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree. Um you know, as a &gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree. Um you know, as a neuroscientist, I have to put a call out neuroscientist, I have to put a call out neuroscientist, I have to put a call out against sparring for anyone who's not against sparring for anyone who's not against sparring for anyone who's not trying to make it a profession and maybe trying to make it a profession and maybe trying to make it a profession and maybe even for those that are, that's their even for those that are, that's their even for those that are, that's their choice. But um but speed bag work and um choice. But um but speed bag work and um choice. But um but speed bag work and um the vis the visual coordination that's the vis the visual coordination that's the vis the visual coordination that's involved is also incredible. near far, involved is also incredible. near far, involved is also incredible. near far, but also just switching from peripheral but also just switching from peripheral but also just switching from peripheral to central vision is I imagine it to central vision is I imagine it to central vision is I imagine it improves the brain in many ways improves the brain in many ways improves the brain in many ways except for the getting hit in the head except for the getting hit in the head except for the getting hit in the head part. &gt;&gt; Well, probably. &gt;&gt; Well, probably. &gt;&gt; Well, probably. &gt;&gt; And you're also well known for being &gt;&gt; And you're also well known for being &gt;&gt; And you're also well known for being quite strong. Tell us about your quite strong. Tell us about your quite strong. Tell us about your deadlift. Uh deadlift. Uh deadlift. Uh &gt;&gt; well I mean no uh it's I was training &gt;&gt; well I mean no uh it's I was training &gt;&gt; well I mean no uh it's I was training with uh in a real weight gym with uh in a real weight gym with uh in a real weight gym with competitive weightlifters u and was very competitive weightlifters u and was very competitive weightlifters u and was very serious &gt;&gt; uh from the time I was probably in my &gt;&gt; uh from the time I was probably in my &gt;&gt; uh from the time I was probably in my 50s until mid60s say um and that you 50s until mid60s say um and that you 50s until mid60s say um and that you were nobody in that gym if you didn't do were nobody in that gym if you didn't do were nobody in that gym if you didn't do your body weight for three on the bench your body weight for three on the bench your body weight for three on the bench I mean you know what are you in here for I mean you know what are you in here for I mean you know what are you in here for right so it had that kind of uh require right so it had that kind of uh require right so it had that kind of uh require environment to it. Uh, which is very environment to it. Uh, which is very environment to it. Uh, which is very encouraging if you want to lift heavy encouraging if you want to lift heavy encouraging if you want to lift heavy weight. Uh, and also snapped ammonia, right? Uh, and also snapped ammonia, right? Uh, and also snapped ammonia, right? Which is like, okay, I actually never Which is like, okay, I actually never Which is like, okay, I actually never did that. But the jolt of pulling more did that. But the jolt of pulling more did that. But the jolt of pulling more weight off the ground than you really weight off the ground than you really weight off the ground than you really can do or you have ever done really does can do or you have ever done really does can do or you have ever done really does sound send a rush to the body that is sound send a rush to the body that is sound send a rush to the body that is unique. &gt;&gt; And what was your personal record? &gt;&gt; And what was your personal record? &gt;&gt; And what was your personal record? &gt;&gt; 227. &gt;&gt; 227. &gt;&gt; 227. &gt;&gt; 227 deadlift. Yep. &gt;&gt; 227 deadlift. Yep. &gt;&gt; 227 deadlift. Yep. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Well, I don't know about that. I mean, &gt;&gt; Well, I don't know about that. I mean, &gt;&gt; Well, I don't know about that. I mean, you just do it day in day out. And I you just do it day in day out. And I you just do it day in day out. And I wasn't, you know, you can't train day in wasn't, you know, you can't train day in wasn't, you know, you can't train day in day out, but training rigorously and day out, but training rigorously and day out, but training rigorously and continuously for probably eight or 10 continuously for probably eight or 10 continuously for probably eight or 10 years. Yeah. years. Yeah. years. Yeah. &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and &gt;&gt; I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body hydration is critical for brain and body function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate important that you get adequate important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your the functioning of all cells in your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it nerve cells. Drinking element makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start electrolytes. My days tend to start really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump really fast, meaning I have to jump right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. right into work or right into exercise. So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I So, to make sure that I'm hydrated and I have sufficient electrolytes when I have sufficient electrolytes when I have sufficient electrolytes when I first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 first wake up in the morning, I drink 16 to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element to 32 ounces of water with an element packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink packet dissolved in it. I also drink Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any Element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of electrolytes. Element has a bunch of great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love great tasting flavors. In fact, I love them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the them all. I love the watermelon, the raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love raspberry, the citrus, and I really love the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like the lemonade flavor. So, if you'd like to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with to claim a free element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's any purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. to claim a free sample pack. &gt;&gt; Several times you've mentioned the bar. &gt;&gt; Several times you've mentioned the bar. &gt;&gt; Several times you've mentioned the bar. &gt;&gt; Um, I think most of us understand &gt;&gt; Um, I think most of us understand &gt;&gt; Um, I think most of us understand there's a bar along the wall with a there's a bar along the wall with a there's a bar along the wall with a mirror sometimes behind it, etc. What mirror sometimes behind it, etc. What mirror sometimes behind it, etc. What for the uninformed like for me um what for the uninformed like for me um what for the uninformed like for me um what is what is bar work really about and is what is bar work really about and is what is bar work really about and what and could you give us an example of what and could you give us an example of what and could you give us an example of a few I mean is it designed to improve a few I mean is it designed to improve a few I mean is it designed to improve flexibility is it for what is this flexibility is it for what is this flexibility is it for what is this notion of the bar? notion of the bar? notion of the bar? &gt;&gt; All the above. A bar is a set regimen of &gt;&gt; All the above. A bar is a set regimen of &gt;&gt; All the above. A bar is a set regimen of exercises that are developed to exercises that are developed to exercises that are developed to strengthen uh the uh the uh the structure of the body to basically structure of the body to basically structure of the body to basically approach the jumps to gain height in the approach the jumps to gain height in the approach the jumps to gain height in the air for the men, for the women if air for the men, for the women if air for the men, for the women if they're working on point. the strength they're working on point. the strength they're working on point. the strength in the legs and the torso to be able to in the legs and the torso to be able to in the legs and the torso to be able to support that weight in the little area support that weight in the little area support that weight in the little area down here. Uh and so it's developed down here. Uh and so it's developed down here. Uh and so it's developed essentially from bars evolved but essentially from bars evolved but essentially from bars evolved but basically their format is brilliantly basically their format is brilliantly basically their format is brilliantly designed uh and begins with uh usually designed uh and begins with uh usually designed uh and begins with uh usually pa uh which the terminology is French pa uh which the terminology is French pa uh which the terminology is French which means to fold. So you're folding which means to fold. So you're folding which means to fold. So you're folding the body in the pa you're folding, the body in the pa you're folding, the body in the pa you're folding, you're going down and the positions are you're going down and the positions are you're going down and the positions are first, second, third, fourth, and fifth. first, second, third, fourth, and fifth. first, second, third, fourth, and fifth. Okay, first you have actually one center Okay, first you have actually one center Okay, first you have actually one center that comes off of here and here or that comes off of here and here or that comes off of here and here or you're off to this side or you're off to you're off to this side or you're off to you're off to this side or you're off to that side. But if you're working very that side. But if you're working very that side. But if you're working very rigorously, you're working to develop rigorously, you're working to develop rigorously, you're working to develop that single center in first. Second is a that single center in first. Second is a that single center in first. Second is a much more evolved kind of higher much more evolved kind of higher much more evolved kind of higher muscular kind of situation where it's muscular kind of situation where it's muscular kind of situation where it's being supported from the torso and the being supported from the torso and the being supported from the torso and the leg muscles more than from the feet. The leg muscles more than from the feet. The leg muscles more than from the feet. The third position is never used because third position is never used because third position is never used because third looks like a bad fifth. So, it's third looks like a bad fifth. So, it's third looks like a bad fifth. So, it's just been eliminated, which is kind of just been eliminated, which is kind of just been eliminated, which is kind of too bad because I actually do use too bad because I actually do use too bad because I actually do use third. Uh but not if I think it's at a third. Uh but not if I think it's at a third. Uh but not if I think it's at a moment where it could be judgmentally moment where it could be judgmentally moment where it could be judgmentally determined. Actually, it was an determined. Actually, it was an determined. Actually, it was an uncrossed fifth. Oh dear. Uh but in any uncrossed fifth. Oh dear. Uh but in any uncrossed fifth. Oh dear. Uh but in any case so third weight is somewhere case so third weight is somewhere case so third weight is somewhere between openly distributed and between openly distributed and between openly distributed and cross through a single center between cross through a single center between cross through a single center between the two legs. Okay this is the fourth the two legs. Okay this is the fourth the two legs. Okay this is the fourth right and the fifth that fourth is right and the fifth that fourth is right and the fifth that fourth is closed so that it's just a reduced even closed so that it's just a reduced even closed so that it's just a reduced even higher center. Okay. In these positions, higher center. Okay. In these positions, higher center. Okay. In these positions, first, second, usually not third, first, second, usually not third, first, second, usually not third, first, second, fourth, and fifth. Pa, first to second, fourth, and fifth. Pa, first to second, fourth, and fifth. Pa, first to bend, to fold. Uh, next tandra to bend, to fold. Uh, next tandra to bend, to fold. Uh, next tandra to stretch, to reach out from that base. stretch, to reach out from that base. stretch, to reach out from that base. Not so far as you're going to fall, but Not so far as you're going to fall, but Not so far as you're going to fall, but far enough so that you have to evolve far enough so that you have to evolve far enough so that you have to evolve and occupy a little bit more space each and occupy a little bit more space each and occupy a little bit more space each time you do it. And you will go first time you do it. And you will go first time you do it. And you will go first from the tandu to a pa to a tandu to a from the tandu to a pa to a tandu to a from the tandu to a pa to a tandu to a pa and then tandu to a straight leg pa and then tandu to a straight leg pa and then tandu to a straight leg which by drawing in you're pulling the which by drawing in you're pulling the which by drawing in you're pulling the center even higher and so therefore it center even higher and so therefore it center even higher and so therefore it comes later in the series of exercises. comes later in the series of exercises. comes later in the series of exercises. They're designed to evolve right. Uh They're designed to evolve right. Uh They're designed to evolve right. Uh after the uh the stretches comes the after the uh the stretches comes the after the uh the stretches comes the ranjam. One of the few exercises ranjam. One of the few exercises ranjam. One of the few exercises actually that's circular. Most of ballet actually that's circular. Most of ballet actually that's circular. Most of ballet comes from fencing. It's very linear. comes from fencing. It's very linear. comes from fencing. It's very linear. It's the attack. It's the retreat. But It's the attack. It's the retreat. But It's the attack. It's the retreat. But it doesn't have a whole lot of that it doesn't have a whole lot of that it doesn't have a whole lot of that going on unless somebody's gotten very going on unless somebody's gotten very going on unless somebody's gotten very ambition flamboyant with their fencing ambition flamboyant with their fencing ambition flamboyant with their fencing styles. Could be. I don't know. But in styles. Could be. I don't know. But in styles. Could be. I don't know. But in any case, random is the circling of the any case, random is the circling of the any case, random is the circling of the leg from a full fourth forward all the leg from a full fourth forward all the leg from a full fourth forward all the way to an open second all the way to a way to an open second all the way to a way to an open second all the way to a full fourth back all the way back to full fourth back all the way back to full fourth back all the way back to your second all the way back to your second all the way back to your second all the way back to your fourth. Forward and down. full rotation. fourth. Forward and down. full rotation. fourth. Forward and down. full rotation. Both sides, by the way, you're always Both sides, by the way, you're always Both sides, by the way, you're always reversing. Even the ones that are in a reversing. Even the ones that are in a reversing. Even the ones that are in a symmetrical position, you still reverse symmetrical position, you still reverse symmetrical position, you still reverse right and left because, as I'm sure right and left because, as I'm sure right and left because, as I'm sure you're well aware, right and left occupy you're well aware, right and left occupy you're well aware, right and left occupy your body all the time and are your body all the time and are your body all the time and are constantly arguing with one another. We constantly arguing with one another. We constantly arguing with one another. We have an interior conflict going on that have an interior conflict going on that have an interior conflict going on that makes almost anything else in life makes almost anything else in life makes almost anything else in life impossible. But so, we have right and impossible. But so, we have right and impossible. But so, we have right and left, which we're always trying to left, which we're always trying to left, which we're always trying to balance. Okay. After random you can have balance. Okay. After random you can have balance. Okay. After random you can have pat, which is little throws. Little pat, which is little throws. Little pat, which is little throws. Little throws. So from your fifth or from your throws. So from your fifth or from your throws. So from your fifth or from your first, you're reaching quickly out. first, you're reaching quickly out. first, you're reaching quickly out. Little darting movements, right? Then Little darting movements, right? Then Little darting movements, right? Then you can have frappe, which is to beat you can have frappe, which is to beat you can have frappe, which is to beat frappe. Uh, and so from the ankle, it'll be a Uh, and so from the ankle, it'll be a Uh, and so from the ankle, it'll be a flex foot that extends boom and boom. flex foot that extends boom and boom. flex foot that extends boom and boom. And all of this is about developing rev And all of this is about developing rev And all of this is about developing rev to lift to rev to lift to rev to lift to rev right uh up to the metatarsal as high as right uh up to the metatarsal as high as right uh up to the metatarsal as high as you can get pulling up through all of you can get pulling up through all of you can get pulling up through all of this rev. And this develops the strength this rev. And this develops the strength this rev. And this develops the strength that you need to jump because from the that you need to jump because from the that you need to jump because from the pa down you're going to drive up and the pa down you're going to drive up and the pa down you're going to drive up and the more power you have down here the more power you have down here the more power you have down here the more you can get up. That little extra eighth you can get up. That little extra eighth you can get up. That little extra eighth of an inch counts. Okay. Uh so frappe of an inch counts. Okay. Uh so frappe of an inch counts. Okay. Uh so frappe after frappe is grom botma the big botma after frappe is grom botma the big botma after frappe is grom botma the big botma the big throw all the way up and down the big throw all the way up and down the big throw all the way up and down but not all the way up changing the but not all the way up changing the but not all the way up changing the angle of the hip so that the rotation is angle of the hip so that the rotation is angle of the hip so that the rotation is going to alter the line holding the hip going to alter the line holding the hip going to alter the line holding the hip straight through up e up e up either straight through up e up e up either straight through up e up e up either through fourth or through second or through fourth or through second or through fourth or through second or through arabesque and back. Those are through arabesque and back. Those are through arabesque and back. Those are the fundamentals. Now, if you're Merse the fundamentals. Now, if you're Merse the fundamentals. Now, if you're Merse Cunningham, you can operate in all of Cunningham, you can operate in all of Cunningham, you can operate in all of the interstases through all of that, but the interstases through all of that, but the interstases through all of that, but you still have the regulation of the you still have the regulation of the you still have the regulation of the body's map. And that's what the ballet body's map. And that's what the ballet body's map. And that's what the ballet has already done. has already done. has already done. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Amazing. &gt;&gt; Not amazing. Just very highly evolved in &gt;&gt; Not amazing. Just very highly evolved in &gt;&gt; Not amazing. Just very highly evolved in terms of how to control movement in terms of how to control movement in terms of how to control movement in terms of strengthening and developing terms of strengthening and developing terms of strengthening and developing the body. Did the people that developed the body. Did the people that developed the body. Did the people that developed this um care about the underlying this um care about the underlying this um care about the underlying physiology or they just and I'm not physiology or they just and I'm not physiology or they just and I'm not saying they should, saying they should, saying they should, but it seems like an incredible but it seems like an incredible but it seems like an incredible intuition at least that they came up intuition at least that they came up intuition at least that they came up with it. with it. with it. &gt;&gt; You'll forgive me for saying something &gt;&gt; You'll forgive me for saying something &gt;&gt; You'll forgive me for saying something stupid like this. The body is very stupid like this. The body is very stupid like this. The body is very smart. And one of my problems has always smart. And one of my problems has always smart. And one of my problems has always been what knows what first. been what knows what first. been what knows what first. Okay. Does the body already get it Okay. Does the body already get it Okay. Does the body already get it brain? and we're trying to educate you brain? and we're trying to educate you brain? and we're trying to educate you or is it brain telling body what to do or is it brain telling body what to do or is it brain telling body what to do in the case of the classical technique I in the case of the classical technique I in the case of the classical technique I think it's actually the body that feels think it's actually the body that feels think it's actually the body that feels that it could get a little higher if that it could get a little higher if that it could get a little higher if only its rotation were a little more only its rotation were a little more only its rotation were a little more open so it urges that open so it urges that open so it urges that I don't think brain is going well you I don't think brain is going well you I don't think brain is going well you know what if you actually could open know what if you actually could open know what if you actually could open that leg out you go higher and you're that leg out you go higher and you're that leg out you go higher and you're going brain I don't know about that what going brain I don't know about that what going brain I don't know about that what does that You don't know what it means. does that You don't know what it means. does that You don't know what it means. The body knows what that means. The body knows what that means. The body knows what that means. &gt;&gt; I've heard it said, you know, we think &gt;&gt; I've heard it said, you know, we think &gt;&gt; I've heard it said, you know, we think that we're a brain with a body, but that we're a brain with a body, but that we're a brain with a body, but perhaps we were a body with that later perhaps we were a body with that later perhaps we were a body with that later got a brain. got a brain. got a brain. &gt;&gt; There are certain sophisticated &gt;&gt; There are certain sophisticated &gt;&gt; There are certain sophisticated movements, rhythms and so forth. I mean, movements, rhythms and so forth. I mean, movements, rhythms and so forth. I mean, for example, great composer is a great for example, great composer is a great for example, great composer is a great mathematician, right? um and the mathematician, right? um and the mathematician, right? um and the indications and um the divisions of time indications and um the divisions of time indications and um the divisions of time um uh I would accept is coming you know um uh I would accept is coming you know um uh I would accept is coming you know particularly because of how you see the particularly because of how you see the particularly because of how you see the notation and how the um note can be notation and how the um note can be notation and how the um note can be subdivided it's a very visual thing once subdivided it's a very visual thing once subdivided it's a very visual thing once you're into the eye you're into the you're into the eye you're into the you're into the eye you're into the brain I mean you know it's like do you brain I mean you know it's like do you brain I mean you know it's like do you know what I'm saying this is more about know what I'm saying this is more about know what I'm saying this is more about the body and this how the toes are going the body and this how the toes are going the body and this how the toes are going about its business down here are very about its business down here are very about its business down here are very much involved about the body. much involved about the body. much involved about the body. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thinking sometimes is really &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thinking sometimes is really &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thinking sometimes is really overrated when overrated when overrated when &gt;&gt; For sure. &gt;&gt; For sure. &gt;&gt; For sure. &gt;&gt; Yeah. As human oldw world &gt;&gt; Yeah. As human oldw world &gt;&gt; Yeah. As human oldw world primates, which we are, um, we got a primates, which we are, um, we got a primates, which we are, um, we got a bunch more machinery up front in the bunch more machinery up front in the bunch more machinery up front in the prefrontal cortex, which let us think prefrontal cortex, which let us think prefrontal cortex, which let us think and plan and reflect and strategize a and plan and reflect and strategize a and plan and reflect and strategize a lot more. Also allowed lot more. Also allowed lot more. Also allowed humans to do bad things a lot more. humans to do bad things a lot more. humans to do bad things a lot more. trickery and things like that, but also trickery and things like that, but also trickery and things like that, but also to plan really incredible wonderful to plan really incredible wonderful to plan really incredible wonderful things, but things, but things, but I do think it in many ways it was at the I do think it in many ways it was at the I do think it in many ways it was at the expense of some of the machinery expense of some of the machinery expense of some of the machinery involved in these I hate use the involved in these I hate use the involved in these I hate use the language lower let's just say more fun language lower let's just say more fun language lower let's just say more fun fundamental intuition. I year I'm not I fundamental intuition. I year I'm not I fundamental intuition. I year I'm not I don't want to give a too many anecdotes don't want to give a too many anecdotes don't want to give a too many anecdotes but years ago I developed an obsession but years ago I developed an obsession but years ago I developed an obsession with comparative neurology. There's this with comparative neurology. There's this with comparative neurology. There's this beautiful journal. hundreds of years old beautiful journal. hundreds of years old beautiful journal. hundreds of years old called the journal of comparative called the journal of comparative called the journal of comparative neurology. I was fortunate enough to neurology. I was fortunate enough to neurology. I was fortunate enough to participate with that journal but you participate with that journal but you participate with that journal but you know for a while reviewing these papers know for a while reviewing these papers know for a while reviewing these papers which for by for modern science people which for by for modern science people which for by for modern science people don't really care about these they're don't really care about these they're don't really care about these they're like what is the cerebellar vermish like what is the cerebellar vermish like what is the cerebellar vermish shape of the you know what of the atlas shape of the you know what of the atlas shape of the you know what of the atlas turtle I don't even know if there's an turtle I don't even know if there's an turtle I don't even know if there's an atlas turtle but I just guess we were atlas turtle but I just guess we were atlas turtle but I just guess we were talking about teddy atlas of the talking about teddy atlas of the talking about teddy atlas of the whatever right of the of the whatever right of the of the whatever right of the of the two toaded three toes whatever all these two toaded three toes whatever all these two toaded three toes whatever all these weird species but no single paper weird species but no single paper weird species but no single paper teaches you that much except about this teaches you that much except about this teaches you that much except about this really arcane thing about the malard really arcane thing about the malard really arcane thing about the malard duck hypothalamus or something. I'm sure duck hypothalamus or something. I'm sure duck hypothalamus or something. I'm sure that paper's in there, by the way. But that paper's in there, by the way. But that paper's in there, by the way. But when you start comparing the nervous when you start comparing the nervous when you start comparing the nervous systems of these different animals and systems of these different animals and systems of these different animals and the way they move and the way they the way they move and the way they the way they move and the way they think, because there are certainly think, because there are certainly think, because there are certainly papers about humans in there, you start papers about humans in there, you start papers about humans in there, you start getting emergent fundamentals. You go, getting emergent fundamentals. You go, getting emergent fundamentals. You go, "Oh my goodness." You know, the like the "Oh my goodness." You know, the like the "Oh my goodness." You know, the like the once the forebrain got bigger, the once the forebrain got bigger, the once the forebrain got bigger, the cerebellum got a little smaller in this cerebellum got a little smaller in this cerebellum got a little smaller in this one area. And and evolution starts to one area. And and evolution starts to one area. And and evolution starts to make a lot more sense. but evolution at make a lot more sense. but evolution at make a lot more sense. but evolution at the level of things like we're talking the level of things like we're talking the level of things like we're talking about today, movement and communication. about today, movement and communication. about today, movement and communication. And it leaves you with this question And it leaves you with this question And it leaves you with this question which is a lot of the reason you're here which is a lot of the reason you're here which is a lot of the reason you're here today is I think we all really want today is I think we all really want today is I think we all really want to understand even if we don't know that to understand even if we don't know that to understand even if we don't know that we want to understand like what are we want to understand like what are we want to understand like what are we really here to do? What are we good at? really here to do? What are we good at? really here to do? What are we good at? How do we tap into these other aspects How do we tap into these other aspects How do we tap into these other aspects of ourselves? of ourselves? of ourselves? When you talk about the brain developing When you talk about the brain developing When you talk about the brain developing in different areas to different degrees, in different areas to different degrees, in different areas to different degrees, I sometimes wonder about and I mean to I sometimes wonder about and I mean to I sometimes wonder about and I mean to be neither naive nor romantic here, the be neither naive nor romantic here, the be neither naive nor romantic here, the morality of the body and if the people morality of the body and if the people morality of the body and if the people who run our governments and who design who run our governments and who design who run our governments and who design our social systems had a sense on a our social systems had a sense on a our social systems had a sense on a daily basis of preserving and protecting daily basis of preserving and protecting daily basis of preserving and protecting and honoring their physical bodies. if and honoring their physical bodies. if and honoring their physical bodies. if their brain would be allowed to concoct their brain would be allowed to concoct their brain would be allowed to concoct some of the schemata that then tell some of the schemata that then tell some of the schemata that then tell bodies everywhere what they're going to bodies everywhere what they're going to bodies everywhere what they're going to be doing. be doing. be doing. &gt;&gt; Tell me more. I think I'm I think I &gt;&gt; Tell me more. I think I'm I think I &gt;&gt; Tell me more. I think I'm I think I understand. I do believe that taking understand. I do believe that taking understand. I do believe that taking care of the body and one's health first care of the body and one's health first care of the body and one's health first is fundamental. Anyone that's lost their is fundamental. Anyone that's lost their is fundamental. Anyone that's lost their health for any amount of time health for any amount of time health for any amount of time understands what I'm talking about. But understands what I'm talking about. But understands what I'm talking about. But we don't tend to do that. We we don't tend to do that. We we don't tend to do that. We we prioritize the brain a lot without prioritize the brain a lot without prioritize the brain a lot without understanding that it exists in this understanding that it exists in this understanding that it exists in this whole context of the body. It's not just whole context of the body. It's not just whole context of the body. It's not just health. It's uh it's propriety and health. It's uh it's propriety and health. It's uh it's propriety and excellence who wants to nurture and excellence who wants to nurture and excellence who wants to nurture and encourage the body to realize its full encourage the body to realize its full encourage the body to realize its full potential that it was gifted with when potential that it was gifted with when potential that it was gifted with when it was born. it was born. it was born. &gt;&gt; Let's say you and I were in charge of &gt;&gt; Let's say you and I were in charge of &gt;&gt; Let's say you and I were in charge of education. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Do you think kids, teenagers, maybe even &gt;&gt; Do you think kids, teenagers, maybe even &gt;&gt; Do you think kids, teenagers, maybe even young adults and older should all do young adults and older should all do young adults and older should all do something akin to like gymnastics? something akin to like gymnastics? something akin to like gymnastics? It's an interesting thought which one. I It's an interesting thought which one. I It's an interesting thought which one. I mean I respect gymnastics a lot. I get mean I respect gymnastics a lot. I get mean I respect gymnastics a lot. I get dancers sometimes who are not ballet dancers sometimes who are not ballet dancers sometimes who are not ballet trained but who are gymnastically trained but who are gymnastically trained but who are gymnastically trained. They're courageous in a trained. They're courageous in a trained. They're courageous in a different way. They have a different way. They have a different way. They have a different center but they have they have a center but they have they have a center but they have they have a willingness to throw through space that willingness to throw through space that willingness to throw through space that a dancer does not or you're not trained a dancer does not or you're not trained a dancer does not or you're not trained in the ballet to throw. There are in the ballet to throw. There are in the ballet to throw. There are moments that you dart forward but moments that you dart forward but moments that you dart forward but they're very restricted. Whereas a they're very restricted. Whereas a they're very restricted. Whereas a gymnast is continuously comfortable with gymnast is continuously comfortable with gymnast is continuously comfortable with that kind of spatial explosion uh which that kind of spatial explosion uh which that kind of spatial explosion uh which is a beautiful thing. is a beautiful thing. is a beautiful thing. &gt;&gt; Should there be a policy that every &gt;&gt; Should there be a policy that every &gt;&gt; Should there be a policy that every young person needs to do a form of young person needs to do a form of young person needs to do a form of movement that encompasses a lot of movement that encompasses a lot of movement that encompasses a lot of different tempos and some jumping, some different tempos and some jumping, some different tempos and some jumping, some rolling, some stretching because we tend rolling, some stretching because we tend rolling, some stretching because we tend to specialize in sport very early or to specialize in sport very early or to specialize in sport very early or people decide they're no good at sports. people decide they're no good at sports. people decide they're no good at sports. &gt;&gt; No, no, they're not allowed to do that. &gt;&gt; No, no, they're not allowed to do that. &gt;&gt; No, no, they're not allowed to do that. Sorry. something they've got to find Sorry. something they've got to find Sorry. something they've got to find that they're good enough at to encourage that they're good enough at to encourage that they're good enough at to encourage themselves to respect themselves to respect themselves to respect themselves otherwise they quit. otherwise they quit. otherwise they quit. &gt;&gt; I will interrupt you here just to say &gt;&gt; I will interrupt you here just to say &gt;&gt; I will interrupt you here just to say that I think this brings us back to your that I think this brings us back to your that I think this brings us back to your early development and expectation your early development and expectation your early development and expectation [clears throat] on people on kids and [clears throat] on people on kids and [clears throat] on people on kids and adults for in other words standards. I adults for in other words standards. I adults for in other words standards. I heard somebody say something really heard somebody say something really heard somebody say something really interesting recently that was you know interesting recently that was you know interesting recently that was you know it used to be now I'm sounding like an it used to be now I'm sounding like an it used to be now I'm sounding like an you know I am 50. It used to be that you know I am 50. It used to be that you know I am 50. It used to be that there were pretty high standards set on there were pretty high standards set on there were pretty high standards set on all of us. all of us. all of us. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Whether or not we got a lot of love and &gt;&gt; Whether or not we got a lot of love and &gt;&gt; Whether or not we got a lot of love and support depended on the household, but support depended on the household, but support depended on the household, but the standards were always high. There the standards were always high. There the standards were always high. There seems to be a period of time in which seems to be a period of time in which seems to be a period of time in which there was a lot more love and support. there was a lot more love and support. there was a lot more love and support. Some people will disagree with me, but Some people will disagree with me, but Some people will disagree with me, but maybe standards weren't held as in high maybe standards weren't held as in high maybe standards weren't held as in high regard. Of course, it varies by family, regard. Of course, it varies by family, regard. Of course, it varies by family, varies by circumstance, but I think varies by circumstance, but I think varies by circumstance, but I think ideally we get back to a point where ideally we get back to a point where ideally we get back to a point where standards are high for everyone. St like standards are high for everyone. St like standards are high for everyone. St like etiquette, god forbid, you know, um not going to god forbid, you know, um not going to god forbid, you know, um not going to the movies in your pajamas, for the movies in your pajamas, for the movies in your pajamas, for instance. &gt;&gt; Yeah. not just etiquette but also &gt;&gt; Yeah. not just etiquette but also &gt;&gt; Yeah. not just etiquette but also behavior which uh group behavior which uh group behavior which uh group um social dance whether it's ballroom or um social dance whether it's ballroom or um social dance whether it's ballroom or square dance you there are rules and square dance you there are rules and square dance you there are rules and regulations and there ways that you know regulations and there ways that you know regulations and there ways that you know that you can work that are going to that you can work that are going to that you can work that are going to respect the traffic pattern if nothing respect the traffic pattern if nothing respect the traffic pattern if nothing else and that's going to transfer to how else and that's going to transfer to how else and that's going to transfer to how you drive a car you drive a car you drive a car &gt;&gt; uh and this you know gets uh established &gt;&gt; uh and this you know gets uh established &gt;&gt; uh and this you know gets uh established early and deeply early and deeply early and deeply in a young person and you know we're in a young person and you know we're in a young person and you know we're talking here I don't know second grade talking here I don't know second grade talking here I don't know second grade third graders I mean as much as I make third graders I mean as much as I make third graders I mean as much as I make light of my mother and I don't make light of my mother and I don't make light of my mother and I don't make light of her at all but uh sometimes light of her at all but uh sometimes light of her at all but uh sometimes feel challenged by the education that I feel challenged by the education that I feel challenged by the education that I received it was not a bad education it received it was not a bad education it received it was not a bad education it was across the boards it was very was across the boards it was very was across the boards it was very difficult for me society but I was difficult for me society but I was difficult for me society but I was grounded in music I was grounded in grounded in music I was grounded in grounded in music I was grounded in movement I was grounded in these movement I was grounded in these movement I was grounded in these different forms of community activity, different forms of community activity, different forms of community activity, including string quartets. Uh, and I was including string quartets. Uh, and I was including string quartets. Uh, and I was grounded in the family owned the grounded in the family owned the grounded in the family owned the Foothill Drive-In Theater between Ryalto Foothill Drive-In Theater between Ryalto Foothill Drive-In Theater between Ryalto and Fontana. Okay. I grew up from time I and Fontana. Okay. I grew up from time I and Fontana. Okay. I grew up from time I was eight until I went to college was eight until I went to college was eight until I went to college watching a screen and getting myself watching a screen and getting myself watching a screen and getting myself into the snack bar when there would be a into the snack bar when there would be a into the snack bar when there would be a run on hot dogs because it was really run on hot dogs because it was really run on hot dogs because it was really boring up here and I saw boring come get boring up here and I saw boring come get boring up here and I saw boring come get to the snack bar sell hot dogs. Okay. to the snack bar sell hot dogs. Okay. to the snack bar sell hot dogs. Okay. plus which it was a place where the plus which it was a place where the plus which it was a place where the speakers often didn't work. Uh there speakers often didn't work. Uh there speakers often didn't work. Uh there were a lot of cars. 600 cars was big were a lot of cars. 600 cars was big were a lot of cars. 600 cars was big movie house. Okay. And a big screen. And movie house. Okay. And a big screen. And movie house. Okay. And a big screen. And so I learned to watch action and without so I learned to watch action and without so I learned to watch action and without sound. And I learned to watch movement and what And I learned to watch movement and what And I learned to watch movement and what communicated without language. communicated without language. communicated without language. &gt;&gt; It's incredible you're saying this. One &gt;&gt; It's incredible you're saying this. One &gt;&gt; It's incredible you're saying this. One of the things that I listen I wanted to of the things that I listen I wanted to of the things that I listen I wanted to talk to you about is this concept of talk to you about is this concept of talk to you about is this concept of wordlessness. A a few years ago, I started practicing A a few years ago, I started practicing A a few years ago, I started practicing something because someone said, "You something because someone said, "You something because someone said, "You should try this. You should try and walk should try this. You should try and walk should try this. You should try and walk down the street and just feel what's down the street and just feel what's down the street and just feel what's going on." And try not to get into a going on." And try not to get into a going on." And try not to get into a verbal dialogue about it and just verbal dialogue about it and just verbal dialogue about it and just experience life through the lens of like experience life through the lens of like experience life through the lens of like what must be like to be some other what must be like to be some other what must be like to be some other species of animal. And um this might species of animal. And um this might species of animal. And um this might sound silly to people, but it's an sound silly to people, but it's an sound silly to people, but it's an incredible portal incredible portal incredible portal into how limited our experience of things how limited our experience of things how limited our experience of things normally is. And maybe for some people, normally is. And maybe for some people, normally is. And maybe for some people, they're always in wordlessness and they they're always in wordlessness and they they're always in wordlessness and they need to get more into words. But it need to get more into words. But it need to get more into words. But it sounds like you had an incredible sounds like you had an incredible sounds like you had an incredible upbringing. First of all, you were upbringing. First of all, you were upbringing. First of all, you were taught to be hardworking. I mean, I taught to be hardworking. I mean, I taught to be hardworking. I mean, I think one can't overemphasize how crit I think one can't overemphasize how crit I think one can't overemphasize how crit I mean, hard work is awesome and because mean, hard work is awesome and because mean, hard work is awesome and because it's a super skill for anything you it's a super skill for anything you it's a super skill for anything you encounter, right? But watching the encounter, right? But watching the encounter, right? But watching the movies without sound, that's incredible. movies without sound, that's incredible. movies without sound, that's incredible. &gt;&gt; Well, even more, I had twin brothers and &gt;&gt; Well, even more, I had twin brothers and &gt;&gt; Well, even more, I had twin brothers and a sister who was born 3 days before they a sister who was born 3 days before they a sister who was born 3 days before they were a year old. So, essentially, they were a year old. So, essentially, they were a year old. So, essentially, they were triplets. and my mother gave up and were triplets. and my mother gave up and were triplets. and my mother gave up and started feeding them all with the same started feeding them all with the same started feeding them all with the same spoon and put them in the same room and spoon and put them in the same room and spoon and put them in the same room and they developed italia which happens with they developed italia which happens with they developed italia which happens with you probably know this a certain you probably know this a certain you probably know this a certain percentage of twins a language before percentage of twins a language before percentage of twins a language before they learn to speak English they evolve they learn to speak English they evolve they learn to speak English they evolve because they're so close to one another because they're so close to one another because they're so close to one another all the time and it's a guttural all the time and it's a guttural all the time and it's a guttural salabic uh form of communication salabic uh form of communication salabic uh form of communication I could speak it but I could certainly I could speak it but I could certainly I could speak it but I could certainly understand it. My parents could not understand it. My parents could not understand it. My parents could not understand it nor speak it. So, I became understand it nor speak it. So, I became understand it nor speak it. So, I became the family translator. the family translator. the family translator. &gt;&gt; So, from day one, I'm observing and &gt;&gt; So, from day one, I'm observing and &gt;&gt; So, from day one, I'm observing and serving the audience. serving the audience. serving the audience. &gt;&gt; I love it. &gt;&gt; I love it. &gt;&gt; I love it. &gt;&gt; And it's nonverbal. &gt;&gt; And it's nonverbal. &gt;&gt; And it's nonverbal. &gt;&gt; This is wild. I'm close friends with a &gt;&gt; This is wild. I'm close friends with a &gt;&gt; This is wild. I'm close friends with a pair of identical twins and they tell pair of identical twins and they tell pair of identical twins and they tell this story from their childhood where this story from their childhood where this story from their childhood where one walks in and goes up to the toast of one walks in and goes up to the toast of one walks in and goes up to the toast of the other one. They were they're women the other one. They were they're women the other one. They were they're women now. They were little girls then. and now. They were little girls then. and now. They were little girls then. and takes her fingers and goes like this takes her fingers and goes like this takes her fingers and goes like this over the toast. Right? over the toast. Right? over the toast. Right? &gt;&gt; To this day, the other one won't eat &gt;&gt; To this day, the other one won't eat &gt;&gt; To this day, the other one won't eat that type of toast. that type of toast. that type of toast. &gt;&gt; But it was like there it wasn't like, &gt;&gt; But it was like there it wasn't like, &gt;&gt; But it was like there it wasn't like, "Oh, this is bad." They would just "Oh, this is bad." They would just "Oh, this is bad." They would just something was communicated in the something was communicated in the something was communicated in the movement and to this day will not touch movement and to this day will not touch movement and to this day will not touch that type of toast, that type of toast, that type of toast, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; And it's so funny and they have &gt;&gt; And it's so funny and they have &gt;&gt; And it's so funny and they have tons of stories about this is that tons of stories about this is that tons of stories about this is that they can communicate without words, they can communicate without words, they can communicate without words, &gt;&gt; right? And a lot of it was signed. I &gt;&gt; right? And a lot of it was signed. I &gt;&gt; right? And a lot of it was signed. I don't remember a lot of this was bread don't remember a lot of this was bread don't remember a lot of this was bread and butter. and butter. and butter. Uh and so very early I got the idea that Uh and so very early I got the idea that Uh and so very early I got the idea that movement communicates. Who needs all movement communicates. Who needs all movement communicates. Who needs all this garble on top and your brain has this garble on top and your brain has this garble on top and your brain has got it? What is that right or left? got it? What is that right or left? got it? What is that right or left? That's going to be that side. It's going That's going to be that side. It's going That's going to be that side. It's going to be right. You don't need to translate to be right. You don't need to translate to be right. You don't need to translate it into language to understand what the it into language to understand what the it into language to understand what the movement is asking for. But unlike so movement is asking for. But unlike so movement is asking for. But unlike so many artists and creatives, many artists and creatives, many artists and creatives, the world is very fortunate that you the world is very fortunate that you the world is very fortunate that you that you were asked to be a translator that you were asked to be a translator that you were asked to be a translator because you don't exist in some I because you don't exist in some I because you don't exist in some I could think of names here, but I don't could think of names here, but I don't could think of names here, but I don't want to insult anyone. There are some want to insult anyone. There are some want to insult anyone. There are some artists that are genuinely artists that are genuinely artists that are genuinely weird to the rest of us because we can't weird to the rest of us because we can't weird to the rest of us because we can't understand them. Now, they're not understand them. Now, they're not understand them. Now, they're not necessarily weird. They're just necessarily weird. They're just necessarily weird. They're just different. But I have to imagine there different. But I have to imagine there different. But I have to imagine there are probably many incredible are probably many incredible are probably many incredible creatives whose work we never hear or creatives whose work we never hear or creatives whose work we never hear or see because there's no one there to see because there's no one there to see because there's no one there to translate it for them and they certainly translate it for them and they certainly translate it for them and they certainly can't do it for themselves. You have to can't do it for themselves. You have to can't do it for themselves. You have to have a certain amount of fluency in the have a certain amount of fluency in the have a certain amount of fluency in the world of business, in the world of world of business, in the world of world of business, in the world of being able to communicate with words, being able to communicate with words, being able to communicate with words, otherwise your work doesn't get out there. Maybe your work doesn't get out there. Maybe your work doesn't get out there. Maybe that's why there's so few people that that's why there's so few people that that's why there's so few people that really sit, you know, where they do in really sit, you know, where they do in really sit, you know, where they do in their craft. their craft. their craft. &gt;&gt; I think that a word here is &gt;&gt; I think that a word here is &gt;&gt; I think that a word here is objectivity. That in doing work there are moments That in doing work there are moments That in doing work there are moments where you have to get outside that work where you have to get outside that work where you have to get outside that work and you have to look at it as an and you have to look at it as an and you have to look at it as an outsider. &gt;&gt; How do you do that? Do you film it &gt;&gt; How do you do that? Do you film it &gt;&gt; How do you do that? Do you film it and watch? and watch? and watch? &gt;&gt; I do it by pulling myself out of the &gt;&gt; I do it by pulling myself out of the &gt;&gt; I do it by pulling myself out of the action. Uh I mean there were times when action. Uh I mean there were times when action. Uh I mean there were times when I danced right and I danced inside as I danced right and I danced inside as I danced right and I danced inside as well as trying to get outside. This is well as trying to get outside. This is well as trying to get outside. This is genuinely a way to become extremely genuinely a way to become extremely genuinely a way to become extremely neurotic and it's a very difficult task. neurotic and it's a very difficult task. neurotic and it's a very difficult task. Um it in some ways it's very rewarding Um it in some ways it's very rewarding Um it in some ways it's very rewarding because the whole thing evolves from you because the whole thing evolves from you because the whole thing evolves from you and plus which you're the jury. Uh but and plus which you're the jury. Uh but and plus which you're the jury. Uh but it's not going to be you can't maintain it's not going to be you can't maintain it's not going to be you can't maintain it for very long. And anybody who makes it for very long. And anybody who makes it for very long. And anybody who makes something wants to have anybody wants to something wants to have anybody wants to something wants to have anybody wants to have the capacity to be unemotional have the capacity to be unemotional have the capacity to be unemotional about it, get back, forget how you feel about it, get back, forget how you feel about it, get back, forget how you feel about it. What does it say to you? about it. What does it say to you? about it. What does it say to you? You in a way become your own translator. You in a way become your own translator. You in a way become your own translator. Does this read? Does this read? Does this read? &gt;&gt; You said something really useful &gt;&gt; You said something really useful &gt;&gt; You said something really useful I think about um critics in your book. I think about um critics in your book. I think about um critics in your book. Uh, you said that the good ones, Uh, you said that the good ones, Uh, you said that the good ones, the honest ones, uh, the ones that the honest ones, uh, the ones that the honest ones, uh, the ones that aren't just trying to get some clickbait aren't just trying to get some clickbait aren't just trying to get some clickbait or get someone to read their story so or get someone to read their story so or get someone to read their story so they can get their couple thousand bucks they can get their couple thousand bucks they can get their couple thousand bucks so they can make rent that month. so they can make rent that month. so they can make rent that month. The really good critics keep us honest The really good critics keep us honest The really good critics keep us honest about who we're supposed to be as about who we're supposed to be as about who we're supposed to be as creators. Now, that makes it sound like creators. Now, that makes it sound like creators. Now, that makes it sound like people who aren't creating stuff that's people who aren't creating stuff that's people who aren't creating stuff that's being, you know, critiqued out in the being, you know, critiqued out in the being, you know, critiqued out in the world don't have anything to learn from world don't have anything to learn from world don't have anything to learn from what you're about to say. But I would what you're about to say. But I would what you're about to say. But I would argue that from the very beginning when argue that from the very beginning when argue that from the very beginning when we start to create anything, a short we start to create anything, a short we start to create anything, a short story, a poem, even if we're just story, a poem, even if we're just story, a poem, even if we're just daydreaming about what we might create, daydreaming about what we might create, daydreaming about what we might create, it's impossible to not get into the it's impossible to not get into the it's impossible to not get into the well, what are people going to how is well, what are people going to how is well, what are people going to how is this going to land? What are people this going to land? What are people this going to land? What are people going to think? So, learning how to hold going to think? So, learning how to hold going to think? So, learning how to hold critique is critical to the creative critique is critical to the creative critique is critical to the creative process. Even if journalists aren't process. Even if journalists aren't process. Even if journalists aren't eventually writing about your work, eventually writing about your work, eventually writing about your work, how do you work with inner critic, which how do you work with inner critic, which how do you work with inner critic, which is really about outer critics, let's be is really about outer critics, let's be is really about outer critics, let's be honest. Um, how do you work with that? honest. Um, how do you work with that? honest. Um, how do you work with that? And how what's your relationship to And how what's your relationship to And how what's your relationship to that? &gt;&gt; This is very difficult because you &gt;&gt; This is very difficult because you &gt;&gt; This is very difficult because you have to love what you're doing. Uh, have to love what you're doing. Uh, have to love what you're doing. Uh, anything that's going to be really anything that's going to be really anything that's going to be really meaningful, there has to be an meaningful, there has to be an meaningful, there has to be an extraordinary degree of love. And we do extraordinary degree of love. And we do extraordinary degree of love. And we do refer um in uh my office to you know the refer um in uh my office to you know the refer um in uh my office to you know the child of that work each dance in a the child of that work each dance in a the child of that work each dance in a way is your gift and it's your child and way is your gift and it's your child and way is your gift and it's your child and somebody's out here and they're going to somebody's out here and they're going to somebody's out here and they're going to slit its throat. How are you supposed to slit its throat. How are you supposed to slit its throat. How are you supposed to feel about that? feel about that? feel about that? &gt;&gt; Also because what we do is very &gt;&gt; Also because what we do is very &gt;&gt; Also because what we do is very personal. It's it musicians translate it personal. It's it musicians translate it personal. It's it musicians translate it into sound. There's a certain distancing into sound. There's a certain distancing into sound. There's a certain distancing from them personally. We're very from them personally. We're very from them personally. We're very personal with your con. You speak personal with your con. You speak personal with your con. You speak bad of my dance. You speak bad of my bad of my dance. You speak bad of my bad of my dance. You speak bad of my body. That don't go down so well, right? So, it's difficult to process the right? So, it's difficult to process the right? So, it's difficult to process the exterior critic's word. And uh on the exterior critic's word. And uh on the exterior critic's word. And uh on the other hand, as I said, one still has to other hand, as I said, one still has to other hand, as I said, one still has to even though you love the thing, you got even though you love the thing, you got even though you love the thing, you got to I mean, you know, long ago, my to I mean, you know, long ago, my to I mean, you know, long ago, my trainer actually uh had two huge wolf trainer actually uh had two huge wolf trainer actually uh had two huge wolf hounds. And I made the mistake one day hounds. And I made the mistake one day hounds. And I made the mistake one day of criticizing one of them. I mean, of criticizing one of them. I mean, of criticizing one of them. I mean, never criticize a guy's dog. Okay, never criticize a guy's dog. Okay, never criticize a guy's dog. Okay, &gt;&gt; this is true. &gt;&gt; this is true. &gt;&gt; this is true. &gt;&gt; Yes, you can criticize the child, but &gt;&gt; Yes, you can criticize the child, but &gt;&gt; Yes, you can criticize the child, but not the dog. All right. not the dog. All right. not the dog. All right. &gt;&gt; Wolf elms are beautiful animals. Very &gt;&gt; Wolf elms are beautiful animals. Very &gt;&gt; Wolf elms are beautiful animals. Very majestic animals. majestic animals. majestic animals. &gt;&gt; Yes, they had to. Uh but so yeah, there &gt;&gt; Yes, they had to. Uh but so yeah, there &gt;&gt; Yes, they had to. Uh but so yeah, there you are. You know, this critic just you are. You know, this critic just you are. You know, this critic just called your dog a bad name. called your dog a bad name. called your dog a bad name. And okay, maybe your dog has got only And okay, maybe your dog has got only And okay, maybe your dog has got only three legs and six months to live. I'm three legs and six months to live. I'm three legs and six months to live. I'm being cruel, but am I? I'm being cruel, but am I? I'm being cruel, but am I? I'm being realistic. Your dog has three legs and realistic. Your dog has three legs and realistic. Your dog has three legs and six months to live. six months to live. six months to live. &gt;&gt; Well, that's not criticism. That's an &gt;&gt; Well, that's not criticism. That's an &gt;&gt; Well, that's not criticism. That's an &gt;&gt; observation. Observation. &gt;&gt; observation. Observation. &gt;&gt; observation. Observation. &gt;&gt; Uh yeah, but it comes across because &gt;&gt; Uh yeah, but it comes across because &gt;&gt; Uh yeah, but it comes across because it's less than perfect. it's less than perfect. it's less than perfect. So you see it's a difficult So you see it's a difficult So you see it's a difficult arena. There's no single answer and you arena. There's no single answer and you arena. There's no single answer and you got to it's like neon. You got to shift got to it's like neon. You got to shift got to it's like neon. You got to shift on, shift off, shift on, shift off. on, shift off, shift on, shift off. on, shift off, shift on, shift off. Is it crazy? A little. Is it crazy? A little. Is it crazy? A little. I'm excited to share that Matina, the I'm excited to share that Matina, the I'm excited to share that Matina, the Yerba Mate drink I helped create, is now Yerba Mate drink I helped create, is now Yerba Mate drink I helped create, is now available at Whole Food Stores available at Whole Food Stores available at Whole Food Stores nationwide. Longtime listeners of this nationwide. Longtime listeners of this nationwide. Longtime listeners of this podcast know that Yerba Mate is my podcast know that Yerba Mate is my podcast know that Yerba Mate is my preferred caffeine source. It provides preferred caffeine source. It provides preferred caffeine source. It provides smooth energy without giving you the smooth energy without giving you the smooth energy without giving you the jitters, and it has a lot of other jitters, and it has a lot of other jitters, and it has a lot of other potential benefits, including helping to potential benefits, including helping to potential benefits, including helping to regulate your blood sugar, improving regulate your blood sugar, improving regulate your blood sugar, improving digestion, mild appetite suppression, digestion, mild appetite suppression, digestion, mild appetite suppression, and much more. Matina is my absolute and much more. Matina is my absolute and much more. Matina is my absolute favorite of all the Yerba Mate brands favorite of all the Yerba Mate brands favorite of all the Yerba Mate brands out there, and I've tried them all. out there, and I've tried them all. out there, and I've tried them all. Given my love for Matina, I decided to Given my love for Matina, I decided to Given my love for Matina, I decided to become a part owner in the business, and become a part owner in the business, and become a part owner in the business, and I helped them create their new line of I helped them create their new line of I helped them create their new line of products, which are all entirely zero products, which are all entirely zero products, which are all entirely zero sugar. These zero sugar cold brew matina sugar. These zero sugar cold brew matina sugar. These zero sugar cold brew matina flavors are fantastic. I drink at least flavors are fantastic. I drink at least flavors are fantastic. I drink at least three cans of them every single day. three cans of them every single day. three cans of them every single day. You'll often see them on the table You'll often see them on the table You'll often see them on the table during my podcast recordings. I during my podcast recordings. I during my podcast recordings. I absolutely love the product and I'm absolutely love the product and I'm absolutely love the product and I'm proud to now have it sold at Whole proud to now have it sold at Whole proud to now have it sold at Whole Foods. So, check out Matina at Whole Foods. So, check out Matina at Whole Foods. So, check out Matina at Whole Foods stores nationwide. It's cold Foods stores nationwide. It's cold Foods stores nationwide. It's cold brewed with the absolute best brewed with the absolute best brewed with the absolute best ingredients. It has zero sugar and it ingredients. It has zero sugar and it ingredients. It has zero sugar and it tastes amazing. And if you don't have a tastes amazing. And if you don't have a tastes amazing. And if you don't have a Whole Foods near you, you can also buy Whole Foods near you, you can also buy Whole Foods near you, you can also buy it online at drinkmatina.com. it online at drinkmatina.com. it online at drinkmatina.com. Every once in a while I find myself Every once in a while I find myself Every once in a while I find myself thinking, "Oh, you know, in the early thinking, "Oh, you know, in the early thinking, "Oh, you know, in the early 2000s, you know, the way art and music 2000s, you know, the way art and music 2000s, you know, the way art and music and media was, it was better in the, you and media was, it was better in the, you and media was, it was better in the, you know, growing up in this." But then I know, growing up in this." But then I know, growing up in this." But then I realized that people probably been realized that people probably been realized that people probably been saying that sort of thing forever. And saying that sort of thing forever. And saying that sort of thing forever. And that for young people now, I have a that for young people now, I have a that for young people now, I have a niece who just went off to college, like niece who just went off to college, like niece who just went off to college, like the, you know, she's not thinking about the, you know, she's not thinking about the, you know, she's not thinking about how it was back then. For her, it's how it was back then. For her, it's how it was back then. For her, it's happening now. happening now. happening now. And I think it's hard for us to adapt to And I think it's hard for us to adapt to And I think it's hard for us to adapt to the fact that we were young once and now the fact that we were young once and now the fact that we were young once and now we're less young. And we're less young. And we're less young. And that is all new for them. And so the that is all new for them. And so the that is all new for them. And so the question is and they don't have that question is and they don't have that question is and they don't have that frame of reference. So, when it comes to frame of reference. So, when it comes to frame of reference. So, when it comes to critics, when it comes to dance and art, critics, when it comes to dance and art, critics, when it comes to dance and art, do you see things getting better, worse, do you see things getting better, worse, do you see things getting better, worse, or do you just think of it as like, oh, or do you just think of it as like, oh, or do you just think of it as like, oh, it's just it's always been just an it's just it's always been just an it's just it's always been just an evolution? I have a hard time going, evolution? I have a hard time going, evolution? I have a hard time going, oh, you know, we had great music in the oh, you know, we had great music in the oh, you know, we had great music in the 90s. It was awesome music came out. 90s. It was awesome music came out. 90s. It was awesome music came out. &gt;&gt; You should have been around in the 70s. &gt;&gt; You should have been around in the 70s. &gt;&gt; You should have been around in the 70s. &gt;&gt; Exactly. You're making Exactly. That's &gt;&gt; Exactly. You're making Exactly. That's &gt;&gt; Exactly. You're making Exactly. That's the point, right? So, but for people who the point, right? So, but for people who the point, right? So, but for people who are 16, 18 now, they're not thinking are 16, 18 now, they're not thinking are 16, 18 now, they're not thinking that way. They're thinking, "We got all that way. They're thinking, "We got all that way. They're thinking, "We got all that music and there's all this other that music and there's all this other that music and there's all this other great music." great music." great music." So, I think the goal perhaps is to just So, I think the goal perhaps is to just So, I think the goal perhaps is to just stay open. stay open. stay open. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think it's not judgmental. It's &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think it's not judgmental. It's &gt;&gt; Yeah. I think it's not judgmental. It's not good or bad. It's what can I learn not good or bad. It's what can I learn not good or bad. It's what can I learn from this? What can I take from this? from this? What can I take from this? from this? What can I take from this? What can I transpose from this to put What can I transpose from this to put What can I transpose from this to put over here? What can I use? Make over here? What can I use? Make over here? What can I use? Make everything transactional. everything transactional. everything transactional. &gt;&gt; Can you elaborate on that? &gt;&gt; Can you elaborate on that? &gt;&gt; Can you elaborate on that? &gt;&gt; No, I like it like that. &gt;&gt; No, I like it like that. &gt;&gt; No, I like it like that. &gt;&gt; Full stop. Okay. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Full stop. Okay. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Full stop. Okay. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah. No transactional. What serves me &gt;&gt; Yeah. No transactional. What serves me &gt;&gt; Yeah. No transactional. What serves me here? What can I use? Uh, sometimes here? What can I use? Uh, sometimes here? What can I use? Uh, sometimes transactional gets a bad name. You are transactional gets a bad name. You are transactional gets a bad name. You are trying to use something. Yeah, I'm trying to use something. Yeah, I'm trying to use something. Yeah, I'm trying to use something. trying to use something. trying to use something. &gt;&gt; Well, the whole thing of, you know, &gt;&gt; Well, the whole thing of, you know, &gt;&gt; Well, the whole thing of, you know, great artists steal, you know, nothing great artists steal, you know, nothing great artists steal, you know, nothing is a new idea. This kind of thing. Do is a new idea. This kind of thing. Do is a new idea. This kind of thing. Do you believe that? you believe that? you believe that? &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Uh, to some degree. I mean, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Uh, to some degree. I mean, &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Uh, to some degree. I mean, that's why it's one of my privileges, that's why it's one of my privileges, that's why it's one of my privileges, uh, to, uh, work with the life of a uh, to, uh, work with the life of a uh, to, uh, work with the life of a composer if I'm serious about that. I composer if I'm serious about that. I composer if I'm serious about that. I worked on Amadeos, right? So, I read all worked on Amadeos, right? So, I read all worked on Amadeos, right? So, I read all of Mozart's writings, which are of Mozart's writings, which are of Mozart's writings, which are voluminous, um, and looked at every voluminous, um, and looked at every voluminous, um, and looked at every manuscript he had ever touched. Uh, and manuscript he had ever touched. Uh, and manuscript he had ever touched. Uh, and I was given access to this. Why wouldn't I was given access to this. Why wouldn't I was given access to this. Why wouldn't you take advantage of that you take advantage of that you take advantage of that &gt;&gt; for the movie Amadeus? &gt;&gt; for the movie Amadeus? &gt;&gt; for the movie Amadeus? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Love that movie. &gt;&gt; Love that movie. &gt;&gt; Love that movie. &gt;&gt; Thank you. We did, too. &gt;&gt; Thank you. We did, too. &gt;&gt; Thank you. We did, too. &gt;&gt; Love that movie. Yeah. the images of &gt;&gt; Love that movie. Yeah. the images of &gt;&gt; Love that movie. Yeah. the images of the lime being thrown over the body the lime being thrown over the body the lime being thrown over the body still, you know, imprinted in my mind. still, you know, imprinted in my mind. still, you know, imprinted in my mind. But it tells you about that era and how But it tells you about that era and how But it tells you about that era and how what people how little people had. what people how little people had. what people how little people had. &gt;&gt; Totally. And how uh much was preserved &gt;&gt; Totally. And how uh much was preserved &gt;&gt; Totally. And how uh much was preserved from the era. We shot in Prague for from the era. We shot in Prague for from the era. We shot in Prague for Vienna. Uh it was hard working there. Uh Vienna. Uh it was hard working there. Uh Vienna. Uh it was hard working there. Uh still under the regime. Um, and still under the regime. Um, and still under the regime. Um, and that in a way put it closer to what that in a way put it closer to what that in a way put it closer to what Mozart had to deal with, the sort of Mozart had to deal with, the sort of Mozart had to deal with, the sort of restrictions that he had. But the restrictions that he had. But the restrictions that he had. But the research that went into that picture was research that went into that picture was research that went into that picture was enormous. Um, the all of the enormous. Um, the all of the enormous. Um, the all of the illumination was from candles. All of illumination was from candles. All of illumination was from candles. All of the illumination, the candles, they use the illumination, the candles, they use the illumination, the candles, they use the same beeswax the same beeswax the same beeswax &gt;&gt; as they had used 200 years before. All &gt;&gt; as they had used 200 years before. All &gt;&gt; as they had used 200 years before. All the mechanisms on stage were what were the mechanisms on stage were what were the mechanisms on stage were what were used in the original productions and used in the original productions and used in the original productions and because we shot in the opera house which because we shot in the opera house which because we shot in the opera house which had not been updated. In fact, it's one had not been updated. In fact, it's one had not been updated. In fact, it's one of the ways Milos got back in was to of the ways Milos got back in was to of the ways Milos got back in was to say, "Okay, we will pay for the say, "Okay, we will pay for the say, "Okay, we will pay for the reconstruction of the opera house when reconstruction of the opera house when reconstruction of the opera house when we're done and they took him up on it." we're done and they took him up on it." we're done and they took him up on it." But I was using the same mechanics under But I was using the same mechanics under But I was using the same mechanics under the stage that Mozart had. door that the stage that Mozart had. door that the stage that Mozart had. door that opened into the orchestra was the door opened into the orchestra was the door opened into the orchestra was the door he touched when he came in to join the he touched when he came in to join the he touched when he came in to join the orchestra. And we had scenes that had orchestra. And we had scenes that had orchestra. And we had scenes that had live fire. We were swinging live fire live fire. We were swinging live fire live fire. We were swinging live fire around. You don't do this, but we were. around. You don't do this, but we were. around. You don't do this, but we were. And out of the floor there were little And out of the floor there were little And out of the floor there were little holes and we figured out that those holes and we figured out that those holes and we figured out that those little holes were a special kind of little holes were a special kind of little holes were a special kind of pollen that they put down and if they pollen that they put down and if they pollen that they put down and if they lit them they would send up sparks. And lit them they would send up sparks. And lit them they would send up sparks. And we were doing the sparks from the floor we were doing the sparks from the floor we were doing the sparks from the floor out of the pollen. And you had out of the pollen. And you had out of the pollen. And you had chandeliers coming down that had chandeliers coming down that had chandeliers coming down that had hundreds of candles. And in between hundreds of candles. And in between hundreds of candles. And in between takes, you're shifting all of the takes, you're shifting all of the takes, you're shifting all of the candles in like 50 chandeliers coming candles in like 50 chandeliers coming candles in like 50 chandeliers coming down here before you can do the next down here before you can do the next down here before you can do the next take. Meanwhile, you got the clothes take. Meanwhile, you got the clothes take. Meanwhile, you got the clothes that are in here. And there are no that are in here. And there are no that are in here. And there are no gussets. So, nobody's arm has gone any gussets. So, nobody's arm has gone any gussets. So, nobody's arm has gone any higher than this. You got the men in higher than this. You got the men in higher than this. You got the men in heels like this. Nobody is running with heels like this. Nobody is running with heels like this. Nobody is running with huge strides, stuff like that. Wow. Now, huge strides, stuff like that. Wow. Now, huge strides, stuff like that. Wow. Now, am I, you know, I don't know what to do am I, you know, I don't know what to do am I, you know, I don't know what to do with that kind of information other than with that kind of information other than with that kind of information other than to marvel at human invention. to marvel at human invention. to marvel at human invention. &gt;&gt; We've definitely come a long way. I I'm &gt;&gt; We've definitely come a long way. I I'm &gt;&gt; We've definitely come a long way. I I'm &gt;&gt; I don't know that we've come a long way. &gt;&gt; I don't know that we've come a long way. &gt;&gt; I don't know that we've come a long way. Things were different and they maximize Things were different and they maximize Things were different and they maximize their resources. their resources. their resources. &gt;&gt; I will say candles are better than uh &gt;&gt; I will say candles are better than uh &gt;&gt; I will say candles are better than uh white light LEDs, but that's a topic for white light LEDs, but that's a topic for white light LEDs, but that's a topic for another podcast. another podcast. another podcast. &gt;&gt; Probably. When are we going to do that? &gt;&gt; Probably. When are we going to do that? &gt;&gt; Probably. When are we going to do that? Incandescents are better but uh than Incandescents are better but uh than Incandescents are better but uh than LEDs. But I'm just thinking about all LEDs. But I'm just thinking about all LEDs. But I'm just thinking about all these candles and I'm wondering whether these candles and I'm wondering whether these candles and I'm wondering whether or not it was very warm in to work or not it was very warm in to work or not it was very warm in to work in that environment. in that environment. in that environment. &gt;&gt; Sure. It was very warm. &gt;&gt; Sure. It was very warm. &gt;&gt; Sure. It was very warm. &gt;&gt; People were sweating all the time. What &gt;&gt; People were sweating all the time. What &gt;&gt; People were sweating all the time. What do you think smell was in the 18th do you think smell was in the 18th do you think smell was in the 18th century? Very stenchy is how smell was in the Very stenchy is how smell was in the Very stenchy is how smell was in the 18th century. 18th century. 18th century. &gt;&gt; I had no idea what went into the making &gt;&gt; I had no idea what went into the making &gt;&gt; I had no idea what went into the making of that film. A spectacular film. of that film. A spectacular film. of that film. A spectacular film. Everyone should see that. It was real. Everyone should see that. It was real. Everyone should see that. It was real. &gt;&gt; It'll also give you a uh a window into &gt;&gt; It'll also give you a uh a window into &gt;&gt; It'll also give you a uh a window into uh how psychiatric illness was treated. uh how psychiatric illness was treated. uh how psychiatric illness was treated. There's that, you know, brutal scene There's that, you know, brutal scene There's that, you know, brutal scene from a I guess they called them insane from a I guess they called them insane from a I guess they called them insane asylums. Um asylums. Um asylums. Um &gt;&gt; y [snorts] &gt;&gt; y [snorts] &gt;&gt; y [snorts] &gt;&gt; and nowadays we probably understand that &gt;&gt; and nowadays we probably understand that &gt;&gt; and nowadays we probably understand that 95% of those people were probably 95% of those people were probably 95% of those people were probably suffering from things that suffering from things that suffering from things that nice at home care probably would have nice at home care probably would have nice at home care probably would have result. &gt;&gt; There's a pill for it. &gt;&gt; There's a pill for it. &gt;&gt; There's a pill for it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. or there's a pill for Yeah. or &gt;&gt; Yeah. or there's a pill for Yeah. or &gt;&gt; Yeah. or there's a pill for Yeah. or a combination of sunlight and or a combination of sunlight and or a combination of sunlight and pills and other things. pills and other things. pills and other things. &gt;&gt; Speaking of which, um &gt;&gt; Speaking of which, um &gt;&gt; Speaking of which, um &gt;&gt; what's your view on modern versus &gt;&gt; what's your view on modern versus &gt;&gt; what's your view on modern versus ancient medicine versus the body just ancient medicine versus the body just ancient medicine versus the body just being really smart? being really smart? being really smart? &gt;&gt; I know not much about either ancient nor &gt;&gt; I know not much about either ancient nor &gt;&gt; I know not much about either ancient nor modern medicine. I'm not sure I'm modern medicine. I'm not sure I'm modern medicine. I'm not sure I'm equipped to have a view uh on these equipped to have a view uh on these equipped to have a view uh on these things. Um, I simply myself try to stay things. Um, I simply myself try to stay things. Um, I simply myself try to stay as close to what is, forgive the word, as close to what is, forgive the word, as close to what is, forgive the word, natural as possible. In terms of eating, natural as possible. In terms of eating, natural as possible. In terms of eating, I uh am currently uh not eating I uh am currently uh not eating I uh am currently uh not eating except for this trip. Okay? No carbs, no except for this trip. Okay? No carbs, no except for this trip. Okay? No carbs, no sugar. All right? Uh which I find to be sugar. All right? Uh which I find to be sugar. All right? Uh which I find to be the keto diet I find to be more the keto diet I find to be more the keto diet I find to be more manageable. I can control it better. Um manageable. I can control it better. Um manageable. I can control it better. Um I know where my weight is. I can feel I know where my weight is. I can feel I know where my weight is. I can feel how close to the bone where I got to how close to the bone where I got to how close to the bone where I got to heho huh. You can't do that if you're heho huh. You can't do that if you're heho huh. You can't do that if you're eating a lot of pasta. eating a lot of pasta. eating a lot of pasta. &gt;&gt; Uh so that's and also I fortunately &gt;&gt; Uh so that's and also I fortunately &gt;&gt; Uh so that's and also I fortunately cannot cook. Therefore, I basically eat cannot cook. Therefore, I basically eat cannot cook. Therefore, I basically eat everything raw. I can eat meat raw. I everything raw. I can eat meat raw. I everything raw. I can eat meat raw. I certainly eat vegetables raw. I am certainly eat vegetables raw. I am certainly eat vegetables raw. I am exaggerating. I can use the oven. Okay. exaggerating. I can use the oven. Okay. exaggerating. I can use the oven. Okay. I can boil water, but that's about it. I can boil water, but that's about it. I can boil water, but that's about it. No sauces ever. No sauces ever. No sauces ever. &gt;&gt; Nothing decorative. Just, you know, I've &gt;&gt; Nothing decorative. Just, you know, I've &gt;&gt; Nothing decorative. Just, you know, I've often said if there were a pill for often said if there were a pill for often said if there were a pill for food, I'd take it. I'm not sure I would food, I'd take it. I'm not sure I would food, I'd take it. I'm not sure I would because I'm not sure it would have what because I'm not sure it would have what because I'm not sure it would have what I needed in it. I'm not sure I'm getting I needed in it. I'm not sure I'm getting I needed in it. I'm not sure I'm getting that anyway, but at least I'm making an that anyway, but at least I'm making an that anyway, but at least I'm making an effort. And I know where it comes from. effort. And I know where it comes from. effort. And I know where it comes from. I don't like mystery a lot. I don't like mystery a lot. I don't like mystery a lot. &gt;&gt; So, it sounds like meat, fish, fruits, &gt;&gt; So, it sounds like meat, fish, fruits, &gt;&gt; So, it sounds like meat, fish, fruits, and vegetables are your staples. and vegetables are your staples. and vegetables are your staples. &gt;&gt; Say so. &gt;&gt; Say so. &gt;&gt; Say so. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Likewise. And uh I think it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Likewise. And uh I think it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. Likewise. And uh I think it's funny that nowadays saying it makes funny that nowadays saying it makes funny that nowadays saying it makes total sense when we say you know the total sense when we say you know the total sense when we say you know the carbs and sugar are the are really the carbs and sugar are the are really the carbs and sugar are the are really the problem in most cases and whereas the problem in most cases and whereas the problem in most cases and whereas for years it felt like the public health for years it felt like the public health for years it felt like the public health space around nutrition was utterly space around nutrition was utterly space around nutrition was utterly confused. It was like fat is the bad confused. It was like fat is the bad confused. It was like fat is the bad thing then protein and then meat is the thing then protein and then meat is the thing then protein and then meat is the bad thing. I mean, deli meats probably bad thing. I mean, deli meats probably bad thing. I mean, deli meats probably they are not great for us, but they are not great for us, but they are not great for us, but &gt;&gt; healthily sourced. &gt;&gt; healthily sourced. &gt;&gt; healthily sourced. &gt;&gt; We we went through a period probably of &gt;&gt; We we went through a period probably of &gt;&gt; We we went through a period probably of about a year or even two where we carb about a year or even two where we carb about a year or even two where we carb loaded because we thought we'd have more loaded because we thought we'd have more loaded because we thought we'd have more energy, we'd be stronger. We just got energy, we'd be stronger. We just got energy, we'd be stronger. We just got heavier. But anyway, maybe we had a heavier. But anyway, maybe we had a heavier. But anyway, maybe we had a little more power. little more power. little more power. &gt;&gt; I have a friend whose daughter is very &gt;&gt; I have a friend whose daughter is very &gt;&gt; I have a friend whose daughter is very um [clears throat] um [clears throat] um [clears throat] interested in ballet. She uh actually is interested in ballet. She uh actually is interested in ballet. She uh actually is part of a conservatory that goes up that part of a conservatory that goes up that part of a conservatory that goes up that they actually live in San Francisco. I they actually live in San Francisco. I they actually live in San Francisco. I don't know that she's part I don't think don't know that she's part I don't think don't know that she's part I don't think she's part of the San Francisco Ballet, she's part of the San Francisco Ballet, she's part of the San Francisco Ballet, but there's something adjacent to that. but there's something adjacent to that. but there's something adjacent to that. And I said, you know, how is that? You And I said, you know, how is that? You And I said, you know, how is that? You know, because you hear these stereotypes know, because you hear these stereotypes know, because you hear these stereotypes of, you know, it's brutal on young of, you know, it's brutal on young of, you know, it's brutal on young girls's probably boys as well, but minds girls's probably boys as well, but minds girls's probably boys as well, but minds about their weight and the training and about their weight and the training and about their weight and the training and it's unhealthy. And he said nowadays it's unhealthy. And he said nowadays it's unhealthy. And he said nowadays they they've adjusted for some of that they they've adjusted for some of that they they've adjusted for some of that and they really try and keep a and they really try and keep a and they really try and keep a healthier environment. What's your view healthier environment. What's your view healthier environment. What's your view on that? I mean, standards versus on that? I mean, standards versus on that? I mean, standards versus health. I mean, this is a topic health. I mean, this is a topic health. I mean, this is a topic that we spills over into everything in that we spills over into everything in that we spills over into everything in science. I used to work 100 hour weeks. science. I used to work 100 hour weeks. science. I used to work 100 hour weeks. 100 one 10 one zero zero. I heard there 100 one 10 one zero zero. I heard there 100 one 10 one zero zero. I heard there was a guy that worked 101, so I worked was a guy that worked 101, so I worked was a guy that worked 101, so I worked 102. Then I realized that I couldn't 102. Then I realized that I couldn't 102. Then I realized that I couldn't sustain that. I'm not suggesting anyone sustain that. I'm not suggesting anyone sustain that. I'm not suggesting anyone do that. But everyone has a kind of war do that. But everyone has a kind of war do that. But everyone has a kind of war story from their time, but you know, now story from their time, but you know, now story from their time, but you know, now there does seem to be more care taken to there does seem to be more care taken to there does seem to be more care taken to mental health, physical health. So, how mental health, physical health. So, how mental health, physical health. So, how do you balance that in the world of do you balance that in the world of do you balance that in the world of dance where you want standards to dance where you want standards to dance where you want standards to continue to stand or rise, but you also continue to stand or rise, but you also continue to stand or rise, but you also don't want people um mentally destroyed? don't want people um mentally destroyed? don't want people um mentally destroyed? &gt;&gt; This is a hard one. &gt;&gt; This is a hard one. &gt;&gt; This is a hard one. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; there's always going to be a trade-off &gt;&gt; there's always going to be a trade-off &gt;&gt; there's always going to be a trade-off to some degree. I mean, the stress of to some degree. I mean, the stress of to some degree. I mean, the stress of performance is whether it's athletic performance is whether it's athletic performance is whether it's athletic performance or, you know, dance performance or, you know, dance performance or, you know, dance performance is extreme. And performance is extreme. And performance is extreme. And unfortunately, it's been my experience unfortunately, it's been my experience unfortunately, it's been my experience that the better the performer, the worse that the better the performer, the worse that the better the performer, the worse the nerves before, the nerves before, the nerves before, &gt;&gt; huh, &gt;&gt; huh, &gt;&gt; huh, &gt;&gt; sorry about that. The more intensely &gt;&gt; sorry about that. The more intensely &gt;&gt; sorry about that. The more intensely important that curtain going up is to important that curtain going up is to important that curtain going up is to that person and the possibility that person and the possibility that person and the possibility of failure is always there and the of failure is always there and the of failure is always there and the degree of rehearsing that's going to degree of rehearsing that's going to degree of rehearsing that's going to address that is why didn't you do more address that is why didn't you do more address that is why didn't you do more is always the response. Um, so that is always the response. Um, so that is always the response. Um, so that is I'm sorry. It's a reality. It's a I'm sorry. It's a reality. It's a I'm sorry. It's a reality. It's a choice. Don't don't choose that choice. Don't don't choose that choice. Don't don't choose that profession. We can't make life totally nice. It is We can't make life totally nice. It is We can't make life totally nice. It is partially what it is. Choose something partially what it is. Choose something partially what it is. Choose something else. You know, often and I'm not alone in You know, often and I'm not alone in You know, often and I'm not alone in this. One hears it often. You know, a this. One hears it often. You know, a this. One hears it often. You know, a parent or a child even will come up. Can parent or a child even will come up. Can parent or a child even will come up. Can I be a dancer? I say don't do it. find I be a dancer? I say don't do it. find I be a dancer? I say don't do it. find something else if you possibly can. something else if you possibly can. something else if you possibly can. If you can't be a dancer If you can't be a dancer If you can't be a dancer &gt;&gt; because you want to set that thick &gt;&gt; because you want to set that thick &gt;&gt; because you want to set that thick line. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean it h and there are other &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean it h and there are other &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean it h and there are other folks who will find their own way to folks who will find their own way to folks who will find their own way to address that line and who will massage address that line and who will massage address that line and who will massage that line and it's part of creativity is that line and it's part of creativity is that line and it's part of creativity is addressing those old lines of boundaries addressing those old lines of boundaries addressing those old lines of boundaries uh classical modern oi uh classical modern oi uh classical modern oi It's interesting when you put that It's interesting when you put that It's interesting when you put that barrier, you naturally select for the barrier, you naturally select for the barrier, you naturally select for the people that really want it. people that really want it. people that really want it. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yesterday I had a early morning call &gt;&gt; Yesterday I had a early morning call &gt;&gt; Yesterday I had a early morning call with a friend of mine who's a former with a friend of mine who's a former with a friend of mine who's a former what they call tier one SEAL team what they call tier one SEAL team what they call tier one SEAL team operator. So he was in the Navy Seals operator. So he was in the Navy Seals operator. So he was in the Navy Seals but with it then there's an another but with it then there's an another but with it then there's an another selection process within it for the selection process within it for the selection process within it for the uh tier one or the sort of elite of uh tier one or the sort of elite of uh tier one or the sort of elite of within that already elite community and within that already elite community and within that already elite community and he has um children and I said uh are he has um children and I said uh are he has um children and I said uh are they interested in military? He said, they interested in military? He said, they interested in military? He said, "One of them is." And I said, "Is he "One of them is." And I said, "Is he "One of them is." And I said, "Is he interested in going to the teams?" And interested in going to the teams?" And interested in going to the teams?" And he's like, "He is." I said, "What are he's like, "He is." I said, "What are he's like, "He is." I said, "What are you telling him?" And he said, "I'm you telling him?" And he said, "I'm you telling him?" And he said, "I'm telling him not to do it." And he keeps telling him not to do it." And he keeps telling him not to do it." And he keeps coming back that he wants to do it. And coming back that he wants to do it. And coming back that he wants to do it. And I'm reassured. He keeps telling him, I'm reassured. He keeps telling him, I'm reassured. He keeps telling him, "Don't do it. You're going to hate it. "Don't do it. You're going to hate it. "Don't do it. You're going to hate it. It's going to be the worst thing ever." It's going to be the worst thing ever." It's going to be the worst thing ever." And and he keeps coming back, "No, I And and he keeps coming back, "No, I And and he keeps coming back, "No, I want to do it. No, I So, he's convinced want to do it. No, I So, he's convinced want to do it. No, I So, he's convinced now that he actually wants to do it." now that he actually wants to do it." now that he actually wants to do it." &gt;&gt; Well, but uh unfortunately, telling a &gt;&gt; Well, but uh unfortunately, telling a &gt;&gt; Well, but uh unfortunately, telling a kid not to do it is a bait. uh and can kid not to do it is a bait. uh and can kid not to do it is a bait. uh and can just engender I want to do it just to just engender I want to do it just to just engender I want to do it just to prove that prove that prove that you're going to go up against authority. you're going to go up against authority. you're going to go up against authority. That's not the right reason to select. That's not the right reason to select. That's not the right reason to select. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Better to just say you got to really &gt;&gt; Better to just say you got to really &gt;&gt; Better to just say you got to really want to do this. Even more, can't really want to do this. Even more, can't really want to do this. Even more, can't you find something else? And if they can you find something else? And if they can you find something else? And if they can question it, they don't want to do it question it, they don't want to do it question it, they don't want to do it enough. Mhm. He did add that if he feels enough. Mhm. He did add that if he feels enough. Mhm. He did add that if he feels he likes it more than it sucks, his he likes it more than it sucks, his he likes it more than it sucks, his words, then he'll be okay. words, then he'll be okay. words, then he'll be okay. &gt;&gt; I would buy that. &gt;&gt; I would buy that. &gt;&gt; I would buy that. &gt;&gt; There's got to be some tilt in the &gt;&gt; There's got to be some tilt in the &gt;&gt; There's got to be some tilt in the seesaw more towards I like this more seesaw more towards I like this more seesaw more towards I like this more than it sucks. than it sucks. than it sucks. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'd buy that. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'd buy that. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'd buy that. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; That's that's fair. &gt;&gt; That's that's fair. &gt;&gt; That's that's fair. &gt;&gt; And I see a lot of parallels between the &gt;&gt; And I see a lot of parallels between the &gt;&gt; And I see a lot of parallels between the communities that you come from and he communities that you come from and he communities that you come from and he comes from. Frankly, comes from. Frankly, comes from. Frankly, &gt;&gt; it is elite. &gt;&gt; it is elite. &gt;&gt; it is elite. &gt;&gt; It has a price to pay. Do you think &gt;&gt; It has a price to pay. Do you think &gt;&gt; It has a price to pay. Do you think nowadays because of social media and the nowadays because of social media and the nowadays because of social media and the internet there's a larger pool of internet there's a larger pool of internet there's a larger pool of dancers to select from and talent that dancers to select from and talent that dancers to select from and talent that gets selected for the to work with you gets selected for the to work with you gets selected for the to work with you for instance is better because it's just for instance is better because it's just for instance is better because it's just such a bigger pool that you that top 1% such a bigger pool that you that top 1% such a bigger pool that you that top 1% reflects an even better 1%. reflects an even better 1%. reflects an even better 1%. &gt;&gt; It's different uh the because the talent &gt;&gt; It's different uh the because the talent &gt;&gt; It's different uh the because the talent is being uh trained and uh challenged in is being uh trained and uh challenged in is being uh trained and uh challenged in a different way as young people. In a different way as young people. In a different way as young people. In other words, there are now competitive other words, there are now competitive other words, there are now competitive um activities for dance. I started to um activities for dance. I started to um activities for dance. I started to say activity sports for dance. It's not say activity sports for dance. It's not say activity sports for dance. It's not quite a sport though it converge which quite a sport though it converge which quite a sport though it converge which is fine. Uh but when I was uh evolving is fine. Uh but when I was uh evolving is fine. Uh but when I was uh evolving as a dancer, we had very strict borders. as a dancer, we had very strict borders. as a dancer, we had very strict borders. This was tap, this was ballet, this was This was tap, this was ballet, this was This was tap, this was ballet, this was modern, this is jazz over here. And you modern, this is jazz over here. And you modern, this is jazz over here. And you could step across the borders and try could step across the borders and try could step across the borders and try out different of these. even acquire out different of these. even acquire out different of these. even acquire knowledge from all of them to become knowledge from all of them to become knowledge from all of them to become something but you had to do it on your something but you had to do it on your something but you had to do it on your own and then uh you would you know work own and then uh you would you know work own and then uh you would you know work to gain acceptance into whatever to gain acceptance into whatever to gain acceptance into whatever performing arena. Now children very performing arena. Now children very performing arena. Now children very young children eight years old even young children eight years old even young children eight years old even younger six-year-old kids there younger six-year-old kids there younger six-year-old kids there competitions for children as dancers uh competitions for children as dancers uh competitions for children as dancers uh or as performers or as performers or as performers um and this engenders a totally um and this engenders a totally um and this engenders a totally different purpose and performance in the different purpose and performance in the different purpose and performance in the kid. I was not I I'm Buster Katon, kid. I was not I I'm Buster Katon, kid. I was not I I'm Buster Katon, right? I take it on the chin, stoic, right? I take it on the chin, stoic, right? I take it on the chin, stoic, down, out, or I make the move, right? down, out, or I make the move, right? down, out, or I make the move, right? The kids are out there to sell it, and The kids are out there to sell it, and The kids are out there to sell it, and they're out there to get their points, they're out there to get their points, they're out there to get their points, and it is partially in their technique, and it is partially in their technique, and it is partially in their technique, but it's also immediately in their but it's also immediately in their but it's also immediately in their manipulation of the audience. Great. manipulation of the audience. Great. manipulation of the audience. Great. That's called performing. And maybe That's called performing. And maybe That's called performing. And maybe you'll be a good actor, but in the you'll be a good actor, but in the you'll be a good actor, but in the meantime, you're shortch changing your meantime, you're shortch changing your meantime, you're shortch changing your technique because you're not asking the technique because you're not asking the technique because you're not asking the audience to just gauge you on what you audience to just gauge you on what you audience to just gauge you on what you can do physically, but how you can sell can do physically, but how you can sell can do physically, but how you can sell it because you want those points and so it because you want those points and so it because you want those points and so do your parents. So these competitions do your parents. So these competitions do your parents. So these competitions in a way are very difficult and for a in a way are very difficult and for a in a way are very difficult and for a long time I wouldn't work with long time I wouldn't work with long time I wouldn't work with competition trained dancers. Now I find competition trained dancers. Now I find competition trained dancers. Now I find that it's broadened and that the kids that it's broadened and that the kids that it's broadened and that the kids are more sophisticated in the ways that are more sophisticated in the ways that are more sophisticated in the ways that they uh attack technique for performing they uh attack technique for performing they uh attack technique for performing and they're also hardened in a way. I and they're also hardened in a way. I and they're also hardened in a way. I can put them in younger. Uh I don't can put them in younger. Uh I don't can put them in younger. Uh I don't worry they're going to be nervous. worry they're going to be nervous. worry they're going to be nervous. They're not going to be nervous. They They're not going to be nervous. They They're not going to be nervous. They were nervous when they were out here were nervous when they were out here were nervous when they were out here trying to get, you know, graded 30 trying to get, you know, graded 30 trying to get, you know, graded 30 points on the watada and the witch points on the watada and the witch points on the watada and the witch and to get the hits for the watada. And and to get the hits for the watada. And and to get the hits for the watada. And you know they're no longer nervous about you know they're no longer nervous about you know they're no longer nervous about squat. So put them in. This is great. squat. So put them in. This is great. squat. So put them in. This is great. But in the meantime, they are doing it But in the meantime, they are doing it But in the meantime, they are doing it for reasons outside of the thing itself for reasons outside of the thing itself for reasons outside of the thing itself for what they can gain from it from for what they can gain from it from for what they can gain from it from their internet hits from their ha their internet hits from their ha their internet hits from their ha their hina the wada as opposed to just doing hina the wada as opposed to just doing hina the wada as opposed to just doing it for the thing itself and taking what it for the thing itself and taking what it for the thing itself and taking what comes from it. It's different. comes from it. It's different. comes from it. It's different. &gt;&gt; Yeah. that exttrinsic reward. While it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. that exttrinsic reward. While it's &gt;&gt; Yeah. that exttrinsic reward. While it's important to keep people moving forward important to keep people moving forward important to keep people moving forward if they want to be a professional, if they want to be a professional, if they want to be a professional, it definitely contaminates the core it definitely contaminates the core it definitely contaminates the core motivation &gt;&gt; and what the kid will accomplish &gt;&gt; and what the kid will accomplish &gt;&gt; and what the kid will accomplish because they won't have to do it the because they won't have to do it the because they won't have to do it the hard way. They'll do it the easy way if hard way. They'll do it the easy way if hard way. They'll do it the easy way if it works as well. I was always trained it works as well. I was always trained it works as well. I was always trained to do it the hard way. You can always do to do it the hard way. You can always do to do it the hard way. You can always do it the easy way. Train for the hard way. it the easy way. Train for the hard way. it the easy way. Train for the hard way. Um, and uh, I can see that in Um, and uh, I can see that in Um, and uh, I can see that in performers. And a performer who has done performers. And a performer who has done performers. And a performer who has done it the hard way has more range. Uh, and it the hard way has more range. Uh, and it the hard way has more range. Uh, and when they work, you're going to be more when they work, you're going to be more when they work, you're going to be more interested in them because they're interested in them because they're interested in them because they're making more choices. And an interesting making more choices. And an interesting making more choices. And an interesting artist is a choice maker. An interesting artist is a choice maker. An interesting artist is a choice maker. An interesting performer is always about making choice. performer is always about making choice. performer is always about making choice. That's what will keep you focused on That's what will keep you focused on That's what will keep you focused on them. If they're just doing what they them. If they're just doing what they them. If they're just doing what they think is going to win, you're going, think is going to win, you're going, think is going to win, you're going, "Really?" &gt;&gt; Listen, I love social media. I teach on &gt;&gt; Listen, I love social media. I teach on &gt;&gt; Listen, I love social media. I teach on social media. But the problem with social media. But the problem with social media. But the problem with social media as it relates to craft and social media as it relates to craft and social media as it relates to craft and feedback, etc., is that it puts you on a feedback, etc., is that it puts you on a feedback, etc., is that it puts you on a reinforcement schedule of you did reinforcement schedule of you did reinforcement schedule of you did something yesterday, you can put it out something yesterday, you can put it out something yesterday, you can put it out there and you and you can immediately there and you and you can immediately there and you and you can immediately get the response. I think there's a get the response. I think there's a get the response. I think there's a sweet spot between practice, mastery, sweet spot between practice, mastery, sweet spot between practice, mastery, and feedback. And when it animals of and feedback. And when it animals of and feedback. And when it animals of which we are get we adapt to certain um which we are get we adapt to certain um which we are get we adapt to certain um contingencies you know every 48 hours I contingencies you know every 48 hours I contingencies you know every 48 hours I expect something back every 72 hours expect something back every 72 hours expect something back every 72 hours every they want to I always tell people every they want to I always tell people every they want to I always tell people if they want to do a PhD you got to love if they want to do a PhD you got to love if they want to do a PhD you got to love the topic you got to embrace the topic you got to embrace the topic you got to embrace the lifestyle but also if nothing else it lifestyle but also if nothing else it lifestyle but also if nothing else it will teach you to work very hard will teach you to work very hard will teach you to work very hard for four years to get something. for four years to get something. for four years to get something. Sometimes there are a couple Sometimes there are a couple Sometimes there are a couple publications in there or more or less, publications in there or more or less, publications in there or more or less, but if nothing else, it will teach you but if nothing else, it will teach you but if nothing else, it will teach you how to work very hard for something how to work very hard for something how to work very hard for something that only comes to you at earliest four that only comes to you at earliest four that only comes to you at earliest four years from now, which I think is very years from now, which I think is very years from now, which I think is very valuable. &gt;&gt; Even four years is like a promise. &gt;&gt; Even four years is like a promise. &gt;&gt; Even four years is like a promise. You might want to think about working You might want to think about working You might want to think about working for no reward. for no reward. for no reward. &gt;&gt; And [clears throat] after four years, &gt;&gt; And [clears throat] after four years, &gt;&gt; And [clears throat] after four years, you don't get anything other than you don't get anything other than you don't get anything other than the opportunity to continue. I love the opportunity to continue. I love the opportunity to continue. I love that. I love that. My graduate adviser that. I love that. My graduate adviser that. I love that. My graduate adviser put this into me. We published a paper put this into me. We published a paper put this into me. We published a paper in science. I was so excited and I said, in science. I was so excited and I said, in science. I was so excited and I said, "We're going to throw a party. Are we "We're going to throw a party. Are we "We're going to throw a party. Are we going to celebrate?" And she just going to celebrate?" And she just going to celebrate?" And she just laughed and she was like, "I could buy laughed and she was like, "I could buy laughed and she was like, "I could buy you a pizza, but I'm not even going to you a pizza, but I'm not even going to you a pizza, but I'm not even going to do that." She said something to that do that." She said something to that do that." She said something to that extent. I can't remember the exact extent. I can't remember the exact extent. I can't remember the exact words, but I remember what came next. words, but I remember what came next. words, but I remember what came next. She said, "You already got the party." She said, "You already got the party." She said, "You already got the party." &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. &gt;&gt; And I was like, "You're right. I love &gt;&gt; And I was like, "You're right. I love &gt;&gt; And I was like, "You're right. I love doing the experiment." And we went on I doing the experiment." And we went on I doing the experiment." And we went on I think we published close to 10 papers think we published close to 10 papers think we published close to 10 papers together. And when I wasn't thinking together. And when I wasn't thinking together. And when I wasn't thinking about the PhD, in fact, they forced me about the PhD, in fact, they forced me about the PhD, in fact, they forced me to take my qualifying exam. I didn't to take my qualifying exam. I didn't to take my qualifying exam. I didn't want to take I just loved doing want to take I just loved doing want to take I just loved doing experiments. And if you love doing experiments. And if you love doing experiments. And if you love doing experiments, turns out you published a experiments, turns out you published a experiments, turns out you published a lot of papers. Published a lot of lot of papers. Published a lot of lot of papers. Published a lot of papers. Turns out it's easy to get a papers. Turns out it's easy to get a papers. Turns out it's easy to get a PhD. &gt;&gt; Right. Exactly. You're doing something &gt;&gt; Right. Exactly. You're doing something &gt;&gt; Right. Exactly. You're doing something for the right reasons, not to get for the right reasons, not to get for the right reasons, not to get something else. something else. something else. &gt;&gt; But it's hard to explain that to someone &gt;&gt; But it's hard to explain that to someone &gt;&gt; But it's hard to explain that to someone who's really driven. Not even nowadays. who's really driven. Not even nowadays. who's really driven. Not even nowadays. It's just hard to explain that to It's just hard to explain that to It's just hard to explain that to somebody because I think people who are somebody because I think people who are somebody because I think people who are really driven also they want people to really driven also they want people to really driven also they want people to understand something. understand something. understand something. &gt;&gt; They they need to understand excellence &gt;&gt; They they need to understand excellence &gt;&gt; They they need to understand excellence on their own terms. Not from outside but on their own terms. Not from outside but on their own terms. Not from outside but from inside. I can do more. I can do from inside. I can do more. I can do from inside. I can do more. I can do more. That's what I'm interested in. Oh, more. That's what I'm interested in. Oh, more. That's what I'm interested in. Oh, you like that? Not enough. you like that? Not enough. you like that? Not enough. I want more. I want more. I want more. &gt;&gt; Just letting that really sink in. I &gt;&gt; Just letting that really sink in. I &gt;&gt; Just letting that really sink in. I totally agree. I'm just trying to think totally agree. I'm just trying to think totally agree. I'm just trying to think of the messaging that of the messaging that of the messaging that works for kids. works for kids. works for kids. &gt;&gt; Almost none. [laughter] I have a &gt;&gt; Almost none. [laughter] I have a &gt;&gt; Almost none. [laughter] I have a grandson, believe me. grandson, believe me. grandson, believe me. &gt;&gt; They operate on their own on their own &gt;&gt; They operate on their own on their own &gt;&gt; They operate on their own on their own in their own frame. in their own frame. in their own frame. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It worked on you. Worked on me to &gt;&gt; Yeah. It worked on you. Worked on me to &gt;&gt; Yeah. It worked on you. Worked on me to some extent. some extent. some extent. &gt;&gt; Yes. uh because my mother was a concert &gt;&gt; Yes. uh because my mother was a concert &gt;&gt; Yes. uh because my mother was a concert pianist and she wasn't able to of the pianist and she wasn't able to of the pianist and she wasn't able to of the war came and she started teaching to war came and she started teaching to war came and she started teaching to help support the family and in a way I help support the family and in a way I help support the family and in a way I think I was aware of the sacrifice that think I was aware of the sacrifice that think I was aware of the sacrifice that she had made but I also heard the level she had made but I also heard the level she had made but I also heard the level of excellence from the time I was a of excellence from the time I was a of excellence from the time I was a teeny itsybitsy I went to her lesson teeny itsybitsy I went to her lesson teeny itsybitsy I went to her lesson she'd continued and I heard the she'd continued and I heard the she'd continued and I heard the practicing and I think even with no practicing and I think even with no practicing and I think even with no training I heard that was better training I heard that was better training I heard that was better than that and they got closer and You than that and they got closer and You than that and they got closer and You develop your own morality. You don't have somebody telling you what You don't have somebody telling you what You don't have somebody telling you what is good and what is bad. is good and what is bad. is good and what is bad. &gt;&gt; It sounds like, if I may, that you &gt;&gt; It sounds like, if I may, that you &gt;&gt; It sounds like, if I may, that you develop your own internal standard. develop your own internal standard. develop your own internal standard. That's very high. That's very high. That's very high. &gt;&gt; It's very high. It's unattainable and &gt;&gt; It's very high. It's unattainable and &gt;&gt; It's very high. It's unattainable and you're going to hate yourself a lot of you're going to hate yourself a lot of you're going to hate yourself a lot of the time. the time. the time. &gt;&gt; They don't tell you that, but it's true. &gt;&gt; They don't tell you that, but it's true. &gt;&gt; They don't tell you that, but it's true. &gt;&gt; No, I'm just saying. &gt;&gt; No, I'm just saying. &gt;&gt; No, I'm just saying. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's true. I don't know if hate &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's true. I don't know if hate &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's true. I don't know if hate hate's a strong word. It is a strong hate's a strong word. It is a strong hate's a strong word. It is a strong word. &gt;&gt; Maybe not satisfied, but &gt;&gt; Maybe not satisfied, but &gt;&gt; Maybe not satisfied, but &gt;&gt; sorry. It's called hate. &gt;&gt; sorry. It's called hate. &gt;&gt; sorry. It's called hate. &gt;&gt; I love your honesty. &gt;&gt; I love your honesty. &gt;&gt; I love your honesty. You've said before, before you can think You've said before, before you can think You've said before, before you can think outside the box, you have to have a box. outside the box, you have to have a box. outside the box, you have to have a box. But you also talk about having an actual But you also talk about having an actual But you also talk about having an actual box. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Explain. Well, the actual box holds the &gt;&gt; Explain. Well, the actual box holds the &gt;&gt; Explain. Well, the actual box holds the tangible items that are very sensory tangible items that are very sensory tangible items that are very sensory that have the feel or the smell or the that have the feel or the smell or the that have the feel or the smell or the weight of when you first thought that weight of when you first thought that weight of when you first thought that idea. Maybe your dance isn't going to idea. Maybe your dance isn't going to idea. Maybe your dance isn't going to look like a rock, but when you picked up look like a rock, but when you picked up look like a rock, but when you picked up that rock, there was a certain kind of that rock, there was a certain kind of that rock, there was a certain kind of physical resistant and that suggested a physical resistant and that suggested a physical resistant and that suggested a kind of movement. And if you don't keep kind of movement. And if you don't keep kind of movement. And if you don't keep that rock, you'll forget sometimes where that rock, you'll forget sometimes where that rock, you'll forget sometimes where it came from. I was working um on a film it came from. I was working um on a film it came from. I was working um on a film script once and uh I was told look script once and uh I was told look script once and uh I was told look write down your initial instinct, your write down your initial instinct, your write down your initial instinct, your initial idea for what the film is to be. initial idea for what the film is to be. initial idea for what the film is to be. Put it in a drawer and lock the drawer Put it in a drawer and lock the drawer Put it in a drawer and lock the drawer because there are times when you're because there are times when you're because there are times when you're going to not know what the you're going to not know what the you're going to not know what the you're doing. Unlock the drawer and remind yourself Unlock the drawer and remind yourself Unlock the drawer and remind yourself that rock can remind you of that rock can remind you of that rock can remind you of that original instinct, that original instinct, that original instinct, that original movement that evolved from you. Go, oh movement that evolved from you. Go, oh movement that evolved from you. Go, oh yeah, that's where I am. That's yeah, that's where I am. That's yeah, that's where I am. That's what I'm doing. But we overthink things what I'm doing. But we overthink things what I'm doing. But we overthink things and we compound it. And it's not that and we compound it. And it's not that and we compound it. And it's not that complicated. You want to keep it as complicated. You want to keep it as complicated. You want to keep it as simple as possible. You want to, I simple as possible. You want to, I simple as possible. You want to, I think, keep it as close to the initial think, keep it as close to the initial think, keep it as close to the initial reason you wanted to do it, the initial reason you wanted to do it, the initial reason you wanted to do it, the initial sense of excitement. And again, to use sense of excitement. And again, to use sense of excitement. And again, to use the same old word, love that you had for the same old word, love that you had for the same old word, love that you had for that moment in time that you wanted to that moment in time that you wanted to that moment in time that you wanted to share. I love the idea of anchoring to physical I love the idea of anchoring to physical I love the idea of anchoring to physical items around something that's conceptual items around something that's conceptual items around something that's conceptual because the conceptual journey can be because the conceptual journey can be because the conceptual journey can be whether or not it's a book or a dance or whether or not it's a book or a dance or whether or not it's a book or a dance or whatever a podcast it can be whatever a podcast it can be whatever a podcast it can be &gt;&gt; so opaque at times and you're just &gt;&gt; so opaque at times and you're just &gt;&gt; so opaque at times and you're just you're trying to stay anchored to the you're trying to stay anchored to the you're trying to stay anchored to the center to the spine and but it can be center to the spine and but it can be center to the spine and but it can be really tough really tough really tough &gt;&gt; and um having a physical object that you &gt;&gt; and um having a physical object that you &gt;&gt; and um having a physical object that you understand means a and that's it. It's understand means a and that's it. It's understand means a and that's it. It's it's uh non-negotiable. it's uh non-negotiable. it's uh non-negotiable. &gt;&gt; There are certain things you don't &gt;&gt; There are certain things you don't &gt;&gt; There are certain things you don't forget. &gt;&gt; Those are the important things. That's &gt;&gt; Those are the important things. That's &gt;&gt; Those are the important things. That's what truth is. You don't forget it. what truth is. You don't forget it. what truth is. You don't forget it. &gt;&gt; I guess this is the reason we have &gt;&gt; I guess this is the reason we have &gt;&gt; I guess this is the reason we have plaques and wedding rings and things plaques and wedding rings and things plaques and wedding rings and things like that is they symbolize like that is they symbolize like that is they symbolize something in a very simple way that's something in a very simple way that's something in a very simple way that's everyone understands. And in this case, everyone understands. And in this case, everyone understands. And in this case, it's important that you understand. it's important that you understand. it's important that you understand. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's a symbol of &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's a symbol of &gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's a symbol of &gt;&gt; that's [clears throat] different. &gt;&gt; that's [clears throat] different. &gt;&gt; that's [clears throat] different. &gt;&gt; Symbol is different from the actual &gt;&gt; Symbol is different from the actual &gt;&gt; Symbol is different from the actual rock. The rock is the thing itself. It's rock. The rock is the thing itself. It's rock. The rock is the thing itself. It's not the symbol of anything. It's the not the symbol of anything. It's the not the symbol of anything. It's the rock. &gt;&gt; So it has a property that is what you're &gt;&gt; So it has a property that is what you're &gt;&gt; So it has a property that is what you're trying to thread through your work. trying to thread through your work. trying to thread through your work. &gt;&gt; Yes. Doesn't stand for something else. &gt;&gt; Yes. Doesn't stand for something else. &gt;&gt; Yes. Doesn't stand for something else. &gt;&gt; It actually has that thing. &gt;&gt; It actually has that thing. &gt;&gt; It actually has that thing. &gt;&gt; And that's in a way why ritual because &gt;&gt; And that's in a way why ritual because &gt;&gt; And that's in a way why ritual because ritual is not quite the same as ritual is not quite the same as ritual is not quite the same as practice. Ritual is done for a purpose. practice. Ritual is done for a purpose. practice. Ritual is done for a purpose. It's done to accomplish an end. It's done to accomplish an end. It's done to accomplish an end. Purpose, you just do it. Purpose, you just do it. Purpose, you just do it. &gt;&gt; So let's break those apart. ritual, &gt;&gt; So let's break those apart. ritual, &gt;&gt; So let's break those apart. ritual, purpose, and habit. If we if you were to purpose, and habit. If we if you were to purpose, and habit. If we if you were to separate those out. separate those out. separate those out. &gt;&gt; Okay. Ritual to accomplish a goal or a &gt;&gt; Okay. Ritual to accomplish a goal or a &gt;&gt; Okay. Ritual to accomplish a goal or a kind of control. kind of control. kind of control. Uh practice Uh practice Uh practice a consistent ongoing activity that a consistent ongoing activity that a consistent ongoing activity that somehow keeps reoccurring. Habit you do somehow keeps reoccurring. Habit you do somehow keeps reoccurring. Habit you do because you're in the habit of doing. I because you're in the habit of doing. I because you're in the habit of doing. I mean, habit and practice are actually mean, habit and practice are actually mean, habit and practice are actually very close. Um, habit is dangerous very close. Um, habit is dangerous very close. Um, habit is dangerous because you got to do it that way. because you got to do it that way. because you got to do it that way. That's the habit for it. Practice is That's the habit for it. Practice is That's the habit for it. Practice is just get the job done. You can do it in just get the job done. You can do it in just get the job done. You can do it in different ways, but get the job done. different ways, but get the job done. different ways, but get the job done. Hand habit. You got to do it the same Hand habit. You got to do it the same Hand habit. You got to do it the same way. &gt;&gt; Throughout the entire listening to your &gt;&gt; Throughout the entire listening to your &gt;&gt; Throughout the entire listening to your book, I had this question in the back of book, I had this question in the back of book, I had this question in the back of my mind. Did you take weekends off? my mind. Did you take weekends off? my mind. Did you take weekends off? &gt;&gt; No. What's a weekend? It's, you know, &gt;&gt; No. What's a weekend? It's, you know, &gt;&gt; No. What's a weekend? It's, you know, it's seven-day work week here. it's seven-day work week here. it's seven-day work week here. &gt;&gt; Love it. You've gotten things like &gt;&gt; Love it. You've gotten things like &gt;&gt; Love it. You've gotten things like honorary degrees from Harvard. this kind honorary degrees from Harvard. this kind honorary degrees from Harvard. this kind of thing. Um, a lot of accolades from a of thing. Um, a lot of accolades from a of thing. Um, a lot of accolades from a lot of different places. Uh, do those lot of different places. Uh, do those lot of different places. Uh, do those things matter to you? things matter to you? things matter to you? &gt;&gt; No, they matter more to other folks and &gt;&gt; No, they matter more to other folks and &gt;&gt; No, they matter more to other folks and sometimes I have trouble with them. Uh, sometimes I have trouble with them. Uh, sometimes I have trouble with them. Uh, they don't tell me anything that I have they don't tell me anything that I have they don't tell me anything that I have done or more importantly will do. Uh, done or more importantly will do. Uh, done or more importantly will do. Uh, can I honestly say it's not nice for can I honestly say it's not nice for can I honestly say it's not nice for somebody to say to you, you've done a somebody to say to you, you've done a somebody to say to you, you've done a great job. I can't say that. I can you great job. I can't say that. I can you great job. I can't say that. I can you know try to feel that it's I think one know try to feel that it's I think one know try to feel that it's I think one thing about that kind of uh action is thing about that kind of uh action is thing about that kind of uh action is that it takes a magnanimous person to that it takes a magnanimous person to that it takes a magnanimous person to recall that they have a goal that's recall that they have a goal that's recall that they have a goal that's going to be ongoing no matter how many going to be ongoing no matter how many going to be ongoing no matter how many accolades they get. But the people accolades they get. But the people accolades they get. But the people giving the accolade want to matter. They giving the accolade want to matter. They giving the accolade want to matter. They want to count. They want to believe that want to count. They want to believe that want to count. They want to believe that what you have done is important. And in what you have done is important. And in what you have done is important. And in a way, you owe it to them more than to a way, you owe it to them more than to a way, you owe it to them more than to yourself to accept that. yourself to accept that. yourself to accept that. &gt;&gt; I know you don't like the term, but you &gt;&gt; I know you don't like the term, but you &gt;&gt; I know you don't like the term, but you came up with it came up with it came up with it &gt;&gt; and I think it's very interesting and &gt;&gt; and I think it's very interesting and &gt;&gt; and I think it's very interesting and important, which is this notion of important, which is this notion of important, which is this notion of scratching when you're searching for the scratching when you're searching for the scratching when you're searching for the next idea or the idea like this notion next idea or the idea like this notion next idea or the idea like this notion of scratching. Could you tell um people of scratching. Could you tell um people of scratching. Could you tell um people what scratching is about? what scratching is about? what scratching is about? &gt;&gt; Okay. two conditions where &gt;&gt; Okay. two conditions where &gt;&gt; Okay. two conditions where scratching is scratching is scratching is kind of an approach. One is you're kind of an approach. One is you're kind of an approach. One is you're really lost and you uh have no sense really lost and you uh have no sense really lost and you uh have no sense that there's any progress to be made and that there's any progress to be made and that there's any progress to be made and if so where's the direction to go and if so where's the direction to go and if so where's the direction to go and you have to be patient uh with yourself you have to be patient uh with yourself you have to be patient uh with yourself in the situations and just try something in the situations and just try something in the situations and just try something and did it mean anything or not and did it mean anything or not and did it mean anything or not and having the faith to continue that is a having the faith to continue that is a having the faith to continue that is a kind of scratching. The other is you kind of scratching. The other is you kind of scratching. The other is you know perfectly well where you're going. know perfectly well where you're going. know perfectly well where you're going. You just don't know how to get there. You just don't know how to get there. You just don't know how to get there. And in u scratching at or essaying or And in u scratching at or essaying or And in u scratching at or essaying or trying that approach, you still got to trying that approach, you still got to trying that approach, you still got to remember where your basic thing is, but remember where your basic thing is, but remember where your basic thing is, but you know you've got somewhere to go. you know you've got somewhere to go. you know you've got somewhere to go. That's a nicer place to be than when you That's a nicer place to be than when you That's a nicer place to be than when you are just in an absolute vacuum are just in an absolute vacuum are just in an absolute vacuum and scratching for something that has and scratching for something that has and scratching for something that has meaning. And scratching can take a lot of forms. And scratching can take a lot of forms. And scratching can take a lot of forms. You've said it could be going to a You've said it could be going to a You've said it could be going to a museum and seeing what captures your museum and seeing what captures your museum and seeing what captures your eye. It could be just living your daily eye. It could be just living your daily eye. It could be just living your daily life and just making sure that you life and just making sure that you life and just making sure that you capture anything that kind of pokes capture anything that kind of pokes capture anything that kind of pokes through. Is that right? through. Is that right? through. Is that right? &gt;&gt; Being being open about things and &gt;&gt; Being being open about things and &gt;&gt; Being being open about things and being willing to be caught off guard, being willing to be caught off guard, being willing to be caught off guard, being willing to be surprised. being willing to be surprised. being willing to be surprised. &gt;&gt; Could you talk about movement and &gt;&gt; Could you talk about movement and &gt;&gt; Could you talk about movement and longevity? I mean, you're longevity? I mean, you're longevity? I mean, you're &gt;&gt; How long have we got? &gt;&gt; How long have we got? &gt;&gt; How long have we got? &gt;&gt; As long as you want. I don't want it's &gt;&gt; As long as you want. I don't want it's &gt;&gt; As long as you want. I don't want it's my least favorite topic and it's my most my least favorite topic and it's my most my least favorite topic and it's my most important topic at the moment which is important topic at the moment which is important topic at the moment which is why it's my least favorite topic. Bodies why it's my least favorite topic. Bodies why it's my least favorite topic. Bodies alter every so often. Okay, a body at 10 alter every so often. Okay, a body at 10 alter every so often. Okay, a body at 10 is going to be different from a body at is going to be different from a body at is going to be different from a body at 20 what it can accomplish. 20 to 40 20 what it can accomplish. 20 to 40 20 what it can accomplish. 20 to 40 there's a kind of continuity in there there's a kind of continuity in there there's a kind of continuity in there that is encouraging. Over 40 body is that is encouraging. Over 40 body is that is encouraging. Over 40 body is going to start behaving differently. 47 going to start behaving differently. 47 going to start behaving differently. 47 50s is getting a little bit numbed and 50s is getting a little bit numbed and 50s is getting a little bit numbed and all of a sudden you're feeling all of a sudden you're feeling all of a sudden you're feeling restricted and you get pissed off and restricted and you get pissed off and restricted and you get pissed off and you have got to find a way of respecting you have got to find a way of respecting you have got to find a way of respecting the fact that you can no longer do what the fact that you can no longer do what the fact that you can no longer do what you did when you were 20 or 25. But you did when you were 20 or 25. But you did when you were 20 or 25. But you still you're pretty potent. Uh and still you're pretty potent. Uh and still you're pretty potent. Uh and that's a good thing. And I managed to that's a good thing. And I managed to that's a good thing. And I managed to push that. I was dancing still pretty push that. I was dancing still pretty push that. I was dancing still pretty hard until I was about 65, which is a hard until I was about 65, which is a hard until I was about 65, which is a long reach. Uh, but after 65, I began to long reach. Uh, but after 65, I began to long reach. Uh, but after 65, I began to feel really restricted. No, you can't do feel really restricted. No, you can't do feel really restricted. No, you can't do just anything even once. just anything even once. just anything even once. And oh, by the way, what you're doing And oh, by the way, what you're doing And oh, by the way, what you're doing might not be strengthening the body. You might not be strengthening the body. You might not be strengthening the body. You might be weakening the body. Repeating might be weakening the body. Repeating might be weakening the body. Repeating that. Oh my god, what do I do here? that. Oh my god, what do I do here? that. Oh my god, what do I do here? Nothing. And 70 And 70 And 70 functional 80 sucks. You're restricted now and your body has You're restricted now and your body has You're restricted now and your body has lost facility and you can't pretend it's lost facility and you can't pretend it's lost facility and you can't pretend it's any other way because you see it and any other way because you see it and any other way because you see it and everybody else sees it and you need help everybody else sees it and you need help everybody else sees it and you need help and you don't like help. and you don't like help. and you don't like help. How do you maintain your independence How do you maintain your independence How do you maintain your independence and still accept graciously help as a and still accept graciously help as a and still accept graciously help as a reality and not a shame? reality and not a shame? reality and not a shame? How do you accept a declining body as How do you accept a declining body as How do you accept a declining body as not demoralizing? Those are tough questions. And um Those are tough questions. And um Those are tough questions. And um particularly if you're invested in the particularly if you're invested in the particularly if you're invested in the body and it's where you learn what's body and it's where you learn what's body and it's where you learn what's true and what isn't true. It could be true and what isn't true. It could be true and what isn't true. It could be true for somebody who can still do it. true for somebody who can still do it. true for somebody who can still do it. It's not true for you because you can't It's not true for you because you can't It's not true for you because you can't you still don't have that speed. You you still don't have that speed. You you still don't have that speed. You don't have that flexibility. You don't have that flexibility. You don't have that flexibility. You don't have that option. And so it becomes, I have that option. And so it becomes, I have that option. And so it becomes, I suppose, and I haven't quite suppose, and I haven't quite suppose, and I haven't quite accomplished this, but I think about it accomplished this, but I think about it accomplished this, but I think about it obviously a lot. We all do. Uh is an obviously a lot. We all do. Uh is an obviously a lot. We all do. Uh is an exchange rate. Uh okay, I'm going to exchange rate. Uh okay, I'm going to exchange rate. Uh okay, I'm going to have to give up a kind of sort of have to give up a kind of sort of have to give up a kind of sort of physical independence, but in exchange physical independence, but in exchange physical independence, but in exchange for this, I can have a lot of goodwill. for this, I can have a lot of goodwill. for this, I can have a lot of goodwill. How can I circulate that goodwill How can I circulate that goodwill How can I circulate that goodwill to get this thing done that still feels to get this thing done that still feels to get this thing done that still feels as though it's a worthy enough as though it's a worthy enough as though it's a worthy enough accomplishment to offer but it's a totally different mechanism but it's a totally different mechanism but it's a totally different mechanism and its physicality translated and its physicality translated and its physicality translated differently and uh you know one I always differently and uh you know one I always differently and uh you know one I always in the studio I was a very good dancer in the studio I was a very good dancer in the studio I was a very good dancer and I managed to build a career because and I managed to build a career because and I managed to build a career because dancers wanted to work with me because dancers wanted to work with me because dancers wanted to work with me because they become better dancers. Uh and now they become better dancers. Uh and now they become better dancers. Uh and now it is not a body that is dancing better it is not a body that is dancing better it is not a body that is dancing better than any other dancer. than any other dancer. than any other dancer. It is a body that is not moving and that It is a body that is not moving and that It is a body that is not moving and that needs still to be able to correspond to needs still to be able to correspond to needs still to be able to correspond to a great dancer with many options a great dancer with many options a great dancer with many options that you have something to offer them that you have something to offer them that you have something to offer them and that you can realize something with and that you can realize something with and that you can realize something with them that is of great value. I dislike the word mentor. I don't think I dislike the word mentor. I don't think I dislike the word mentor. I don't think about that much. Uh because I like about that much. Uh because I like about that much. Uh because I like better the word apprentice that people better the word apprentice that people better the word apprentice that people learn. You don't teach them, they learn. You don't teach them, they learn. You don't teach them, they learn. &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; And that is a component here. And I &gt;&gt; And that is a component here. And I &gt;&gt; And that is a component here. And I think that that's a kind of I mean think that that's a kind of I mean think that that's a kind of I mean that's the upside is you can still that's the upside is you can still that's the upside is you can still be mutual. You can still share this be mutual. You can still share this be mutual. You can still share this process. And it's the same as it ever process. And it's the same as it ever process. And it's the same as it ever was. You bring what you got, they bring was. You bring what you got, they bring was. You bring what you got, they bring what they got. you put them together and what they got. you put them together and what they got. you put them together and you get more than the independent what you get more than the independent what you get more than the independent what is and that can still happen if you let is and that can still happen if you let is and that can still happen if you let it happen and if you don't get too it happen and if you don't get too it happen and if you don't get too pissed off pissed off pissed off &gt;&gt; although being a little pissed might &gt;&gt; although being a little pissed might &gt;&gt; although being a little pissed might help in terms of the pushing through. help in terms of the pushing through. help in terms of the pushing through. &gt;&gt; Everybody needs a little piss all the &gt;&gt; Everybody needs a little piss all the &gt;&gt; Everybody needs a little piss all the time. The uh thing I heard you say once which The uh thing I heard you say once which The uh thing I heard you say once which I really uh which really stuck with me I really uh which really stuck with me I really uh which really stuck with me was that you think that perhaps one of was that you think that perhaps one of was that you think that perhaps one of the reasons why people age at the level the reasons why people age at the level the reasons why people age at the level of the brain and the level of curiosity of the brain and the level of curiosity of the brain and the level of curiosity is that they start moving less that it is that they start moving less that it is that they start moving less that it works in that direction and I started works in that direction and I started works in that direction and I started observing people of different ages and observing people of different ages and observing people of different ages and indeed even just the amount of indeed even just the amount of indeed even just the amount of justesticulating that people do it justesticulating that people do it justesticulating that people do it starts to decline over time. You're an starts to decline over time. You're an starts to decline over time. You're an exception to this. Um, I know only a few exception to this. Um, I know only a few exception to this. Um, I know only a few other exceptions to that rule. I think other exceptions to that rule. I think other exceptions to that rule. I think it is a rule. You look at kids, they're it is a rule. You look at kids, they're it is a rule. You look at kids, they're moving all the time and I think it drops moving all the time and I think it drops moving all the time and I think it drops off fairly linearly after, as you said, off fairly linearly after, as you said, off fairly linearly after, as you said, probably about age 40 or so. It really probably about age 40 or so. It really probably about age 40 or so. It really people start moving less. There's a people start moving less. There's a people start moving less. There's a species of ocean animal that when it species of ocean animal that when it species of ocean animal that when it lands down on a rock, it actually eats lands down on a rock, it actually eats lands down on a rock, it actually eats its own brain. Oh, its own brain. Oh, its own brain. Oh, &gt;&gt; except the part that just keeps it alive &gt;&gt; except the part that just keeps it alive &gt;&gt; except the part that just keeps it alive there to sense when something swims over there to sense when something swims over there to sense when something swims over it and then it can do its thing. In it and then it can do its thing. In it and then it can do its thing. In other words, if we stop moving, our other words, if we stop moving, our other words, if we stop moving, our nervous system atrophies. Uh, and that's nervous system atrophies. Uh, and that's nervous system atrophies. Uh, and that's very clear. And it seems that the very clear. And it seems that the very clear. And it seems that the distal, the fingers and the feet, the distal, the fingers and the feet, the distal, the fingers and the feet, the neurons that control those certainly the neurons that control those certainly the neurons that control those certainly lose their strength before we lose our lose their strength before we lose our lose their strength before we lose our trunk strength and so on. So, trunk strength and so on. So, trunk strength and so on. So, there's this kind of outward to center there's this kind of outward to center there's this kind of outward to center atrophy. So atrophy. So atrophy. So move more, move more, move more in every move more, move more, move more in every move more, move more, move more in every aspect of life seems to be the takeaway. aspect of life seems to be the takeaway. aspect of life seems to be the takeaway. &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not just more, it's degree &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not just more, it's degree &gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not just more, it's degree also. I think that with age we recess, also. I think that with age we recess, also. I think that with age we recess, we pull backwards, we reach out less we pull backwards, we reach out less we pull backwards, we reach out less even than we can. Partially the sight even than we can. Partially the sight even than we can. Partially the sight begins to decline the hearing and the begins to decline the hearing and the begins to decline the hearing and the kind of fear sets in. You still have to kind of fear sets in. You still have to kind of fear sets in. You still have to be able to maintain a fearlessness in be able to maintain a fearlessness in be able to maintain a fearlessness in regards to boundaries that you c you regards to boundaries that you c you regards to boundaries that you c you don't have to pull up shy. You don't have to pull up shy. You don't have to pull up shy. You don't have to pull up short of a boundary. You have to pull up short of a boundary. You have to pull up short of a boundary. You can still address that boundary. It's can still address that boundary. It's can still address that boundary. It's just you're not going to be able to just you're not going to be able to just you're not going to be able to reach as far across as you could have in reach as far across as you could have in reach as far across as you could have in each of these different decades. It's each of these different decades. It's each of these different decades. It's just uh you know you could do one thing just uh you know you could do one thing just uh you know you could do one thing when you were you know two years old, when you were you know two years old, when you were you know two years old, you can do another thing now. Uh, and you can do another thing now. Uh, and you can do another thing now. Uh, and it's accepting that everything can give it's accepting that everything can give it's accepting that everything can give you push back. You have to accept push you push back. You have to accept push you push back. You have to accept push back. You have to still accept push back. You have to still accept push back. You have to still accept push back. It's going to feel differently, back. It's going to feel differently, back. It's going to feel differently, but you still want it. but you still want it. but you still want it. &gt;&gt; Maybe that's the thing to seek is that &gt;&gt; Maybe that's the thing to seek is that &gt;&gt; Maybe that's the thing to seek is that friction point. friction point. friction point. &gt;&gt; In describing dancers in dance, you &gt;&gt; In describing dancers in dance, you &gt;&gt; In describing dancers in dance, you talked a lot about taking up space. It's talked a lot about taking up space. It's talked a lot about taking up space. It's interesting now we're talking about interesting now we're talking about interesting now we're talking about people reflexively taking up less and people reflexively taking up less and people reflexively taking up less and less space as they get older. less space as they get older. less space as they get older. um voice occupies space too. Um so it's um voice occupies space too. Um so it's um voice occupies space too. Um so it's kind of interesting to think about kind of interesting to think about kind of interesting to think about movement as a the fundamental way in movement as a the fundamental way in movement as a the fundamental way in which we have action at a distance or which we have action at a distance or which we have action at a distance or impact at a distance. Um and it as we as impact at a distance. Um and it as we as impact at a distance. Um and it as we as you said shrivel Yeah. you said shrivel Yeah. you said shrivel Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's the thing maybe that's the &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's the thing maybe that's the &gt;&gt; Yeah. That's the thing maybe that's the thing to fight against thing to fight against thing to fight against &gt;&gt; you know the word fight we fight against &gt;&gt; you know the word fight we fight against &gt;&gt; you know the word fight we fight against everything and I do it too. We all do everything and I do it too. We all do everything and I do it too. We all do it. uh it's we got to look at it. uh it's we got to look at it. uh it's we got to look at it, I say to myself, uh as an it, I say to myself, uh as an it, I say to myself, uh as an opportunity. It's it's not a it's not a opportunity. It's it's not a it's not a opportunity. It's it's not a it's not a fight. Uh it's an opportunity to uh to a fight. Uh it's an opportunity to uh to a fight. Uh it's an opportunity to uh to keep the keep the pressure on. I mean, keep the keep the pressure on. I mean, keep the keep the pressure on. I mean, we become we become frightened. we become we become frightened. we become we become frightened. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've seen that in some older &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've seen that in some older &gt;&gt; Yeah. I've seen that in some older folks. They get there's a fear that sets folks. They get there's a fear that sets folks. They get there's a fear that sets in, &gt;&gt; right? And that's not necessary because &gt;&gt; right? And that's not necessary because &gt;&gt; right? And that's not necessary because we also got compensations we also got compensations we also got compensations uh for no reason. I'm thinking here of Camu for no reason. I'm thinking here of Camu for no reason. I'm thinking here of Camu had twins. Uh and uh one of them was for had twins. Uh and uh one of them was for had twins. Uh and uh one of them was for some reason thinking she was going to go some reason thinking she was going to go some reason thinking she was going to go blind. Uh I guess she'd been diagnosed. blind. Uh I guess she'd been diagnosed. blind. Uh I guess she'd been diagnosed. Um she started practicing being blind. Um she started practicing being blind. Um she started practicing being blind. She started keeping on keeping her eyes She started keeping on keeping her eyes She started keeping on keeping her eyes closed in P. She's this is a 12-year-old closed in P. She's this is a 12-year-old closed in P. She's this is a 12-year-old take kicking cane and starting trying to take kicking cane and starting trying to take kicking cane and starting trying to find her way as a blind person. She see find her way as a blind person. She see find her way as a blind person. She see perfectly well. She was providing perfectly well. She was providing perfectly well. She was providing against the future. You're not going to against the future. You're not going to against the future. You're not going to provide against death. So just get over provide against death. So just get over provide against death. So just get over it and keep, you know, pushing through it and keep, you know, pushing through it and keep, you know, pushing through like you can see cuz you can. It's like you can see cuz you can. It's like you can see cuz you can. It's like meet the friction that's there, but at meet the friction that's there, but at meet the friction that's there, but at that edge, not any further at that edge, not any further at that edge, not any further &gt;&gt; at a reasonable point where there is &gt;&gt; at a reasonable point where there is &gt;&gt; at a reasonable point where there is a competition, not where you're pre a competition, not where you're pre a competition, not where you're pre uh pre-defeated. uh pre-defeated. uh pre-defeated. &gt;&gt; Speaking of taking up space, it you've &gt;&gt; Speaking of taking up space, it you've &gt;&gt; Speaking of taking up space, it you've mentioned before that the fact that your mentioned before that the fact that your mentioned before that the fact that your name is Twilight name is Twilight name is Twilight perhaps shaped you in some ways. perhaps shaped you in some ways. perhaps shaped you in some ways. &gt;&gt; Yes. I'm fascinated by this that how &gt;&gt; Yes. I'm fascinated by this that how &gt;&gt; Yes. I'm fascinated by this that how names shape our self-perception, how names shape our self-perception, how names shape our self-perception, how they shape others perceptions of us and they shape others perceptions of us and they shape others perceptions of us and how to some extent we might live into how to some extent we might live into how to some extent we might live into those perceptions. those perceptions. those perceptions. &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh my mother uh as with everything &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh my mother uh as with everything &gt;&gt; Yes. Uh my mother uh as with everything provided me with a moniker that would um provided me with a moniker that would um provided me with a moniker that would um serve me. So the name Twi u she saw in a serve me. So the name Twi u she saw in a serve me. So the name Twi u she saw in a newspaper but it was spelled with an I. newspaper but it was spelled with an I. newspaper but it was spelled with an I. the original Twilight, who was a pig the original Twilight, who was a pig the original Twilight, who was a pig calling princess in the next county. calling princess in the next county. calling princess in the next county. Twilight, I forget her last name. In any Twilight, I forget her last name. In any Twilight, I forget her last name. In any case, my mother changed it to a Y case, my mother changed it to a Y case, my mother changed it to a Y because she thought Twilight with a Y because she thought Twilight with a Y because she thought Twilight with a Y would look better on a marquee. Okay, would look better on a marquee. Okay, would look better on a marquee. Okay, she was right. uh that the T had to be she was right. uh that the T had to be she was right. uh that the T had to be selected for the alliteration between selected for the alliteration between selected for the alliteration between Twilight and Tharp TT Marilyn Monroe. Twilight and Tharp TT Marilyn Monroe. Twilight and Tharp TT Marilyn Monroe. All stars have got alliterative names. All stars have got alliterative names. All stars have got alliterative names. She's not wrong. It makes it easier to She's not wrong. It makes it easier to She's not wrong. It makes it easier to remember. It also seems to have a remember. It also seems to have a remember. It also seems to have a reinforcing quality. One name is a T. reinforcing quality. One name is a T. reinforcing quality. One name is a T. Another T must be good. Two T's, right? Another T must be good. Two T's, right? Another T must be good. Two T's, right? Yeah. This is all my mother's subliminal Yeah. This is all my mother's subliminal Yeah. This is all my mother's subliminal thinking uh to provide me with the thinking uh to provide me with the thinking uh to provide me with the course of stardom. Should I select course of stardom. Should I select course of stardom. Should I select that's what I should go towards? that's what I should go towards? that's what I should go towards? &gt;&gt; God bless her. &gt;&gt; God bless her. &gt;&gt; God bless her. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's what I said. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's what I said. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's what I said. &gt;&gt; Well, Twilight Tharp, &gt;&gt; Well, Twilight Tharp, &gt;&gt; Well, Twilight Tharp, &gt;&gt; thank you so much for coming here today. &gt;&gt; thank you so much for coming here today. &gt;&gt; thank you so much for coming here today. It was a It is a real honor for me. It was a It is a real honor for me. It was a It is a real honor for me. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, it's fun. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, it's fun. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, it's fun. &gt;&gt; A real pleasure. A real honor. And um I &gt;&gt; A real pleasure. A real honor. And um I &gt;&gt; A real pleasure. A real honor. And um I know you are uncomfortable with know you are uncomfortable with know you are uncomfortable with accolades. So I'm just going to I'm accolades. So I'm just going to I'm accolades. So I'm just going to I'm going to barrel into them by just saying going to barrel into them by just saying going to barrel into them by just saying that it's an honor because I think your that it's an honor because I think your that it's an honor because I think your work is incredible. I think the book work is incredible. I think the book work is incredible. I think the book is incredible. So many people that I is incredible. So many people that I is incredible. So many people that I told I was going to sit down with you uh told I was going to sit down with you uh told I was going to sit down with you uh today. Um I'm surprised they're not, you today. Um I'm surprised they're not, you today. Um I'm surprised they're not, you know, beating down the doors outside. know, beating down the doors outside. know, beating down the doors outside. And that's because I think you represent And that's because I think you represent And that's because I think you represent a lot more than just incredible elite a lot more than just incredible elite a lot more than just incredible elite level dance and choreography. You level dance and choreography. You level dance and choreography. You certainly represent that and the arts certainly represent that and the arts certainly represent that and the arts and thank you for your comments about and thank you for your comments about and thank you for your comments about supporting the arts that those will supporting the arts that those will supporting the arts that those will propagate far and wide and hopefully propagate far and wide and hopefully propagate far and wide and hopefully have an impact. But you also represent have an impact. But you also represent have an impact. But you also represent this spirit behind creating things this spirit behind creating things this spirit behind creating things leaning into friction but also embracing leaning into friction but also embracing leaning into friction but also embracing the for lack of a better word the for lack of a better word the for lack of a better word the dance of it all uh including what comes dance of it all uh including what comes dance of it all uh including what comes from the outside and the internal from the outside and the internal from the outside and the internal process. This is a complicated thing and process. This is a complicated thing and process. This is a complicated thing and I know many people want it or um I know many people want it or um I know many people want it or um just love to see people striving and just love to see people striving and just love to see people striving and creating and so you really embody that creating and so you really embody that creating and so you really embody that spirit and uh I you know the words spirit and uh I you know the words spirit and uh I you know the words aren't enough to express how grateful aren't enough to express how grateful aren't enough to express how grateful I am and how grateful millions and I am and how grateful millions and I am and how grateful millions and millions of people are. So thank you. millions of people are. So thank you. millions of people are. So thank you. &gt;&gt; So God bless your mother for naming you &gt;&gt; So God bless your mother for naming you &gt;&gt; So God bless your mother for naming you Twilight and God bless you for coming Twilight and God bless you for coming Twilight and God bless you for coming here today. here today. here today. &gt;&gt; Thank you sweetheart. and God bless you &gt;&gt; Thank you sweetheart. and God bless you &gt;&gt; Thank you sweetheart. and God bless you for doing this and for believing it's for doing this and for believing it's for doing this and for believing it's worthwhile. So, thank you. worthwhile. So, thank you. worthwhile. So, thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's &gt;&gt; Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Twilight Tharp. To learn discussion with Twilight Tharp. To learn discussion with Twilight Tharp. To learn more about her work and to find a link more about her work and to find a link more about her work and to find a link to her truly spectacular book, The to her truly spectacular book, The to her truly spectacular book, The Creative Habit, please see the show note Creative Habit, please see the show note Creative Habit, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more book that I've been working on for more than five years, and that's based on than five years, and that's based on than five years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and more than 30 years of research and more than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various There you can find links to various There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media Hubberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Twilight Tharp. today's discussion with Twilight Tharp. today's discussion with Twilight Tharp. And last, but certainly not least, And last, but certainly not least, And last, but certainly not least, [music] thank you for your interest in [music] thank you for your interest in [music] thank you for your interest in science. &gt;&gt; [music]