Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes [music] where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are going to discuss how we are going to discuss how we are going to discuss how we conceptualize grief both at an emotional conceptualize grief both at an emotional conceptualize grief both at an emotional and at a logical level. I'm going to and at a logical level. I'm going to and at a logical level. I'm going to teach you about the neuroscience and the teach you about the neuroscience and the teach you about the neuroscience and the psychology of grief and incredible psychology of grief and incredible psychology of grief and incredible findings that have been made in just a findings that have been made in just a findings that have been made in just a few key laboratories that point to the few key laboratories that point to the few key laboratories that point to the fact that we essentially map our fact that we essentially map our fact that we essentially map our experience of people in three experience of people in three experience of people in three dimensions. I'll just give you a little dimensions. I'll just give you a little dimensions. I'll just give you a little hint of what those dimensions are. They hint of what those dimensions are. They hint of what those dimensions are. They relate to space, where people are, time, relate to space, where people are, time, relate to space, where people are, time, when people are, I'll explain what that when people are, I'll explain what that when people are, I'll explain what that means, and a dimension called closeness. means, and a dimension called closeness. means, and a dimension called closeness. and how those three dimensions of space, and how those three dimensions of space, and how those three dimensions of space, time, and closeness are what establish time, and closeness are what establish time, and closeness are what establish very close bonds with people and are very close bonds with people and are very close bonds with people and are what require remapping, reorganization what require remapping, reorganization what require remapping, reorganization within our emotional framework and our within our emotional framework and our within our emotional framework and our logical framework when we lose somebody logical framework when we lose somebody logical framework when we lose somebody for whatever reason. The important thing for whatever reason. The important thing for whatever reason. The important thing to point out is that grief is a process. to point out is that grief is a process. to point out is that grief is a process. Like any biological or psychological Like any biological or psychological Like any biological or psychological event, it has a beginning, a middle, and event, it has a beginning, a middle, and event, it has a beginning, a middle, and an end. And I do believe that being able an end. And I do believe that being able an end. And I do believe that being able to orient in terms of where you are in to orient in terms of where you are in to orient in terms of where you are in that process can be immensely that process can be immensely that process can be immensely beneficial, not just for predicting how beneficial, not just for predicting how beneficial, not just for predicting how long it's going to last, but in order to long it's going to last, but in order to long it's going to last, but in order to conceptualize the person or animal that conceptualize the person or animal that conceptualize the person or animal that you lost in a way that allows you to you lost in a way that allows you to you lost in a way that allows you to best preserve their memory while best preserve their memory while best preserve their memory while maintaining your own functional capacity maintaining your own functional capacity maintaining your own functional capacity in life. Along those lines, I want to in life. Along those lines, I want to in life. Along those lines, I want to point out that grief and depression, point out that grief and depression, point out that grief and depression, while they can feel quite similar in while they can feel quite similar in while they can feel quite similar in certain ways and have overlapping certain ways and have overlapping certain ways and have overlapping symptomology, loss of appetite, symptomology, loss of appetite, symptomology, loss of appetite, challenges sleeping, challenges sleeping, challenges sleeping, crying in the middle of the day for no crying in the middle of the day for no crying in the middle of the day for no apparent reason, etc. They are apparent reason, etc. They are apparent reason, etc. They are distinctly different processes. As we distinctly different processes. As we distinctly different processes. As we wade into this important topic, I'd like wade into this important topic, I'd like wade into this important topic, I'd like to emphasize some of the common myths to emphasize some of the common myths to emphasize some of the common myths and misunderstandings about grief. Some and misunderstandings about grief. Some and misunderstandings about grief. Some of the myths and misunderstanding arrive of the myths and misunderstanding arrive of the myths and misunderstanding arrive from the beautiful work of Elizabeth from the beautiful work of Elizabeth from the beautiful work of Elizabeth Kubler Ross, a psychologist who wrote Kubler Ross, a psychologist who wrote Kubler Ross, a psychologist who wrote the famous book on death and dying. The the famous book on death and dying. The the famous book on death and dying. The different stages of grief very quickly different stages of grief very quickly different stages of grief very quickly are denial, anger, bargaining, are denial, anger, bargaining, are denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance. But depression, and acceptance. But depression, and acceptance. But unfortunately, those five stages were unfortunately, those five stages were unfortunately, those five stages were sort of taken to be gospel for a long sort of taken to be gospel for a long sort of taken to be gospel for a long time. And we now know based on time. And we now know based on time. And we now know based on neuroiming, based on more in-depth neuroiming, based on more in-depth neuroiming, based on more in-depth psychological evaluation, and frankly psychological evaluation, and frankly psychological evaluation, and frankly more researchers and clinicians moving more researchers and clinicians moving more researchers and clinicians moving into this area and observing that while into this area and observing that while into this area and observing that while much of what Kubler Ross described does much of what Kubler Ross described does much of what Kubler Ross described does hold true, it's not always the case. How hold true, it's not always the case. How hold true, it's not always the case. How do I know this? Well, I know this do I know this? Well, I know this do I know this? Well, I know this because brain imaging studies in because brain imaging studies in because brain imaging studies in involving what's called functional involving what's called functional involving what's called functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI, in magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI, in magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI, in which you can evaluate which brain areas which you can evaluate which brain areas which you can evaluate which brain areas are more active than others according to are more active than others according to are more active than others according to blood flow, which correlates with neural blood flow, which correlates with neural blood flow, which correlates with neural activity and so forth, teaches us that activity and so forth, teaches us that activity and so forth, teaches us that the brain areas that are associated with the brain areas that are associated with the brain areas that are associated with motivation and craving and pursuit are motivation and craving and pursuit are motivation and craving and pursuit are some of the primary brain areas and some of the primary brain areas and some of the primary brain areas and circuits that are activated in states of circuits that are activated in states of circuits that are activated in states of grief. We understand also on the basis grief. We understand also on the basis grief. We understand also on the basis of brain imaging studies that in order of brain imaging studies that in order of brain imaging studies that in order to understand grief, we have to understand grief, we have to understand grief, we have to understand how attachments are understand how attachments are understand how attachments are represented in our brain. And it turns represented in our brain. And it turns represented in our brain. And it turns out that both attachments and the out that both attachments and the out that both attachments and the breaking of attachments in healthy ways breaking of attachments in healthy ways breaking of attachments in healthy ways are governed by three important what we are governed by three important what we are governed by three important what we call dimensions. The three dimensions of call dimensions. The three dimensions of call dimensions. The three dimensions of relating to someone or an animal or a relating to someone or an animal or a relating to someone or an animal or a thing are space, time, and closeness. thing are space, time, and closeness. thing are space, time, and closeness. And in order to illustrate each one and And in order to illustrate each one and And in order to illustrate each one and how they work together to support how they work together to support how they work together to support relationships and their involvement in relationships and their involvement in relationships and their involvement in the grieving process, I'm going to tell the grieving process, I'm going to tell the grieving process, I'm going to tell you about an experiment. The experiment you about an experiment. The experiment you about an experiment. The experiment involves putting people into a brain involves putting people into a brain involves putting people into a brain scanner that allows the researcher to scanner that allows the researcher to scanner that allows the researcher to evaluate brain activity in different evaluate brain activity in different evaluate brain activity in different areas. In fact, can look in a very areas. In fact, can look in a very areas. In fact, can look in a very non-biased way, not make any predictions non-biased way, not make any predictions non-biased way, not make any predictions about which brain areas are going to be about which brain areas are going to be about which brain areas are going to be involved. And the experiment is the involved. And the experiment is the involved. And the experiment is the following. The person I should say the research The person I should say the research The person I should say the research subject first sees images of things that subject first sees images of things that subject first sees images of things that reside at different distances from one reside at different distances from one reside at different distances from one another. So in one case it's a beach or another. So in one case it's a beach or another. So in one case it's a beach or a parking lot with bowling balls set at a parking lot with bowling balls set at a parking lot with bowling balls set at different distances from one another. different distances from one another. different distances from one another. Their brain is imaged and as their brain Their brain is imaged and as their brain Their brain is imaged and as their brain is imaged they see different pictures of is imaged they see different pictures of is imaged they see different pictures of different scenes, the beach, the parking different scenes, the beach, the parking different scenes, the beach, the parking lot, etc. bowling balls spaced in lot, etc. bowling balls spaced in lot, etc. bowling balls spaced in different ways. Close together, far different ways. Close together, far different ways. Close together, far apart, regularly spaced, non-regularly apart, regularly spaced, non-regularly apart, regularly spaced, non-regularly spaced. When one does this sort of spaced. When one does this sort of spaced. When one does this sort of experiment, you see a lot of brain areas experiment, you see a lot of brain areas experiment, you see a lot of brain areas activated. Not surprisingly, the visual activated. Not surprisingly, the visual activated. Not surprisingly, the visual cortex, the area of the brain that is cortex, the area of the brain that is cortex, the area of the brain that is responsible for creating visual responsible for creating visual responsible for creating visual perceptions, but also a brain area that perceptions, but also a brain area that perceptions, but also a brain area that seems uniquely tuned to the distance seems uniquely tuned to the distance seems uniquely tuned to the distance between you and the objects. We'll refer between you and the objects. We'll refer between you and the objects. We'll refer to that measure, that dimension, as we to that measure, that dimension, as we to that measure, that dimension, as we call it, as proximity. Then subjects call it, as proximity. Then subjects call it, as proximity. Then subjects listen to tones. Those tones also are listen to tones. Those tones also are listen to tones. Those tones also are spaced from one another. So it could be spaced from one another. So it could be spaced from one another. So it could be something as simple as my hand uh something as simple as my hand uh something as simple as my hand uh meeting the table top that I'm happen to meeting the table top that I'm happen to meeting the table top that I'm happen to be sitting in front of. So it's they image the brain. Of course, areas they image the brain. Of course, areas they image the brain. Of course, areas of the brain they're associated with of the brain they're associated with of the brain they're associated with auditory perception are active, not auditory perception are active, not auditory perception are active, not surprisingly. But as they evaluate surprisingly. But as they evaluate surprisingly. But as they evaluate different types of sounds and patterns different types of sounds and patterns different types of sounds and patterns of sounds, for instance, they can start to parse brain areas that they can start to parse brain areas that they can start to parse brain areas that seem uniquely tuned to the spacing of seem uniquely tuned to the spacing of seem uniquely tuned to the spacing of sounds independent of what sounds are sounds independent of what sounds are sounds independent of what sounds are coming in. that is it becomes active coming in. that is it becomes active coming in. that is it becomes active specifically in response to changes in specifically in response to changes in specifically in response to changes in the spacing between sounds much in the spacing between sounds much in the spacing between sounds much in the same way as they could identify brain same way as they could identify brain same way as they could identify brain regions that were only activated when regions that were only activated when regions that were only activated when there were changes in the distance there were changes in the distance there were changes in the distance between objects such as the bowling between objects such as the bowling between objects such as the bowling balls that I used in the previous balls that I used in the previous balls that I used in the previous example and then the subjects saw a example and then the subjects saw a example and then the subjects saw a different set of images that they saw different set of images that they saw different set of images that they saw were of people and of faces and some of were of people and of faces and some of were of people and of faces and some of the images that they saw were of the images that they saw were of the images that they saw were of people's faces right up close and other people's faces right up close and other people's faces right up close and other images were of people at a distance images were of people at a distance images were of people at a distance where you could see the whole body of where you could see the whole body of where you could see the whole body of the person. Now they also varied the person. Now they also varied the person. Now they also varied the emotional relationship to those people. emotional relationship to those people. emotional relationship to those people. That is they were able to get That is they were able to get That is they were able to get photographs from these research subjects photographs from these research subjects photographs from these research subjects lives. So they could show them pictures lives. So they could show them pictures lives. So they could show them pictures of for instance their sister or some of for instance their sister or some of for instance their sister or some random person off the street. They could random person off the street. They could random person off the street. They could show them pictures of a parent or of a show them pictures of a parent or of a show them pictures of a parent or of a neighbor or of a celebrity that's neighbor or of a celebrity that's neighbor or of a celebrity that's well-known or of somebody that they well-known or of somebody that they well-known or of somebody that they didn't know at all. So, they were able didn't know at all. So, they were able didn't know at all. So, they were able to vary both the position of the person, to vary both the position of the person, to vary both the position of the person, close or far, and they were able to vary close or far, and they were able to vary close or far, and they were able to vary the emotional distance to the person, the emotional distance to the person, the emotional distance to the person, which is this dimension that I'm which is this dimension that I'm which is this dimension that I'm referring to as closeness, which is not referring to as closeness, which is not referring to as closeness, which is not physical closeness, but how attached or physical closeness, but how attached or physical closeness, but how attached or how well you know somebody. Now this is how well you know somebody. Now this is how well you know somebody. Now this is may be sounding like a somewhat may be sounding like a somewhat may be sounding like a somewhat complicated experiment but the takeaway complicated experiment but the takeaway complicated experiment but the takeaway from this experiment is exquisitly from this experiment is exquisitly from this experiment is exquisitly simple and exquisitly important. The simple and exquisitly important. The simple and exquisitly important. The result was that in all three conditions result was that in all three conditions result was that in all three conditions changes in the physical spacing of these changes in the physical spacing of these changes in the physical spacing of these objects changes in the temporal that is objects changes in the temporal that is objects changes in the temporal that is the time spacing of these sounds and the time spacing of these sounds and the time spacing of these sounds and changes in the emotional distance changes in the emotional distance changes in the emotional distance between the subject and different between the subject and different between the subject and different people. the same brain area was uniquely people. the same brain area was uniquely people. the same brain area was uniquely activated. And that brain area, it turns activated. And that brain area, it turns activated. And that brain area, it turns out, is a brain area called the inferior out, is a brain area called the inferior out, is a brain area called the inferior parietal lobule. The inferior parietal lobule. The inferior parietal lobule. The inferior parietal lobule. Now, you don't need to know lobule. Now, you don't need to know lobule. Now, you don't need to know where the inferior parietal lobule is. where the inferior parietal lobule is. where the inferior parietal lobule is. In fact, you don't even need to know the In fact, you don't even need to know the In fact, you don't even need to know the name of this brain area. What you do name of this brain area. What you do name of this brain area. What you do need to know however if you want to need to know however if you want to need to know however if you want to understand grief and how to move through understand grief and how to move through understand grief and how to move through grief is that your map of people is not grief is that your map of people is not grief is that your map of people is not a map of emotional closeness per se. It a map of emotional closeness per se. It a map of emotional closeness per se. It is a map of emotional closeness what we is a map of emotional closeness what we is a map of emotional closeness what we call attachment that is interwoven that call attachment that is interwoven that call attachment that is interwoven that is braided in a very intimate way is braided in a very intimate way is braided in a very intimate way with your map of where they are in with your map of where they are in with your map of where they are in physical space and where they are in physical space and where they are in physical space and where they are in time. when you saw them last, when time. when you saw them last, when time. when you saw them last, when you're likely to see them again, and if you're likely to see them again, and if you're likely to see them again, and if you were to want to see them, how much you were to want to see them, how much you were to want to see them, how much time it would take to reach them or for time it would take to reach them or for time it would take to reach them or for them to reach you. Now, earlier I said them to reach you. Now, earlier I said them to reach you. Now, earlier I said that one of the key functions of our that one of the key functions of our that one of the key functions of our nervous system is to be able to make nervous system is to be able to make nervous system is to be able to make predictions. And so it's somewhat predictions. And so it's somewhat predictions. And so it's somewhat obvious but nonetheless important to obvious but nonetheless important to obvious but nonetheless important to state and restate that one of the most state and restate that one of the most state and restate that one of the most powerful aspects of our attachments to powerful aspects of our attachments to powerful aspects of our attachments to people, animals, and things is our people, animals, and things is our people, animals, and things is our ability to predict what it would take to ability to predict what it would take to ability to predict what it would take to see them again and when we are going to see them again and when we are going to see them again and when we are going to see them again. Now if all of this see them again. Now if all of this see them again. Now if all of this sounds like a bunch of neuroscycho sounds like a bunch of neuroscycho sounds like a bunch of neuroscycho babble parsing of the obvious, I'd babble parsing of the obvious, I'd babble parsing of the obvious, I'd encourage you to suspend that belief for encourage you to suspend that belief for encourage you to suspend that belief for the moment. Because if you understand the moment. Because if you understand the moment. Because if you understand that all relationships are mapped in the that all relationships are mapped in the that all relationships are mapped in the brain and body through these three brain and body through these three brain and body through these three dimensions space, time and closeness or dimensions space, time and closeness or dimensions space, time and closeness or proximity of space, proximity in time proximity of space, proximity in time proximity of space, proximity in time and proximity of attachment, how close and proximity of attachment, how close and proximity of attachment, how close or rich or bonded you are to someone. or rich or bonded you are to someone. or rich or bonded you are to someone. Well, if you can understand that, then Well, if you can understand that, then Well, if you can understand that, then it almost becomes obvious or at least it almost becomes obvious or at least it almost becomes obvious or at least it becomes intuitive as to why after the becomes intuitive as to why after the becomes intuitive as to why after the loss of somebody in particular a death loss of somebody in particular a death loss of somebody in particular a death or the loss of an animal, this map has or the loss of an animal, this map has or the loss of an animal, this map has to be reordered. Why? Because if we are to be reordered. Why? Because if we are to be reordered. Why? Because if we are attached to someone or an animal at a attached to someone or an animal at a attached to someone or an animal at a deep level, it is almost always on the deep level, it is almost always on the deep level, it is almost always on the basis of a lot of what we call episodic basis of a lot of what we call episodic basis of a lot of what we call episodic experience, a lot of episodic memories. experience, a lot of episodic memories. experience, a lot of episodic memories. memories of things that happened. memories of things that happened. memories of things that happened. Episodic memories are literally the Episodic memories are literally the Episodic memories are literally the conscious recollection of your conscious recollection of your conscious recollection of your experience of somebody or an animal or a experience of somebody or an animal or a experience of somebody or an animal or a thing. And within that memory, you have thing. And within that memory, you have thing. And within that memory, you have an understanding of what has happened an understanding of what has happened an understanding of what has happened with them in association to you, what's with them in association to you, what's with them in association to you, what's going on with them, where it happened, going on with them, where it happened, going on with them, where it happened, when it happened. When somebody is taken when it happened. When somebody is taken when it happened. When somebody is taken away from us for whatever reason, away from us for whatever reason, away from us for whatever reason, episodic memories persist for some episodic memories persist for some episodic memories persist for some period of time and they are still linked period of time and they are still linked period of time and they are still linked to our feelings of attachment. to our feelings of attachment. to our feelings of attachment. Grief is the process of uncoupling, Grief is the process of uncoupling, Grief is the process of uncoupling, unbraiding and untangling that unbraiding and untangling that unbraiding and untangling that relationship between where people are in relationship between where people are in relationship between where people are in space, in time, and our attachment to space, in time, and our attachment to space, in time, and our attachment to them. This is very, very hard to do. And them. This is very, very hard to do. And them. This is very, very hard to do. And for some people, it's almost impossible for some people, it's almost impossible for some people, it's almost impossible to do at least at the outset of grief. to do at least at the outset of grief. to do at least at the outset of grief. When we have a rich catalog of When we have a rich catalog of When we have a rich catalog of experiences with somebody or of them, experiences with somebody or of them, experiences with somebody or of them, that memory bank is not just flushed out that memory bank is not just flushed out that memory bank is not just flushed out the moment that we learn that they're no the moment that we learn that they're no the moment that we learn that they're no longer with us. What happens is the longer with us. What happens is the longer with us. What happens is the brain continues to make these brain continues to make these brain continues to make these predictions that they will be in a predictions that they will be in a predictions that they will be in a certain place or a certain time, right? certain place or a certain time, right? certain place or a certain time, right? That they'll be in a certain time zone That they'll be in a certain time zone That they'll be in a certain time zone or they'll walk in the door any moment. or they'll walk in the door any moment. or they'll walk in the door any moment. All of those predictions still hold. The All of those predictions still hold. The All of those predictions still hold. The neural activity continues. We call this neural activity continues. We call this neural activity continues. We call this reverberatory activity. That explains reverberatory activity. That explains reverberatory activity. That explains the yearning for and the desire to the yearning for and the desire to the yearning for and the desire to interact. And yet, it's just beyond our interact. And yet, it's just beyond our interact. And yet, it's just beyond our reach. Because once they're gone, our reach. Because once they're gone, our reach. Because once they're gone, our brain still functions in a way. These brain still functions in a way. These brain still functions in a way. These neural circuits still function in a way neural circuits still function in a way neural circuits still function in a way that put us into an action state of that put us into an action state of that put us into an action state of seeking them, looking for them in the seeking them, looking for them in the seeking them, looking for them in the same location, expecting them to contact same location, expecting them to contact same location, expecting them to contact us at whatever frequency that we were us at whatever frequency that we were us at whatever frequency that we were used to hearing from them or that we used to hearing from them or that we used to hearing from them or that we could reach out to them and reliably get could reach out to them and reliably get could reach out to them and reliably get a response. a response. a response. It is immensely disorienting. In other It is immensely disorienting. In other It is immensely disorienting. In other words, to maintain a close attachment words, to maintain a close attachment words, to maintain a close attachment and at the same time to not be able to and at the same time to not be able to and at the same time to not be able to make predictions about where that make predictions about where that make predictions about where that person, animal or thing is in space and person, animal or thing is in space and person, animal or thing is in space and time. So with this current understanding time. So with this current understanding time. So with this current understanding in mind, a few things start to become in mind, a few things start to become in mind, a few things start to become obvious and entirely normal to us in the obvious and entirely normal to us in the obvious and entirely normal to us in the best and most healthy sense of the word best and most healthy sense of the word best and most healthy sense of the word normal. For instance, if you've lost normal. For instance, if you've lost normal. For instance, if you've lost somebody or an animal or even a thing somebody or an animal or even a thing somebody or an animal or even a thing that was vitally important to you, it that was vitally important to you, it that was vitally important to you, it should make perfect sense to you as to should make perfect sense to you as to should make perfect sense to you as to why you keep looking for that person. why you keep looking for that person. why you keep looking for that person. Those expectations, those predictions Those expectations, those predictions Those expectations, those predictions that the brain is making are entirely that the brain is making are entirely that the brain is making are entirely normal because they are based on that normal because they are based on that normal because they are based on that deep catalog of episodic memory that you deep catalog of episodic memory that you deep catalog of episodic memory that you maintain about that person. Again, it's maintain about that person. Again, it's maintain about that person. Again, it's simply an activation of this map that simply an activation of this map that simply an activation of this map that involves closeness, space, and time. Not involves closeness, space, and time. Not involves closeness, space, and time. Not surprisingly then the reordering of that surprisingly then the reordering of that surprisingly then the reordering of that map that's required in order to move map that's required in order to move map that's required in order to move through the grieving process is going to through the grieving process is going to through the grieving process is going to involve some remapping. Psychologists involve some remapping. Psychologists involve some remapping. Psychologists and neuroscientists generally agree that and neuroscientists generally agree that and neuroscientists generally agree that the best way to approach moving through the best way to approach moving through the best way to approach moving through grief is actually to remap these grief is actually to remap these grief is actually to remap these dimensions while maintaining the close dimensions while maintaining the close dimensions while maintaining the close sense of attachment to the person by not sense of attachment to the person by not sense of attachment to the person by not in any way trying to undermine the in any way trying to undermine the in any way trying to undermine the intensity of the attachment or how intensity of the attachment or how intensity of the attachment or how important it was to you. So we'll now important it was to you. So we'll now important it was to you. So we'll now talk about how that process works and talk about how that process works and talk about how that process works and the different entry points as they're the different entry points as they're the different entry points as they're called to engaging in that process. called to engaging in that process. called to engaging in that process. These are tools gleaned from the These are tools gleaned from the These are tools gleaned from the research psychology, the clinical research psychology, the clinical research psychology, the clinical psychology, and the neuroscience psychology, and the neuroscience psychology, and the neuroscience literature. The first one involves the literature. The first one involves the literature. The first one involves the acknowledgement and really the acknowledgement and really the acknowledgement and really the understanding that you don't want to understanding that you don't want to understanding that you don't want to disengage or dismantle your real disengage or dismantle your real disengage or dismantle your real attachment to someone, an animal, or a attachment to someone, an animal, or a attachment to someone, an animal, or a thing. That's a real thing. And there is thing. That's a real thing. And there is thing. That's a real thing. And there is actually no adaptive reason to try and actually no adaptive reason to try and actually no adaptive reason to try and persuade yourself or numb yourself or persuade yourself or numb yourself or persuade yourself or numb yourself or somehow avoid the thinking of just how somehow avoid the thinking of just how somehow avoid the thinking of just how much they meant to you. much they meant to you. much they meant to you. What is important however is that you What is important however is that you What is important however is that you make some effort to shift your mindset make some effort to shift your mindset make some effort to shift your mindset and your understanding of that person in and your understanding of that person in and your understanding of that person in a way that holds in mind that yes indeed a way that holds in mind that yes indeed a way that holds in mind that yes indeed the attachment is very real and in some the attachment is very real and in some the attachment is very real and in some cases is very intense but is now cases is very intense but is now cases is very intense but is now going to be uncoupled from the other two going to be uncoupled from the other two going to be uncoupled from the other two dimensions of the map namely space and dimensions of the map namely space and dimensions of the map namely space and time. So it's a complicated process you time. So it's a complicated process you time. So it's a complicated process you can imagine but you really want to hold can imagine but you really want to hold can imagine but you really want to hold and register two things at once. One way and register two things at once. One way and register two things at once. One way to do this is to set aside a dedicated to do this is to set aside a dedicated to do this is to set aside a dedicated period of time of maybe five or 10, period of time of maybe five or 10, period of time of maybe five or 10, maybe even as much as 30 minutes in maybe even as much as 30 minutes in maybe even as much as 30 minutes in which you are going to feel deeply into which you are going to feel deeply into which you are going to feel deeply into your closeness and your attachment to your closeness and your attachment to your closeness and your attachment to that person, animal, or thing. But you that person, animal, or thing. But you that person, animal, or thing. But you are consciously going to try and prevent are consciously going to try and prevent are consciously going to try and prevent yourself from thinking about a couple of yourself from thinking about a couple of yourself from thinking about a couple of categories of things. First of all, you categories of things. First of all, you categories of things. First of all, you want to actively try and disengage from want to actively try and disengage from want to actively try and disengage from any attempt to engage in what's called any attempt to engage in what's called any attempt to engage in what's called counterfactual thinking, the whatifs. counterfactual thinking, the whatifs. counterfactual thinking, the whatifs. What if I had called them a day earlier? What if I had called them a day earlier? What if I had called them a day earlier? What if they had taken a different route What if they had taken a different route What if they had taken a different route home? What if I had taken a different home? What if I had taken a different home? What if I had taken a different route home? route home? route home? These counterfactual modes of thinking These counterfactual modes of thinking These counterfactual modes of thinking are an infinite landscape of possibility are an infinite landscape of possibility are an infinite landscape of possibility and they are very closely tied to guilt. and they are very closely tied to guilt. and they are very closely tied to guilt. So as an infinite space, it's a very So as an infinite space, it's a very So as an infinite space, it's a very precarious one. And it will not allow precarious one. And it will not allow precarious one. And it will not allow you to uncouple that intense emotional you to uncouple that intense emotional you to uncouple that intense emotional attachment that I'm telling you is attachment that I'm telling you is attachment that I'm telling you is actually vital to hold on to from that actually vital to hold on to from that actually vital to hold on to from that catalog of episodic memory that you've catalog of episodic memory that you've catalog of episodic memory that you've established. In fact, it's going to established. In fact, it's going to established. In fact, it's going to strengthen those bonds. So in this strengthen those bonds. So in this strengthen those bonds. So in this dedicated five or 10 or 30 whatever dedicated five or 10 or 30 whatever dedicated five or 10 or 30 whatever period of time you can tolerate and period of time you can tolerate and period of time you can tolerate and maintain focus. The idea is to think maintain focus. The idea is to think maintain focus. The idea is to think about your attachment in a rich way and about your attachment in a rich way and about your attachment in a rich way and to perhaps even experience that in your to perhaps even experience that in your to perhaps even experience that in your brain and body. This tool if you will of brain and body. This tool if you will of brain and body. This tool if you will of dedicated blocks of time for really dedicated blocks of time for really dedicated blocks of time for really spending some effort and it is indeed spending some effort and it is indeed spending some effort and it is indeed effort to access the emotional effort to access the emotional effort to access the emotional connection while starting to uncouple connection while starting to uncouple connection while starting to uncouple the other nodes of the map as it were is the other nodes of the map as it were is the other nodes of the map as it were is something that is hard. But in terms of something that is hard. But in terms of something that is hard. But in terms of the options one has in order to deal the options one has in order to deal the options one has in order to deal with grief, it is indeed the most with grief, it is indeed the most with grief, it is indeed the most adaptive way to go about it. Now, I'd adaptive way to go about it. Now, I'd adaptive way to go about it. Now, I'd like to consider why two people, both like to consider why two people, both like to consider why two people, both who are intensely attached to a person who are intensely attached to a person who are intensely attached to a person that is no longer there, can experience that is no longer there, can experience that is no longer there, can experience the grief of the loss of that person in the grief of the loss of that person in the grief of the loss of that person in such different ways. We don't really such different ways. We don't really such different ways. We don't really know how other people feel. There's no know how other people feel. There's no know how other people feel. There's no clear way of knowing that the expression clear way of knowing that the expression clear way of knowing that the expression someone else has or whether or not someone else has or whether or not someone else has or whether or not they're crying or not or their body they're crying or not or their body they're crying or not or their body language really represents how they feel language really represents how they feel language really represents how they feel inside. So that is important to keep in inside. So that is important to keep in inside. So that is important to keep in mind. Nonetheless, there does seem to be mind. Nonetheless, there does seem to be mind. Nonetheless, there does seem to be a sort of a split among people and a sort of a split among people and a sort of a split among people and indeed among animals as well, even indeed among animals as well, even indeed among animals as well, even within a species in terms of how within a species in terms of how within a species in terms of how intensely they feel the yearning aspect intensely they feel the yearning aspect intensely they feel the yearning aspect of grief. And it appears based on a of grief. And it appears based on a of grief. And it appears based on a number of different lines of evidence number of different lines of evidence number of different lines of evidence that relates to this molecule that relates to this molecule that relates to this molecule that some of you have probably heard of which some of you have probably heard of which some of you have probably heard of which is oxytocin. Oxytocin is a is oxytocin. Oxytocin is a is oxytocin. Oxytocin is a hormone/eptide. A peptide just means a hormone/eptide. A peptide just means a hormone/eptide. A peptide just means a protein, generally a small protein. And protein, generally a small protein. And protein, generally a small protein. And a hormone is generally something that a hormone is generally something that a hormone is generally something that functions at numerous locations in the functions at numerous locations in the functions at numerous locations in the body to impact numerous organs and areas body to impact numerous organs and areas body to impact numerous organs and areas of the brain. Oxytocin of the brain. Oxytocin of the brain. Oxytocin has a variety of roles in the brain and has a variety of roles in the brain and has a variety of roles in the brain and body. It's involved in milk let down body. It's involved in milk let down body. It's involved in milk let down during lactation. It's involved in pair during lactation. It's involved in pair during lactation. It's involved in pair bonding both in males and females. It's bonding both in males and females. It's bonding both in males and females. It's involved in bonding of parent to child involved in bonding of parent to child involved in bonding of parent to child and indeed between romantic partners etc and indeed between romantic partners etc and indeed between romantic partners etc etc. Let's talk about some of the animal etc. Let's talk about some of the animal etc. Let's talk about some of the animal models that inform us about the models that inform us about the models that inform us about the potential roles of oxytocin in the potential roles of oxytocin in the potential roles of oxytocin in the grieving process. grieving process. grieving process. There's a species of animal called the There's a species of animal called the There's a species of animal called the prairie v. And believe it or not, the prairie v. And believe it or not, the prairie v. And believe it or not, the prairie v has been studied fairly prairie v has been studied fairly prairie v has been studied fairly extensively by neuroscience and extensively by neuroscience and extensively by neuroscience and psychology researchers. Prairie vos are psychology researchers. Prairie vos are psychology researchers. Prairie vos are one species of animal, but depending on one species of animal, but depending on one species of animal, but depending on where they live, you find that some where they live, you find that some where they live, you find that some prairie vos are monogamous, that is, prairie vos are monogamous, that is, prairie vos are monogamous, that is, they mate with the same prairie vole for they mate with the same prairie vole for they mate with the same prairie vole for life. They raise litters of little life. They raise litters of little life. They raise litters of little prairie bowls, and other prairie vos prairie bowls, and other prairie vos prairie bowls, and other prairie vos generally that live in different generally that live in different generally that live in different locations in the wild are non- locations in the wild are non- locations in the wild are non- monogamous, sometimes called polygamous. monogamous, sometimes called polygamous. monogamous, sometimes called polygamous. The neurochemical and circuit basis for The neurochemical and circuit basis for The neurochemical and circuit basis for this monogamy versus non- monogamy are this monogamy versus non- monogamy are this monogamy versus non- monogamy are quite interesting. However, in the quite interesting. However, in the quite interesting. However, in the context of grief and attachment, the context of grief and attachment, the context of grief and attachment, the prairie bowl have taught us a lot. And prairie bowl have taught us a lot. And prairie bowl have taught us a lot. And they've taught us a lot through the they've taught us a lot through the they've taught us a lot through the following experiment. Take two prairie following experiment. Take two prairie following experiment. Take two prairie vos that are coupled up. So, these would vos that are coupled up. So, these would vos that are coupled up. So, these would be monogous prairie bowls that have be monogous prairie bowls that have be monogous prairie bowls that have established a coupleum. established a coupleum. established a coupleum. I guess you would call that a prairie I guess you would call that a prairie I guess you would call that a prairie volum. Anyway, put them in a cage volum. Anyway, put them in a cage volum. Anyway, put them in a cage together. They mate together. They raise together. They mate together. They raise together. They mate together. They raise young together. And then you separate young together. And then you separate young together. And then you separate them. You literally put a physical them. You literally put a physical them. You literally put a physical barrier between the two of them. And you barrier between the two of them. And you barrier between the two of them. And you can evaluate how strongly one prairie can evaluate how strongly one prairie can evaluate how strongly one prairie bowl will work to get access to the bowl will work to get access to the bowl will work to get access to the other prairie bowl. And what you observe other prairie bowl. And what you observe other prairie bowl. And what you observe is that the monogous prairie vos will is that the monogous prairie vos will is that the monogous prairie vos will work very hard to get back to their work very hard to get back to their work very hard to get back to their mate. But the non- monogamous prairie mate. But the non- monogamous prairie mate. But the non- monogamous prairie will not work as hard to access a will not work as hard to access a will not work as hard to access a prairie vole partner. This turns out to prairie vole partner. This turns out to prairie vole partner. This turns out to be interesting when you start to explore be interesting when you start to explore be interesting when you start to explore the patterns of so-called oxytocin the patterns of so-called oxytocin the patterns of so-called oxytocin receptors in the brain. To make a long receptors in the brain. To make a long receptors in the brain. To make a long story short and to also bridge to the story short and to also bridge to the story short and to also bridge to the human literature, human literature, human literature, it turns out that the monogamous prairie it turns out that the monogamous prairie it turns out that the monogamous prairie bowls have far more oxytocin receptors bowls have far more oxytocin receptors bowls have far more oxytocin receptors in this brain area that I mentioned in this brain area that I mentioned in this brain area that I mentioned earlier, the nucleus encumbent. And earlier, the nucleus encumbent. And earlier, the nucleus encumbent. And again to remind you, the nucleus again to remind you, the nucleus again to remind you, the nucleus encumbent is the brain area associated encumbent is the brain area associated encumbent is the brain area associated with motivation, craving, and pursuit. with motivation, craving, and pursuit. with motivation, craving, and pursuit. So it's as if the monogous prairie vos So it's as if the monogous prairie vos So it's as if the monogous prairie vos have a capacity to link the attachment have a capacity to link the attachment have a capacity to link the attachment circuitry and the molecules of circuitry and the molecules of circuitry and the molecules of attachment in this case oxytocin to attachment in this case oxytocin to attachment in this case oxytocin to reward pathways and to motivational reward pathways and to motivational reward pathways and to motivational pathways. So in other words non- pathways. So in other words non- pathways. So in other words non- monogamous prairie seem to have less monogamous prairie seem to have less monogamous prairie seem to have less yearning for attachment overall at least yearning for attachment overall at least yearning for attachment overall at least to a single individual prairie bowl. And to a single individual prairie bowl. And to a single individual prairie bowl. And when we look at the human literature in when we look at the human literature in when we look at the human literature in terms of oxytocin receptor expression terms of oxytocin receptor expression terms of oxytocin receptor expression and brain imaging experiments and so on, and brain imaging experiments and so on, and brain imaging experiments and so on, what you find is the same that people what you find is the same that people what you find is the same that people that experience intense grief and a deep that experience intense grief and a deep that experience intense grief and a deep yearning and a motivation to reconnect yearning and a motivation to reconnect yearning and a motivation to reconnect with the person, animal or thing that is with the person, animal or thing that is with the person, animal or thing that is lost in many cases have heightened lost in many cases have heightened lost in many cases have heightened levels of oxytocin specifically or I levels of oxytocin specifically or I levels of oxytocin specifically or I should say oxytocin receptors to be should say oxytocin receptors to be should say oxytocin receptors to be exact specifically within the brain exact specifically within the brain exact specifically within the brain regions associated ated with craving and regions associated ated with craving and regions associated ated with craving and pursuit. So for those of you that find pursuit. So for those of you that find pursuit. So for those of you that find yourself in this kind of stuck mode, yourself in this kind of stuck mode, yourself in this kind of stuck mode, this persistence of trying to reach into this persistence of trying to reach into this persistence of trying to reach into the past or wishful thinking, this um the past or wishful thinking, this um the past or wishful thinking, this um counterfactual thinking, the yearning, counterfactual thinking, the yearning, counterfactual thinking, the yearning, the desire and the impulsivity, the desire and the impulsivity, the desire and the impulsivity, the kind of leaning in and at a almost the kind of leaning in and at a almost the kind of leaning in and at a almost reflexive way to try and access that reflexive way to try and access that reflexive way to try and access that person again, to text them, to want to person again, to text them, to want to person again, to text them, to want to hear from them could, and I have to hear from them could, and I have to hear from them could, and I have to highlight, could reflect the fact that highlight, could reflect the fact that highlight, could reflect the fact that you just so happen to have more oxytocin you just so happen to have more oxytocin you just so happen to have more oxytocin receptor or maybe more oxytocin overall receptor or maybe more oxytocin overall receptor or maybe more oxytocin overall in this brain area that's associated in this brain area that's associated in this brain area that's associated with motivation and pursuit does not with motivation and pursuit does not with motivation and pursuit does not necessarily mean that you are more necessarily mean that you are more necessarily mean that you are more capable of attachment than people who capable of attachment than people who capable of attachment than people who move through grief more quickly and I move through grief more quickly and I move through grief more quickly and I should say that people move through should say that people move through should say that people move through grief at different rates even if two grief at different rates even if two grief at different rates even if two people lost the same person or same people lost the same person or same people lost the same person or same animal people move through this at animal people move through this at animal people move through this at different rates and some of that is no different rates and some of that is no different rates and some of that is no doubt psychological but some of it no doubt psychological but some of it no doubt psychological but some of it no doubt is also neurochemical and bi doubt is also neurochemical and bi doubt is also neurochemical and bi biological. I'd like to take a moment biological. I'd like to take a moment biological. I'd like to take a moment and explore this idea that allowing and explore this idea that allowing and explore this idea that allowing ourselves to really feel the attachment ourselves to really feel the attachment ourselves to really feel the attachment to somebody can accelerate or at least to somebody can accelerate or at least to somebody can accelerate or at least support adaptive transitioning through support adaptive transitioning through support adaptive transitioning through grief. There's a really wonderful study grief. There's a really wonderful study grief. There's a really wonderful study that on the face of it appears to be a that on the face of it appears to be a that on the face of it appears to be a what we call negative result. A negative what we call negative result. A negative what we call negative result. A negative result is when a hypothesis is posed and result is when a hypothesis is posed and result is when a hypothesis is posed and then turns out the hypothesis is not then turns out the hypothesis is not then turns out the hypothesis is not true. But as is the case with so many true. But as is the case with so many true. But as is the case with so many interesting scientific findings, often interesting scientific findings, often interesting scientific findings, often when there's a negative result, there's when there's a negative result, there's when there's a negative result, there's a more interesting result nested in that a more interesting result nested in that a more interesting result nested in that negative outcome. And this is the case negative outcome. And this is the case negative outcome. And this is the case in a particular paper I'll share with in a particular paper I'll share with in a particular paper I'll share with you now. This is a paper published in you now. This is a paper published in you now. This is a paper published in the journal biological psychology. And the journal biological psychology. And the journal biological psychology. And again, the title is posed as a question again, the title is posed as a question again, the title is posed as a question which is emotional disclosure for whom? which is emotional disclosure for whom? which is emotional disclosure for whom? A study of veagal tone in bereavement. A study of veagal tone in bereavement. A study of veagal tone in bereavement. What this study explored was whether or What this study explored was whether or What this study explored was whether or not written disclosure of the emotional not written disclosure of the emotional not written disclosure of the emotional connection to somebody that was lost connection to somebody that was lost connection to somebody that was lost would be effective as a way for people would be effective as a way for people would be effective as a way for people to move through the grieving process. to move through the grieving process. to move through the grieving process. The study also explored the so-called The study also explored the so-called The study also explored the so-called vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is an vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is an vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is an extensive nerve pathway that is extensive nerve pathway that is extensive nerve pathway that is birectional between brain and body. So birectional between brain and body. So birectional between brain and body. So brain to body and body to brain. The way brain to body and body to brain. The way brain to body and body to brain. The way to think about it in terms of what we're to think about it in terms of what we're to think about it in terms of what we're going to talk about now is heart rate going to talk about now is heart rate going to talk about now is heart rate and heart rate variability. The vagus and heart rate variability. The vagus and heart rate variability. The vagus nerve is generally associated with nerve is generally associated with nerve is generally associated with parasympathetic functions and has the parasympathetic functions and has the parasympathetic functions and has the capacity to slow down our heart rate in capacity to slow down our heart rate in capacity to slow down our heart rate in particular by exhales and just simply particular by exhales and just simply particular by exhales and just simply because of the movement of the diaphragm because of the movement of the diaphragm because of the movement of the diaphragm and its relationship to the heart and its relationship to the heart and its relationship to the heart and the thoracic cavity. Exhales result in the thoracic cavity. Exhales result in the thoracic cavity. Exhales result in slowing down of the heart rate. This is slowing down of the heart rate. This is slowing down of the heart rate. This is what we call an increased veagal tone. what we call an increased veagal tone. what we call an increased veagal tone. Now in this study what they did is they Now in this study what they did is they Now in this study what they did is they had people and I should say it was 35 had people and I should say it was 35 had people and I should say it was 35 participants go through a writing participants go through a writing participants go through a writing exercise for a period of weeks and there exercise for a period of weeks and there exercise for a period of weeks and there were two different groups. One group was were two different groups. One group was were two different groups. One group was in the so-called written disclosure in the so-called written disclosure in the so-called written disclosure group. What they did is they on day one group. What they did is they on day one group. What they did is they on day one they would write about what happened they would write about what happened they would write about what happened when a loved one died and indeed they when a loved one died and indeed they when a loved one died and indeed they used people who had experienced real used people who had experienced real used people who had experienced real loss. And so they were asked to talk loss. And so they were asked to talk loss. And so they were asked to talk about and write about their deepest about and write about their deepest about and write about their deepest emotions and thoughts about it, memories emotions and thoughts about it, memories emotions and thoughts about it, memories of their loved one. Very intense stuff of their loved one. Very intense stuff of their loved one. Very intense stuff if you think about it. If they're in the if you think about it. If they're in the if you think about it. If they're in the immediate period of having lost someone, immediate period of having lost someone, immediate period of having lost someone, then they actually were asked to write a then they actually were asked to write a then they actually were asked to write a letter to the person that they lost. The letter to the person that they lost. The letter to the person that they lost. The other group was a so-called control other group was a so-called control other group was a so-called control group where they were simply told to group where they were simply told to group where they were simply told to write about how they use their time. So write about how they use their time. So write about how they use their time. So an emotionally kind of empty writing an emotionally kind of empty writing an emotionally kind of empty writing exercise, if you will. They describe exercise, if you will. They describe exercise, if you will. They describe what they would do today after they woke what they would do today after they woke what they would do today after they woke up, etc. No, no heavy emotional content up, etc. No, no heavy emotional content up, etc. No, no heavy emotional content and so on. What I didn't tell you thus and so on. What I didn't tell you thus and so on. What I didn't tell you thus far is why they had them do this far is why they had them do this far is why they had them do this exercise at all. They had them do this exercise at all. They had them do this exercise at all. They had them do this exercise because many of the effective exercise because many of the effective exercise because many of the effective practices for moving through grief practices for moving through grief practices for moving through grief involve, as I mentioned earlier, getting involve, as I mentioned earlier, getting involve, as I mentioned earlier, getting close to and actually deliberately close to and actually deliberately close to and actually deliberately experiencing the attachment that one has experiencing the attachment that one has experiencing the attachment that one has to that person that was lost. Not to that person that was lost. Not to that person that was lost. Not distracting oneself, not getting into distracting oneself, not getting into distracting oneself, not getting into this counterfactual thinking, the what this counterfactual thinking, the what this counterfactual thinking, the what if, what if, what if, but rather if, what if, what if, but rather if, what if, what if, but rather thinking about or in this case writing thinking about or in this case writing thinking about or in this case writing about the real attachment. And so the about the real attachment. And so the about the real attachment. And so the initial idea was if people write the initial idea was if people write the initial idea was if people write about this attachment that they're going about this attachment that they're going about this attachment that they're going to experience this attachment and that to experience this attachment and that to experience this attachment and that will serve them in some or many ways in will serve them in some or many ways in will serve them in some or many ways in terms of moving through grief. And that terms of moving through grief. And that terms of moving through grief. And that wasn't what they found. They found no wasn't what they found. They found no wasn't what they found. They found no difference between the two groups until difference between the two groups until difference between the two groups until they explored who had higher veagal they explored who had higher veagal they explored who had higher veagal tone, who had a greater degree of tone, who had a greater degree of tone, who had a greater degree of so-called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. so-called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. so-called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. In other words, who was able to modulate In other words, who was able to modulate In other words, who was able to modulate their state using their breathing and their state using their breathing and their state using their breathing and their body. And what they discovered was their body. And what they discovered was their body. And what they discovered was that a subset of individuals who had a that a subset of individuals who had a that a subset of individuals who had a high degree of veagal tone seemed to get high degree of veagal tone seemed to get high degree of veagal tone seemed to get more benefit from this writing type more benefit from this writing type more benefit from this writing type exercise. Now this is one study and I exercise. Now this is one study and I exercise. Now this is one study and I would consider it fairly preliminary would consider it fairly preliminary would consider it fairly preliminary with 35 subjects although you know it's with 35 subjects although you know it's with 35 subjects although you know it's a study unto itself and I think a quite a study unto itself and I think a quite a study unto itself and I think a quite nice one and it really set the stage for nice one and it really set the stage for nice one and it really set the stage for a number of other studies that followed a number of other studies that followed a number of other studies that followed from this group and other groups that from this group and other groups that from this group and other groups that really point to the fact that yes indeed really point to the fact that yes indeed really point to the fact that yes indeed accessing these states of emotionality accessing these states of emotionality accessing these states of emotionality by writing or thinking about somebody is by writing or thinking about somebody is by writing or thinking about somebody is quite powerful in terms of engaging the quite powerful in terms of engaging the quite powerful in terms of engaging the bodily states and the mind states bodily states and the mind states bodily states and the mind states associated with the attachment and that associated with the attachment and that associated with the attachment and that is very beneficial. for moving through is very beneficial. for moving through is very beneficial. for moving through grief. That is very beneficial for grief. That is very beneficial for grief. That is very beneficial for sensing the attachment. And now it makes sensing the attachment. And now it makes sensing the attachment. And now it makes perfect sense as to why some people perfect sense as to why some people perfect sense as to why some people would benefit from that sort of practice would benefit from that sort of practice would benefit from that sort of practice more than others because some people are more than others because some people are more than others because some people are able to access more real somatic able to access more real somatic able to access more real somatic feelings of attachment by writing about feelings of attachment by writing about feelings of attachment by writing about the attachment or by thinking about it the attachment or by thinking about it the attachment or by thinking about it than others. Because again what this than others. Because again what this than others. Because again what this paper really points to and set off a paper really points to and set off a paper really points to and set off a number of other investigations related number of other investigations related number of other investigations related to is that for those that can really to is that for those that can really to is that for those that can really feel the relationship between breathing, feel the relationship between breathing, feel the relationship between breathing, heart rate, what we call veagal tone. heart rate, what we call veagal tone. heart rate, what we call veagal tone. Well, those people are going to be in a Well, those people are going to be in a Well, those people are going to be in a better position to move through grief better position to move through grief better position to move through grief not because they are disengaging from not because they are disengaging from not because they are disengaging from the feelings of attachment but because the feelings of attachment but because the feelings of attachment but because they are better able to access those they are better able to access those they are better able to access those feelings of attachment. So what this feelings of attachment. So what this feelings of attachment. So what this relates to, of course, is that relates to, of course, is that relates to, of course, is that tripartite map, that threepart map that tripartite map, that threepart map that tripartite map, that threepart map that we talked about earlier, that we talked about earlier, that we talked about earlier, that representation of space, where things representation of space, where things representation of space, where things are, where the person is, where their are, where the person is, where their are, where the person is, where their belongings are, where their car is, belongings are, where their car is, belongings are, where their car is, where their bicycle is, time, when you where their bicycle is, time, when you where their bicycle is, time, when you were expecting to see them on a regular were expecting to see them on a regular were expecting to see them on a regular basis, when they would call, when they basis, when they would call, when they basis, when they would call, when they would come home from work, etc. And that would come home from work, etc. And that would come home from work, etc. And that third node or that third dimension of third node or that third dimension of third node or that third dimension of attachment, which is literally attachment, which is literally attachment, which is literally attachment and closeness. Now, I'd like attachment and closeness. Now, I'd like attachment and closeness. Now, I'd like to take a moment and consider some of to take a moment and consider some of to take a moment and consider some of the tools that you can access that the tools that you can access that the tools that you can access that support healthy transitioning through support healthy transitioning through support healthy transitioning through grief. And these are tools distinct from grief. And these are tools distinct from grief. And these are tools distinct from that neural map, that space, time, that neural map, that space, time, that neural map, that space, time, closeness, attachment map that we were closeness, attachment map that we were closeness, attachment map that we were talking about before. Rather, it's talking about before. Rather, it's talking about before. Rather, it's important to remind ourselves that important to remind ourselves that important to remind ourselves that everything exists in a context of our everything exists in a context of our everything exists in a context of our baseline physiology. And I'm certainly baseline physiology. And I'm certainly baseline physiology. And I'm certainly not going to be the first or the last to not going to be the first or the last to not going to be the first or the last to tell you that everything in life, tell you that everything in life, tell you that everything in life, learning, relationships with people that learning, relationships with people that learning, relationships with people that are still around. are still around. are still around. Our health in every way, immune system, Our health in every way, immune system, Our health in every way, immune system, etc., function far better when we're etc., function far better when we're etc., function far better when we're sleeping really well. And when we are sleeping really well. And when we are sleeping really well. And when we are generally awake during the daytime and generally awake during the daytime and generally awake during the daytime and asleep at night, there's a particular asleep at night, there's a particular asleep at night, there's a particular feature to our dural and dial meaning feature to our dural and dial meaning feature to our dural and dial meaning the opposite of nocturnal. Our dal the opposite of nocturnal. Our dal the opposite of nocturnal. Our dal pattern of the release of a hormone pattern of the release of a hormone pattern of the release of a hormone called cortisol. It's linked to our called cortisol. It's linked to our called cortisol. It's linked to our increase in temperature rhythms and can increase in temperature rhythms and can increase in temperature rhythms and can further increase our temperature which further increase our temperature which further increase our temperature which leads to waking and so on. The typical leads to waking and so on. The typical leads to waking and so on. The typical pattern of cortisol in a healthy pattern of cortisol in a healthy pattern of cortisol in a healthy individual and we really can say individual and we really can say individual and we really can say physically and emotionally healthy physically and emotionally healthy physically and emotionally healthy individual is that cortisol is going to individual is that cortisol is going to individual is that cortisol is going to be somewhat high right around waking and be somewhat high right around waking and be somewhat high right around waking and then is going to be highest as it ever then is going to be highest as it ever then is going to be highest as it ever will be in the 24-hour period about 45 will be in the 24-hour period about 45 will be in the 24-hour period about 45 minutes post waking. Not exactly 45 minutes post waking. Not exactly 45 minutes post waking. Not exactly 45 minutes, but about 45 minutes. And then minutes, but about 45 minutes. And then minutes, but about 45 minutes. And then it will drop gradually such that by it will drop gradually such that by it will drop gradually such that by about 4 pm in the afternoon, which is about 4 pm in the afternoon, which is about 4 pm in the afternoon, which is actually when body temperature tends to actually when body temperature tends to actually when body temperature tends to start to drop as well. Cortisol tends to start to drop as well. Cortisol tends to start to drop as well. Cortisol tends to be very low and then remains low in a be very low and then remains low in a be very low and then remains low in a healthy individual such that at 900 p.m. healthy individual such that at 900 p.m. healthy individual such that at 900 p.m. it's very low and throughout the night it's very low and throughout the night it's very low and throughout the night as we sleep it's very low. There's a as we sleep it's very low. There's a as we sleep it's very low. There's a very interesting paper exploring the very interesting paper exploring the very interesting paper exploring the relationship between cortisol rhythms relationship between cortisol rhythms relationship between cortisol rhythms and grieving. in particular complicated and grieving. in particular complicated and grieving. in particular complicated versus non-complicated grieving. Again, versus non-complicated grieving. Again, versus non-complicated grieving. Again, complicated grieving being the form of complicated grieving being the form of complicated grieving being the form of grieving that reflects a immense grieving that reflects a immense grieving that reflects a immense challenge of people moving through the challenge of people moving through the challenge of people moving through the grieving process such that it really grieving process such that it really grieving process such that it really needs to be dealt with. Right? Again, needs to be dealt with. Right? Again, needs to be dealt with. Right? Again, grieving is healthy, but complicated grieving is healthy, but complicated grieving is healthy, but complicated grieving is a prolonged grieving and has grieving is a prolonged grieving and has grieving is a prolonged grieving and has other dimensions as well. Hence the name other dimensions as well. Hence the name other dimensions as well. Hence the name complicated. The title of this paper is complicated. The title of this paper is complicated. The title of this paper is dal cortisol in complicated and dal cortisol in complicated and dal cortisol in complicated and non-complicated grief slope differences non-complicated grief slope differences non-complicated grief slope differences across the day. And the figure to orient across the day. And the figure to orient across the day. And the figure to orient to in this paper if you do decide to in this paper if you do decide to in this paper if you do decide to check it out is figure one which check it out is figure one which check it out is figure one which beautifully shows or I should say very beautifully shows or I should say very beautifully shows or I should say very clearly shows that when you compare the clearly shows that when you compare the clearly shows that when you compare the cortisol levels between people cortisol levels between people cortisol levels between people experiencing complicated grieving versus experiencing complicated grieving versus experiencing complicated grieving versus non-complicated grieving. What you find non-complicated grieving. What you find non-complicated grieving. What you find is the 4pm and 900 p.m. cortisol levels is the 4pm and 900 p.m. cortisol levels is the 4pm and 900 p.m. cortisol levels are significantly higher than they are significantly higher than they are significantly higher than they are in the non-complicated grieving group. in the non-complicated grieving group. in the non-complicated grieving group. This raises a very interesting idea. We This raises a very interesting idea. We This raises a very interesting idea. We arrive at a scenario where it makes very arrive at a scenario where it makes very arrive at a scenario where it makes very good sense to think about modulating good sense to think about modulating good sense to think about modulating that is controlling the foundation of that is controlling the foundation of that is controlling the foundation of your life in a way that establishes your life in a way that establishes your life in a way that establishes cortisol rhythms and sleep patterns and cortisol rhythms and sleep patterns and cortisol rhythms and sleep patterns and patterns of autonomic arousal and patterns of autonomic arousal and patterns of autonomic arousal and catakolamine release that position you catakolamine release that position you catakolamine release that position you to navigate the grief process in the to navigate the grief process in the to navigate the grief process in the best possible way. If you are somebody best possible way. If you are somebody best possible way. If you are somebody who is heading into grief or is who is heading into grief or is who is heading into grief or is challenged with grief, getting adequate challenged with grief, getting adequate challenged with grief, getting adequate sleep at night and establishing as sleep at night and establishing as sleep at night and establishing as normal a pattern of cortisol as possible normal a pattern of cortisol as possible normal a pattern of cortisol as possible is going to be very important. And is going to be very important. And is going to be very important. And there's a very simple straightforward there's a very simple straightforward there's a very simple straightforward way to do this. And I apologize to the way to do this. And I apologize to the way to do this. And I apologize to the listeners of this podcast in advance if listeners of this podcast in advance if listeners of this podcast in advance if I sound like a repeating record, but the I sound like a repeating record, but the I sound like a repeating record, but the most powerful way to do this is to view most powerful way to do this is to view most powerful way to do this is to view sunlight very close to waking. It does sunlight very close to waking. It does sunlight very close to waking. It does not have to be right at sunrise, but not have to be right at sunrise, but not have to be right at sunrise, but when you get up in the morning, if the when you get up in the morning, if the when you get up in the morning, if the sun isn't out, please turn on as many sun isn't out, please turn on as many sun isn't out, please turn on as many bright lights as possible in your bright lights as possible in your bright lights as possible in your environment. Why do I say this thing environment. Why do I say this thing environment. Why do I say this thing about sunlight over and over and over about sunlight over and over and over about sunlight over and over and over again? Well, having an early day again? Well, having an early day again? Well, having an early day cortisol peak and a very low cortisol peak and a very low cortisol peak and a very low cortisol level late in the day, 4 p.m. and 9:00 level late in the day, 4 p.m. and 9:00 level late in the day, 4 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., is immensely beneficial. It's p.m., is immensely beneficial. It's p.m., is immensely beneficial. It's reflects a properly regulated autonomic reflects a properly regulated autonomic reflects a properly regulated autonomic nervous system. It means being alert nervous system. It means being alert nervous system. It means being alert during the day and your ability to sleep during the day and your ability to sleep during the day and your ability to sleep at night isite tightly correlated to at night isite tightly correlated to at night isite tightly correlated to this viewing of sunlight in the morning. this viewing of sunlight in the morning. this viewing of sunlight in the morning. If you have additional questions about If you have additional questions about If you have additional questions about this or these protocols, please see our this or these protocols, please see our this or these protocols, please see our mastering sleep episode also at mastering sleep episode also at mastering sleep episode also at hubermanlab.com. So, what are the tools hubermanlab.com. So, what are the tools hubermanlab.com. So, what are the tools that we can think about using in terms that we can think about using in terms that we can think about using in terms of healthy adaptive moving through of healthy adaptive moving through of healthy adaptive moving through grief, trying to avoid complicated grief grief, trying to avoid complicated grief grief, trying to avoid complicated grief and prolonged grief disorders? Clearly, and prolonged grief disorders? Clearly, and prolonged grief disorders? Clearly, it's a value to dedicate some period of it's a value to dedicate some period of it's a value to dedicate some period of time, perhaps every day, perhaps every time, perhaps every day, perhaps every time, perhaps every day, perhaps every other day, depending on your capacity other day, depending on your capacity other day, depending on your capacity and schedule. and schedule. and schedule. These could be periods of time ranging These could be periods of time ranging These could be periods of time ranging anywhere from 5 to 45 minutes, maybe anywhere from 5 to 45 minutes, maybe anywhere from 5 to 45 minutes, maybe longer. These blocks of time would be longer. These blocks of time would be longer. These blocks of time would be appropriately described as rational appropriately described as rational appropriately described as rational grieving. Rational grieving is a clear grieving. Rational grieving is a clear grieving. Rational grieving is a clear acceptance of the new reality that the acceptance of the new reality that the acceptance of the new reality that the person, animal, or thing no longer person, animal, or thing no longer person, animal, or thing no longer exists in the same space-time exists in the same space-time exists in the same space-time dimensionality that we knew them before dimensionality that we knew them before dimensionality that we knew them before and yet holding on to and anchoring to and yet holding on to and anchoring to and yet holding on to and anchoring to the attachment that we had. This is the attachment that we had. This is the attachment that we had. This is really anchoring to the depth and the really anchoring to the depth and the really anchoring to the depth and the intensity of the attachment that existed intensity of the attachment that existed intensity of the attachment that existed as a way to, for lack of a better way to as a way to, for lack of a better way to as a way to, for lack of a better way to put it, push off from those episodic put it, push off from those episodic put it, push off from those episodic memories, to distance ourselves from memories, to distance ourselves from memories, to distance ourselves from them because those episodic memories are them because those episodic memories are them because those episodic memories are the ones that lead us to look for the ones that lead us to look for the ones that lead us to look for the person in our current reality. And person in our current reality. And person in our current reality. And assuming this is a real and complete assuming this is a real and complete assuming this is a real and complete loss, those sorts of expectations are loss, those sorts of expectations are loss, those sorts of expectations are maladaptive. They do not serve us well. maladaptive. They do not serve us well. maladaptive. They do not serve us well. The second aspect of this is to The second aspect of this is to The second aspect of this is to understand that the node of the map, the understand that the node of the map, the understand that the node of the map, the component of the neural map that you're component of the neural map that you're component of the neural map that you're anchoring to is a very real component of anchoring to is a very real component of anchoring to is a very real component of you. These are literally cells that you. These are literally cells that you. These are literally cells that represent the depth of attachment. We represent the depth of attachment. We represent the depth of attachment. We talked a moment ago about the importance talked a moment ago about the importance talked a moment ago about the importance of accessing quality sleep on a regular of accessing quality sleep on a regular of accessing quality sleep on a regular basis. There again a rich array of tools basis. There again a rich array of tools basis. There again a rich array of tools to do that in the mastering sleep to do that in the mastering sleep to do that in the mastering sleep episode. And again highlighting the episode. And again highlighting the episode. And again highlighting the importance of sleep for not just emotion importance of sleep for not just emotion importance of sleep for not just emotion regulation and autonomic control which regulation and autonomic control which regulation and autonomic control which is so vital but also for making sure is so vital but also for making sure is so vital but also for making sure that neuroplasticity takes place because that neuroplasticity takes place because that neuroplasticity takes place because again neuroplasticity is a two-part again neuroplasticity is a two-part again neuroplasticity is a two-part process. There's the triggering of the process. There's the triggering of the process. There's the triggering of the plasticity which in the case of the plasticity which in the case of the plasticity which in the case of the things we're talking about today will be things we're talking about today will be things we're talking about today will be naturally activated by the practice of a naturally activated by the practice of a naturally activated by the practice of a dedicated focusing on the attachment dedicated focusing on the attachment dedicated focusing on the attachment feeling the attachment to the person feeling the attachment to the person feeling the attachment to the person maybe even writing about the attachment maybe even writing about the attachment maybe even writing about the attachment to the person as was described in that to the person as was described in that to the person as was described in that previous study. but also just the previous study. but also just the previous study. but also just the plasticity is triggered by the mere loss plasticity is triggered by the mere loss plasticity is triggered by the mere loss of that person, the intensity of that of that person, the intensity of that of that person, the intensity of that experience. But neuroplasticity, the experience. But neuroplasticity, the experience. But neuroplasticity, the literal rewiring of connections occurs literal rewiring of connections occurs literal rewiring of connections occurs during deep sleep and in what I call during deep sleep and in what I call during deep sleep and in what I call non-sleep deep rest or NSDR. And you can non-sleep deep rest or NSDR. And you can non-sleep deep rest or NSDR. And you can find NSDR scripts. These are short find NSDR scripts. These are short find NSDR scripts. These are short behavioral protocols that you do for 10 behavioral protocols that you do for 10 behavioral protocols that you do for 10 to 30 minutes at some point throughout to 30 minutes at some point throughout to 30 minutes at some point throughout the day, maybe even multiple times the day, maybe even multiple times the day, maybe even multiple times through day that have been shown to through day that have been shown to through day that have been shown to accelerate neuroplasticity. So having a accelerate neuroplasticity. So having a accelerate neuroplasticity. So having a such a practice can be very useful and such a practice can be very useful and such a practice can be very useful and understand that it involves some understand that it involves some understand that it involves some cognitive work. We have to hold on to cognitive work. We have to hold on to cognitive work. We have to hold on to the attachment and imagine and feel as the attachment and imagine and feel as the attachment and imagine and feel as much as we can the attachment while also much as we can the attachment while also much as we can the attachment while also being extremely rationally grounded and being extremely rationally grounded and being extremely rationally grounded and trying to not try to hold on to the past trying to not try to hold on to the past trying to not try to hold on to the past trying to not anticipate the person trying to not anticipate the person trying to not anticipate the person walking in the room. This is very hard walking in the room. This is very hard walking in the room. This is very hard because when we think about the because when we think about the because when we think about the attachment, the attachment tends to drag attachment, the attachment tends to drag attachment, the attachment tends to drag with it those episodic memories, that with it those episodic memories, that with it those episodic memories, that rich catalog of experiences. And we rich catalog of experiences. And we rich catalog of experiences. And we talked about preparing ourselves for talked about preparing ourselves for talked about preparing ourselves for grief. We can prepare ourselves to grief. We can prepare ourselves to grief. We can prepare ourselves to grieve more adaptively by regulating the grieve more adaptively by regulating the grieve more adaptively by regulating the level of catakolamines, in particular level of catakolamines, in particular level of catakolamines, in particular epinephrine, and tools such as the one epinephrine, and tools such as the one epinephrine, and tools such as the one found in our mastering stress episode found in our mastering stress episode found in our mastering stress episode and tools of the sort that we talked and tools of the sort that we talked and tools of the sort that we talked about today, increasing that veagal tone about today, increasing that veagal tone about today, increasing that veagal tone by actively building up the relationship by actively building up the relationship by actively building up the relationship between exhales and slowing down of the between exhales and slowing down of the between exhales and slowing down of the heart rate, so-called respiratory sinus heart rate, so-called respiratory sinus heart rate, so-called respiratory sinus arhythmia. Those things can be very arhythmia. Those things can be very arhythmia. Those things can be very useful tools. And of course, I want to useful tools. And of course, I want to useful tools. And of course, I want to restate again, it is often important to restate again, it is often important to restate again, it is often important to access a trained professional access a trained professional access a trained professional psychologist or psychiatrist or both or psychologist or psychiatrist or both or psychologist or psychiatrist or both or bereavement group or all of the above bereavement group or all of the above bereavement group or all of the above in order to get the proper support for in order to get the proper support for in order to get the proper support for grieving. I like to think that the tools grieving. I like to think that the tools grieving. I like to think that the tools that we've talked about today would be that we've talked about today would be that we've talked about today would be not only compatible but would be not only compatible but would be not only compatible but would be complimentary to the sorts of approaches complimentary to the sorts of approaches complimentary to the sorts of approaches that they take. And I would encourage that they take. And I would encourage that they take. And I would encourage you to not lean away from but rather to you to not lean away from but rather to you to not lean away from but rather to lean into the building of those episodic lean into the building of those episodic lean into the building of those episodic memories to build up a richer and richer memories to build up a richer and richer memories to build up a richer and richer set of experiences and emotional set of experiences and emotional set of experiences and emotional attachments. Because while the process attachments. Because while the process attachments. Because while the process of grieving is in direct relation to how of grieving is in direct relation to how of grieving is in direct relation to how close we are attached to people, there close we are attached to people, there close we are attached to people, there are ways to move through it. And of are ways to move through it. And of are ways to move through it. And of course, it is the depth of our course, it is the depth of our course, it is the depth of our attachments and the number and the depth attachments and the number and the depth attachments and the number and the depth of meaning of experiences that we share of meaning of experiences that we share of meaning of experiences that we share with others and with animals that makes with others and with animals that makes with others and with animals that makes life so rich and worth living. So, I life so rich and worth living. So, I life so rich and worth living. So, I just want to take a moment and say thank just want to take a moment and say thank just want to take a moment and say thank you for being willing to explore this you for being willing to explore this you for being willing to explore this rather complicated and sometimes rather complicated and sometimes rather complicated and sometimes extremely challenging thing that we call extremely challenging thing that we call extremely challenging thing that we call grief from the perspective or through grief from the perspective or through grief from the perspective or through the lens of neuroscience and psychology. the lens of neuroscience and psychology. the lens of neuroscience and psychology. And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. you for your interest in science. you for your interest in science. [music]