Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and where we discuss science and where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Stanford School of Medicine. Recently, I had the pleasure of hosting Recently, I had the pleasure of hosting Recently, I had the pleasure of hosting two live events, one in Seattle, two live events, one in Seattle, two live events, one in Seattle, Washington, and one in Portland, Oregon, Washington, and one in Portland, Oregon, Washington, and one in Portland, Oregon, both entitled The Brain-Body Contract, both entitled The Brain-Body Contract, both entitled The Brain-Body Contract, where I discussed science and where I discussed science and where I discussed science and science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. My physical health, and performance. My physical health, and performance. My favorite part of each evening, however, favorite part of each evening, however, favorite part of each evening, however, was the question and answer period that was the question and answer period that was the question and answer period that followed the lecture. I love the followed the lecture. I love the followed the lecture. I love the question and answer period because it question and answer period because it question and answer period because it gives me an opportunity to hear directly gives me an opportunity to hear directly gives me an opportunity to hear directly from the audience as to what they want from the audience as to what they want from the audience as to what they want to know most, and indeed to get into a to know most, and indeed to get into a to know most, and indeed to get into a bit of dialogue, so we really clarify bit of dialogue, so we really clarify bit of dialogue, so we really clarify what are the underlying mechanisms of what are the underlying mechanisms of what are the underlying mechanisms of particular tools, how best to use the particular tools, how best to use the particular tools, how best to use the tools for things like focus and sleep. tools for things like focus and sleep. tools for things like focus and sleep. We also touched on some things related We also touched on some things related We also touched on some things related to mental health and physical health. It to mental health and physical health. It to mental health and physical health. It was a delight for me, and I like to was a delight for me, and I like to was a delight for me, and I like to think that the audience learned a lot. I think that the audience learned a lot. I think that the audience learned a lot. I know that many of you weren't able to know that many of you weren't able to know that many of you weren't able to attend those events, but we wanted to attend those events, but we wanted to attend those events, but we wanted to make the information available to you. make the information available to you. make the information available to you. So, what follows this is a recording of So, what follows this is a recording of So, what follows this is a recording of the question and answer period from the question and answer period from the question and answer period from the lecture in Seattle, Washington. I hope lecture in Seattle, Washington. I hope lecture in Seattle, Washington. I hope you'll find it to be both interesting you'll find it to be both interesting you'll find it to be both interesting and informative. I'd also like to thank and informative. I'd also like to thank and informative. I'd also like to thank our sponsors of these live events. The our sponsors of these live events. The our sponsors of these live events. The first is Momentous Supplements, which is first is Momentous Supplements, which is first is Momentous Supplements, which is our partner with the Huberman Lab our partner with the Huberman Lab our partner with the Huberman Lab podcast, providing supplements that are podcast, providing supplements that are podcast, providing supplements that are of the very highest quality, that ship of the very highest quality, that ship of the very highest quality, that ship internationally, and that are arranged internationally, and that are arranged internationally, and that are arranged in dosages and single-ingredient in dosages and single-ingredient in dosages and single-ingredient formulations that make it possible for formulations that make it possible for formulations that make it possible for you to develop the optimal supplement you to develop the optimal supplement you to develop the optimal supplement strategy for you. And I'd also like to strategy for you. And I'd also like to strategy for you. And I'd also like to thank our other sponsor, which is thank our other sponsor, which is thank our other sponsor, which is InsideTracker, which provides blood InsideTracker, which provides blood InsideTracker, which provides blood tests and DNA tests, so you can monitor tests and DNA tests, so you can monitor tests and DNA tests, so you can monitor your immediate and long-term health your immediate and long-term health your immediate and long-term health progress. I'd also like to announce that progress. I'd also like to announce that progress. I'd also like to announce that there are two new live events scheduled. there are two new live events scheduled. there are two new live events scheduled. The first one is going to take place The first one is going to take place The first one is going to take place Sunday, October 16th, at the Wiltern Sunday, October 16th, at the Wiltern Sunday, October 16th, at the Wiltern Theatre in Los Angeles. The other live Theatre in Los Angeles. The other live Theatre in Los Angeles. The other live event will take place Wednesday, event will take place Wednesday, event will take place Wednesday, November 9th, at the Beacon Theatre in November 9th, at the Beacon Theatre in November 9th, at the Beacon Theatre in New York City. Tickets to both of those New York City. Tickets to both of those New York City. Tickets to both of those events are now available online at events are now available online at events are now available online at hubermanlab.com/tour. That's hubermanlab.com/tour. That's hubermanlab.com/tour. That's hubermanlab.com/tour. I do hope that you learn from and enjoy I do hope that you learn from and enjoy I do hope that you learn from and enjoy the recording of the question and answer the recording of the question and answer the recording of the question and answer period that follows this. period that follows this. period that follows this. And last but certainly not least, thank And last but certainly not least, thank And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. Um what is your most Um what is your most Um what is your most used protocol? I'm assuming that you used protocol? I'm assuming that you used protocol? I'm assuming that you mean the protocol that I use the most. I mean the protocol that I use the most. I mean the protocol that I use the most. I genuinely do the morning sunlight genuinely do the morning sunlight genuinely do the morning sunlight viewing and this evening I went and viewing and this evening I went and viewing and this evening I went and looked at the sunset every single looked at the sunset every single looked at the sunset every single evening and I absolutely do 10 evening and I absolutely do 10 evening and I absolutely do 10 to 30 minutes of some non-sleep deep to 30 minutes of some non-sleep deep to 30 minutes of some non-sleep deep rest protocol every single day. rest protocol every single day. rest protocol every single day. Every single day. Um the reason I called Every single day. Um the reason I called Every single day. Um the reason I called it non-sleep deep rest is because while it non-sleep deep rest is because while it non-sleep deep rest is because while I love the classic traditions of I love the classic traditions of I love the classic traditions of and things like yoga nidra, my fear was and things like yoga nidra, my fear was and things like yoga nidra, my fear was that if I called things yoga nidra that if I called things yoga nidra that if I called things yoga nidra that people would get spooked. Um but I also people would get spooked. Um but I also people would get spooked. Um but I also have to say have to say have to say that I rather loathe the fact that I rather loathe the fact that I rather loathe the fact that scientists use so many scientists use so many scientists use so many uh fancy terms that it also vaults uh fancy terms that it also vaults uh fancy terms that it also vaults information from the very people that information from the very people that information from the very people that fund the work. So I have a kind of an fund the work. So I have a kind of an fund the work. So I have a kind of an axe to grind with the scientific axe to grind with the scientific axe to grind with the scientific community, too. So non-sleep deep rest community, too. So non-sleep deep rest community, too. So non-sleep deep rest was my attempt to kind of was my attempt to kind of was my attempt to kind of put my arms around a number of different put my arms around a number of different put my arms around a number of different things like yoga nidra, which I have things like yoga nidra, which I have things like yoga nidra, which I have great reverence for, great reverence for, great reverence for, and other tools like that. I do that and other tools like that. I do that and other tools like that. I do that usually in the early afternoon or if I usually in the early afternoon or if I usually in the early afternoon or if I wake up first thing in the morning and I wake up first thing in the morning and I wake up first thing in the morning and I haven't slept enough or not that well, haven't slept enough or not that well, haven't slept enough or not that well, I'll do 30 of yoga nidra and I feel I'll do 30 of yoga nidra and I feel I'll do 30 of yoga nidra and I feel terrific after that. I'll just mention a terrific after that. I'll just mention a terrific after that. I'll just mention a brief anecdote. brief anecdote. brief anecdote. I um I learned about yoga nidra while I um I learned about yoga nidra while I um I learned about yoga nidra while researching a book that I never wrote um researching a book that I never wrote um researching a book that I never wrote um that may or may not ever be published. I that may or may not ever be published. I that may or may not ever be published. I went and spent a week in a went and spent a week in a went and spent a week in a um trauma center and addiction treatment um trauma center and addiction treatment um trauma center and addiction treatment center in Florida and saw some amazing center in Florida and saw some amazing center in Florida and saw some amazing work of some amazing people and some work of some amazing people and some work of some amazing people and some amazing transformations and it was a big amazing transformations and it was a big amazing transformations and it was a big part of their daily routine for these part of their daily routine for these part of their daily routine for these people to do people to do people to do yoga nidra and non-sleep deep rest and I yoga nidra and non-sleep deep rest and I yoga nidra and non-sleep deep rest and I thought they're really onto something thought they're really onto something thought they're really onto something here. So, almost religiously for me here. So, almost religiously for me here. So, almost religiously for me every day 10 to 30 minutes. Not that it every day 10 to 30 minutes. Not that it every day 10 to 30 minutes. Not that it matters, but the CEO of Google's really matters, but the CEO of Google's really matters, but the CEO of Google's really into NSDR. I don't know him, into NSDR. I don't know him, into NSDR. I don't know him, but there's he's written about that a but there's he's written about that a but there's he's written about that a number of times. In Seattle sunrise number of times. In Seattle sunrise number of times. In Seattle sunrise varies from 4:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. varies from 4:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. varies from 4:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. depending on season. Are you depending on season. Are you depending on season. Are you recommending to vary your wake up recommending to vary your wake up recommending to vary your wake up outside time with the seasons? Somewhat. outside time with the seasons? Somewhat. outside time with the seasons? Somewhat. Um you know, you don't need to see the Um you know, you don't need to see the Um you know, you don't need to see the sun cross the horizon. That would be sun cross the horizon. That would be sun cross the horizon. That would be great, but not everyone can wake up with great, but not everyone can wake up with great, but not everyone can wake up with the sun. the sun. the sun. Uh you want to get so-called low solar you want to get so-called low solar you want to get so-called low solar angle sunlight. Why? Because of that angle sunlight. Why? Because of that angle sunlight. Why? Because of that yellow blue contrast that we talked yellow blue contrast that we talked yellow blue contrast that we talked about before. about before. about before. Many people wake up before the sun is Many people wake up before the sun is Many people wake up before the sun is out. If that case if you want to be out. If that case if you want to be out. If that case if you want to be awake, turn on as many bright lights as awake, turn on as many bright lights as awake, turn on as many bright lights as you can. Up here, I don't Does anyone you can. Up here, I don't Does anyone you can. Up here, I don't Does anyone here you don't have to admit this if you here you don't have to admit this if you here you don't have to admit this if you don't want to, but maybe nod or raise don't want to, but maybe nod or raise don't want to, but maybe nod or raise your hand if you're comfortable your hand if you're comfortable your hand if you're comfortable admitting that in the winter you feel admitting that in the winter you feel admitting that in the winter you feel less well less well less well or typically in the transition Yeah, or typically in the transition Yeah, or typically in the transition Yeah, it's huge up here. It's really it's huge up here. It's really it's huge up here. It's really it's amazing. And then when you're on campus amazing. And then when you're on campus amazing. And then when you're on campus or that's where I've spent time and you or that's where I've spent time and you or that's where I've spent time and you see Rainier and it's like the blossoms see Rainier and it's like the blossoms see Rainier and it's like the blossoms are out and you feel almost high because are out and you feel almost high because are out and you feel almost high because that's dopamine. that's dopamine. that's dopamine. You know, You know, You know, animals that have white plumage in the animals that have white plumage in the animals that have white plumage in the winter and then it turns dark in the winter and then it turns dark in the winter and then it turns dark in the summer and spring months, that pathway, summer and spring months, that pathway, summer and spring months, that pathway, the melanin pathway is from tyrosine the melanin pathway is from tyrosine the melanin pathway is from tyrosine which is the precursor which is the precursor which is the precursor to dopamine and also to melanin to dopamine and also to melanin to dopamine and also to melanin production in the fur. So, the whole production in the fur. So, the whole production in the fur. So, the whole system is linked. It's not rigged, it's system is linked. It's not rigged, it's system is linked. It's not rigged, it's linked. So, what do I suggest? I suggest linked. So, what do I suggest? I suggest linked. So, what do I suggest? I suggest in the winter months getting 30 minutes in the winter months getting 30 minutes in the winter months getting 30 minutes of sunlight viewing. I know it's a lot, of sunlight viewing. I know it's a lot, of sunlight viewing. I know it's a lot, but it's a but it's a but it's a it's much better than feeling lousy all it's much better than feeling lousy all it's much better than feeling lousy all day. And then the real key in the winter day. And then the real key in the winter day. And then the real key in the winter is to try and catch some sunlight before is to try and catch some sunlight before is to try and catch some sunlight before it goes down. If you're indoors and it goes down. If you're indoors and it goes down. If you're indoors and it goes down and then you go outside and goes down and then you go outside and goes down and then you go outside and it's dark, your brain and body you it's dark, your brain and body you it's dark, your brain and body you really know where they are in time, and really know where they are in time, and really know where they are in time, and then you flip on Ozark and you're then you flip on Ozark and you're then you flip on Ozark and you're watching Ozark and then you really don't watching Ozark and then you really don't watching Ozark and then you really don't know where you are in time. I've one know where you are in time. I've one know where you are in time. I've one more episode, don't tell me what more episode, don't tell me what more episode, don't tell me what happened. That show is When I was a postdoc, I That show is When I was a postdoc, I That show is When I was a postdoc, I used to used to used to recommend The Wire to my competitors. recommend The Wire to my competitors. recommend The Wire to my competitors. True. I go to sleep fired up, ready and I go to sleep fired up, ready and I go to sleep fired up, ready and excited to do whatever it takes. When I excited to do whatever it takes. When I excited to do whatever it takes. When I wake up, that drive is depleted. Why and wake up, that drive is depleted. Why and wake up, that drive is depleted. Why and what can I do? Interesting. Have not what can I do? Interesting. Have not what can I do? Interesting. Have not heard that one before, but if I were to heard that one before, but if I were to heard that one before, but if I were to venture a guess, venture a guess, venture a guess, you know, we didn't spend much time you know, we didn't spend much time you know, we didn't spend much time tonight talking about the autonomic tonight talking about the autonomic tonight talking about the autonomic nervous system, this kind of seesaw that nervous system, this kind of seesaw that nervous system, this kind of seesaw that takes us from very alert, potentially takes us from very alert, potentially takes us from very alert, potentially panicked, but to very, very deep sleep, panicked, but to very, very deep sleep, panicked, but to very, very deep sleep, even, you know, God forbid we go into a even, you know, God forbid we go into a even, you know, God forbid we go into a coma, it's because the parasympathetic coma, it's because the parasympathetic coma, it's because the parasympathetic nervous system is overactive relative to nervous system is overactive relative to nervous system is overactive relative to the sympathetic nervous system, the sympathetic nervous system, the sympathetic nervous system, the seesaw of autonomic function. seesaw of autonomic function. seesaw of autonomic function. You may be sleeping very, very deeply, You may be sleeping very, very deeply, You may be sleeping very, very deeply, and when you are in deep, deep rest, and when you are in deep, deep rest, and when you are in deep, deep rest, the last thing you want to do is get the last thing you want to do is get the last thing you want to do is get into that forward center of mass, into that forward center of mass, into that forward center of mass, thinking, planning, predicting, right? thinking, planning, predicting, right? thinking, planning, predicting, right? In You know, again, in yoga nidra, In You know, again, in yoga nidra, In You know, again, in yoga nidra, again, non-sleep deep rest, there's this again, non-sleep deep rest, there's this again, non-sleep deep rest, there's this common theme in the script of going from common theme in the script of going from common theme in the script of going from thinking and doing and predicting to thinking and doing and predicting to thinking and doing and predicting to being and feeling, they say. And I'm not being and feeling, they say. And I'm not being and feeling, they say. And I'm not making fun of them as the moment I hear making fun of them as the moment I hear making fun of them as the moment I hear that, I go, "Just going to be and feel." that, I go, "Just going to be and feel." that, I go, "Just going to be and feel." What are you doing? You're actually just What are you doing? You're actually just What are you doing? You're actually just moving into sensation, but no planning. moving into sensation, but no planning. moving into sensation, but no planning. Right? There's nothing mysterious about Right? There's nothing mysterious about Right? There's nothing mysterious about it. Sensation, but no planning. Now, in it. Sensation, but no planning. Now, in it. Sensation, but no planning. Now, in sleep, a very deeply parasympathetic sleep, a very deeply parasympathetic sleep, a very deeply parasympathetic sleep state, sleep state, sleep state, what's happening? You actually that what's happening? You actually that what's happening? You actually that visual aperture visual aperture visual aperture is actually so big, is actually so big, is actually so big, right? You're not in panoramic vision, right? You're not in panoramic vision, right? You're not in panoramic vision, your eyes are actually closed. Space and your eyes are actually closed. Space and your eyes are actually closed. Space and time are time are time are from past, present, and future are from past, present, and future are from past, present, and future are invited into your thinking, you're in a invited into your thinking, you're in a invited into your thinking, you're in a deep, deep state of relaxation, and it deep, deep state of relaxation, and it deep, deep state of relaxation, and it may be may be may be Dustin, that when you're waking up, Dustin, that when you're waking up, Dustin, that when you're waking up, you're having a hard time transitioning you're having a hard time transitioning you're having a hard time transitioning out of that because you're sleeping so out of that because you're sleeping so out of that because you're sleeping so deeply. You may be waking up mid sleep deeply. You may be waking up mid sleep deeply. You may be waking up mid sleep cycle. Many people find it useful to set cycle. Many people find it useful to set cycle. Many people find it useful to set an alarm so that they wake up at the end an alarm so that they wake up at the end an alarm so that they wake up at the end of a 90-minute so-called ultradian of a 90-minute so-called ultradian of a 90-minute so-called ultradian cycle. There are some sleep apps that do cycle. There are some sleep apps that do cycle. There are some sleep apps that do this on the phone. I can't recall their this on the phone. I can't recall their this on the phone. I can't recall their names, but so rather than sleeping 7 names, but so rather than sleeping 7 names, but so rather than sleeping 7 hours, you might be better off sleeping hours, you might be better off sleeping hours, you might be better off sleeping 6 or 7 and 1/2 hours, right? Waking up 6 or 7 and 1/2 hours, right? Waking up 6 or 7 and 1/2 hours, right? Waking up at the end of one of these 90-minute at the end of one of these 90-minute at the end of one of these 90-minute cycles. Try that. That would be cycles. Try that. That would be cycles. Try that. That would be consistent with what we know about the consistent with what we know about the consistent with what we know about the biology. But I think it's common to if you sleep But I think it's common to if you sleep But I think it's common to if you sleep very deeply to wake up and not very deeply to wake up and not very deeply to wake up and not necessarily want to spring out of bed. necessarily want to spring out of bed. necessarily want to spring out of bed. I've heard of these people that just I've heard of these people that just I've heard of these people that just want to spring out of bed and attack the want to spring out of bed and attack the want to spring out of bed and attack the day. Jocko willing 4:30 in the morning day. Jocko willing 4:30 in the morning day. Jocko willing 4:30 in the morning is Casio phone is Casio phone is Casio phone watch. I'm seeing his watch when it's watch. I'm seeing his watch when it's watch. I'm seeing his watch when it's like 8:00 for me. I'm like, "Wow, like 8:00 for me. I'm like, "Wow, like 8:00 for me. I'm like, "Wow, like again these people are amazing. I must again these people are amazing. I must again these people are amazing. I must be doing something wrong." be doing something wrong." be doing something wrong." But these are you know, I don't wake up But these are you know, I don't wake up But these are you know, I don't wake up that way, you know, like Tigger. I'm that way, you know, like Tigger. I'm that way, you know, like Tigger. I'm like, "I want water. I want sunlight. 90 like, "I want water. I want sunlight. 90 like, "I want water. I want sunlight. 90 minutes later I want caffeine." What are some of your favorite books What are some of your favorite books What are some of your favorite books that have had the biggest impact on you? that have had the biggest impact on you? that have had the biggest impact on you? Kyle G. Thank you, Kyle. Um Kyle G. Thank you, Kyle. Um Kyle G. Thank you, Kyle. Um gosh, so many. gosh, so many. gosh, so many. You know, You know, You know, for nonfiction, for nonfiction, for nonfiction, um well, Oliver Sacks's well, Oliver Sacks's well, Oliver Sacks's autobiography On the Move had a profound autobiography On the Move had a profound autobiography On the Move had a profound impact on me. You know, people hated impact on me. You know, people hated impact on me. You know, people hated him. The scientific community tried to kick The scientific community tried to kick The scientific community tried to kick him out. Um they him out. Um they him out. Um they said horrible things about him. Um said horrible things about him. Um said horrible things about him. Um created all sorts of scandals. It wasn't created all sorts of scandals. It wasn't created all sorts of scandals. It wasn't until Awakenings became a blockbuster until Awakenings became a blockbuster until Awakenings became a blockbuster movie that suddenly he got appointments movie that suddenly he got appointments movie that suddenly he got appointments at NYU and Columbia. Ha. at NYU and Columbia. Ha. at NYU and Columbia. Ha. Then now they wanted him back. And the Then now they wanted him back. And the Then now they wanted him back. And the revered neurologist. Like incredible, revered neurologist. Like incredible, revered neurologist. Like incredible, right? But he was also a real seeker right? But he was also a real seeker right? But he was also a real seeker and the cuttlefish thing and he had a lot of the cuttlefish thing and he had a lot of the cuttlefish thing and he had a lot of internal struggles, too. internal struggles, too. internal struggles, too. Um some of which I relate to, some of Um some of which I relate to, some of Um some of which I relate to, some of which I don't. Actually, I've been in which I don't. Actually, I've been in which I don't. Actually, I've been in touch with his former partner because touch with his former partner because touch with his former partner because that moved to Topanga Canyon for a short that moved to Topanga Canyon for a short that moved to Topanga Canyon for a short while just because Oliver lived there. I while just because Oliver lived there. I while just because Oliver lived there. I thought if I go there I'll actually thought if I go there I'll actually thought if I go there I'll actually finish this book. Guess what? Just finish this book. Guess what? Just finish this book. Guess what? Just moving someplace doesn't allow you to moving someplace doesn't allow you to moving someplace doesn't allow you to finish your book. Um he lived in Topanga finish your book. Um he lived in Topanga finish your book. Um he lived in Topanga so I was like that's the key. so I was like that's the key. so I was like that's the key. It didn't work. It didn't work. It didn't work. And people were wondering why I was And people were wondering why I was And people were wondering why I was hanging around their house all the time hanging around their house all the time hanging around their house all the time cuz it was Oliver's former home. So cuz it was Oliver's former home. So cuz it was Oliver's former home. So that's an amazing book. Um that's an amazing book. Um that's an amazing book. Um and tells you my obsessive nature. Um and tells you my obsessive nature. Um and tells you my obsessive nature. Um the other books that have had a profound the other books that have had a profound the other books that have had a profound influence on me I would say in the influence on me I would say in the influence on me I would say in the non-fiction realm non-fiction realm non-fiction realm well I learned how to make a decent well I learned how to make a decent well I learned how to make a decent steak and a few other simple recipes not steak and a few other simple recipes not steak and a few other simple recipes not well from Tim Ferriss's book The 4-Hour well from Tim Ferriss's book The 4-Hour well from Tim Ferriss's book The 4-Hour Chef cuz I really needed help. Um that Chef cuz I really needed help. Um that Chef cuz I really needed help. Um that was a fun one. was a fun one. was a fun one. Um I like Robert Greene's book Mastery I like Robert Greene's book Mastery I like Robert Greene's book Mastery because I've had amazing mentors and because I've had amazing mentors and because I've had amazing mentors and that book is all about that book is all about that book is all about finding mentors and assigning mentors to finding mentors and assigning mentors to finding mentors and assigning mentors to you even if you don't know them. And as you even if you don't know them. And as you even if you don't know them. And as you can tell from my stories about you can tell from my stories about you can tell from my stories about Oliver who I never met and I and a few Oliver who I never met and I and a few Oliver who I never met and I and a few other folks that I've just decided that other folks that I've just decided that other folks that I've just decided that they don't know it but I'm mentoring they don't know it but I'm mentoring they don't know it but I'm mentoring them that they're mentoring me excuse them that they're mentoring me excuse them that they're mentoring me excuse me. Um that book was really me. Um that book was really me. Um that book was really important for me and that uh important for me and that uh important for me and that uh mentor-mentee relationships always mentor-mentee relationships always mentor-mentee relationships always involve a breakup either by death or by involve a breakup either by death or by involve a breakup either by death or by decision or by consequence decision or by consequence decision or by consequence your circumstance rather there's your circumstance rather there's your circumstance rather there's something happens and they're supposed something happens and they're supposed something happens and they're supposed to break. You're not supposed to break. You're not supposed to break. You're not supposed to apprentice with somebody forever. That apprentice with somebody forever. That apprentice with somebody forever. That was an interesting book for me. I would was an interesting book for me. I would was an interesting book for me. I would say in the in the fiction realm Yeah. I would say in the fiction realm Yeah. I would say in the fiction realm Yeah. I would say in the fiction realm it's all childhood books cuz it's been a it's all childhood books cuz it's been a it's all childhood books cuz it's been a long time since I've read fiction. I long time since I've read fiction. I long time since I've read fiction. I read a lot of poetry. I'm a big Wendell read a lot of poetry. I'm a big Wendell read a lot of poetry. I'm a big Wendell Berry fan. I like poetry because poetry Berry fan. I like poetry because poetry Berry fan. I like poetry because poetry to me is like the subconscious. It to me is like the subconscious. It to me is like the subconscious. It the structure is all messed up and you the structure is all messed up and you the structure is all messed up and you think you understand what they're think you understand what they're think you understand what they're talking about but you don't really know talking about but you don't really know talking about but you don't really know and so it always feels and so it always feels and so it always feels important and consequential even though important and consequential even though important and consequential even though you know it it's your own you know it it's your own you know it it's your own interpretation. And then I love the interpretation. And then I love the interpretation. And then I love the psychologists. I love Young, I love psychologists. I love Young, I love psychologists. I love Young, I love Erickson, I love um Erickson, I love um Erickson, I love um I love the psychologists and could read I love the psychologists and could read I love the psychologists and could read endlessly about the early days of endlessly about the early days of endlessly about the early days of attachment theory and things like that attachment theory and things like that attachment theory and things like that because I find that stuff to be because I find that stuff to be because I find that stuff to be fascinating. So, those books have been a fascinating. So, those books have been a fascinating. So, those books have been a lot of fun. And I love picture books lot of fun. And I love picture books lot of fun. And I love picture books with animals. And so, if you And so, if you And so, if you can get a hold of Joel Sartore's uh can get a hold of Joel Sartore's uh can get a hold of Joel Sartore's uh Instagram account, The Photo Ark, he Instagram account, The Photo Ark, he Instagram account, The Photo Ark, he decided to take pictures of every animal decided to take pictures of every animal decided to take pictures of every animal on the planet, especially the ones that on the planet, especially the ones that on the planet, especially the ones that are endangered. He's an amazing are endangered. He's an amazing are endangered. He's an amazing photographer, um but his books are even photographer, um but his books are even photographer, um but his books are even better. So, if you like animal books. better. So, if you like animal books. better. So, if you like animal books. What excites you most about the future What excites you most about the future What excites you most about the future research of mental health treatment, research of mental health treatment, research of mental health treatment, particularly anxiety and depression? particularly anxiety and depression? particularly anxiety and depression? Ooh, um Michael, thank you, Michael. Michael, thank you, Michael. Michael, thank you, Michael. Well, there I think that we're in an Well, there I think that we're in an Well, there I think that we're in an exciting time. I exciting time. I exciting time. I am I am I am I'll just reveal my biases. Um I'll just reveal my biases. Um I'll just reveal my biases. Um I'm quite pessimistic at the idea that we're quite pessimistic at the idea that we're quite pessimistic at the idea that we're going to have going to have going to have better medication soon better medication soon better medication soon for most things. What I do think we are for most things. What I do think we are for most things. What I do think we are starting to approach is a time in which starting to approach is a time in which starting to approach is a time in which we understand how broad categories of we understand how broad categories of we understand how broad categories of drugs impact broad categories of drugs impact broad categories of drugs impact broad categories of chemicals, which kind of shift our mind chemicals, which kind of shift our mind chemicals, which kind of shift our mind in broad categories of directions. What in broad categories of directions. What in broad categories of directions. What does all that mean? I think we're does all that mean? I think we're does all that mean? I think we're starting to realize that because there starting to realize that because there starting to realize that because there are different receptors for all these are different receptors for all these are different receptors for all these chemicals all over the brain and body, chemicals all over the brain and body, chemicals all over the brain and body, that side effect-less drug is that side effect-less drug is that side effect-less drug is unlikely to exist for mental health, but unlikely to exist for mental health, but unlikely to exist for mental health, but that the combination of that the combination of that the combination of maybe some pharmacology, but especially maybe some pharmacology, but especially maybe some pharmacology, but especially behavioral tools, people actually behavioral tools, people actually behavioral tools, people actually learning how to drive this thing that we learning how to drive this thing that we learning how to drive this thing that we call our nervous system, call our nervous system, call our nervous system, is potentially helpful. Maybe very is potentially helpful. Maybe very is potentially helpful. Maybe very helpful. Now, in cases like helpful. Now, in cases like helpful. Now, in cases like schizophrenia, autism, and I didn't put those next to one and I didn't put those next to one and I didn't put those next to one another for any reason, by way. another for any reason, by way. another for any reason, by way. OCD, eating disorders. And I'm very mindful of the fact that, And I'm very mindful of the fact that, And I'm very mindful of the fact that, you know, anorexia is the most lethal of you know, anorexia is the most lethal of you know, anorexia is the most lethal of all the psychiatric disorders, right? all the psychiatric disorders, right? all the psychiatric disorders, right? Amazing and sad fact. Amazing and sad fact. Amazing and sad fact. I think for those conditions, we are I think for those conditions, we are I think for those conditions, we are soon going to enter a time in which it's soon going to enter a time in which it's soon going to enter a time in which it's going to be combination behavioral, drug going to be combination behavioral, drug going to be combination behavioral, drug therapy, and yes, brain machine therapy, and yes, brain machine therapy, and yes, brain machine interface. I don't mean putting chips interface. I don't mean putting chips interface. I don't mean putting chips down below the skull. I think there's down below the skull. I think there's down below the skull. I think there's going to be going to be going to be and there are things happening now of and there are things happening now of and there are things happening now of people using devices like virtual people using devices like virtual people using devices like virtual reality, as well as transcranial reality, as well as transcranial reality, as well as transcranial magnetic stimulation, placing a magnet magnetic stimulation, placing a magnet magnetic stimulation, placing a magnet on particular location in the head, on particular location in the head, on particular location in the head, combined with a particular combined with a particular combined with a particular maybe drug, maybe psychedelics, maybe drug, maybe psychedelics, maybe drug, maybe psychedelics, maybe not, to enhance plasticity. to enhance plasticity. to enhance plasticity. I hear I hear I hear a vote for psychedelics, and I want to a vote for psychedelics, and I want to a vote for psychedelics, and I want to make a serious point about psychedelics. make a serious point about psychedelics. make a serious point about psychedelics. Five years ago, when I Five years ago, when I Five years ago, when I Well, four years ago, when I started Well, four years ago, when I started Well, four years ago, when I started doing a bit of public-facing stuff, I doing a bit of public-facing stuff, I doing a bit of public-facing stuff, I was absolutely terrified to say that was absolutely terrified to say that was absolutely terrified to say that word. Terrified. I thought I'd lose my job. Terrified. I thought I'd lose my job. Terrified. I thought I'd lose my job. I really did. I thought, "Don't say I really did. I thought, "Don't say I really did. I thought, "Don't say psychedelics." And I'll be very honest. You know, I And I'll be very honest. You know, I And I'll be very honest. You know, I For me, I think that For me, I think that For me, I think that um the clinical data on MDMA and on um the clinical data on MDMA and on um the clinical data on MDMA and on psilocybin are very interesting. Very psilocybin are very interesting. Very psilocybin are very interesting. Very interesting. I don't think they are the interesting. I don't think they are the interesting. I don't think they are the first and only pass first and only pass first and only pass at rewiring the brain, but it is clear at rewiring the brain, but it is clear at rewiring the brain, but it is clear that the brain can enter a state of that the brain can enter a state of that the brain can enter a state of heightened learning capacity, but it heightened learning capacity, but it heightened learning capacity, but it needs to be directed towards something. needs to be directed towards something. needs to be directed towards something. The goal of The goal of The goal of opening plasticity just opening plasticity just opening plasticity just it opens plasticity. That's not the it opens plasticity. That's not the it opens plasticity. That's not the goal. It's like running. The goal isn't It's like running. The goal isn't It's like running. The goal isn't running. The goal is to run in a running. The goal is to run in a running. The goal is to run in a particular direction. So, what I think particular direction. So, what I think particular direction. So, what I think is really needed is to drive that is really needed is to drive that is really needed is to drive that plasticity in particular directions, and plasticity in particular directions, and plasticity in particular directions, and I would love to see more directed use I would love to see more directed use I would love to see more directed use of those in, of course, the safe of those in, of course, the safe of those in, of course, the safe clinical setting where it's appropriate. clinical setting where it's appropriate. clinical setting where it's appropriate. And a guest on the podcast, Matthew And a guest on the podcast, Matthew And a guest on the podcast, Matthew Johnson, who's at Johns Hopkins, Johnson, who's at Johns Hopkins, Johnson, who's at Johns Hopkins, I asked him, "What's the deal with I asked him, "What's the deal with I asked him, "What's the deal with microdosing?" And you know what his microdosing?" And you know what his microdosing?" And you know what his answer was? I was very surprised. He answer was? I was very surprised. He answer was? I was very surprised. He said, "Macrodose." And I thought, And I thought, And I thought, "Okay, I'm not a guy who you know, I'm "Okay, I'm not a guy who you know, I'm "Okay, I'm not a guy who you know, I'm not into I'm not I'm not a pushing I'm not into I'm not I'm not a pushing I'm not into I'm not I'm not a pushing this. I'm not a proponent." I said, this. I'm not a proponent." I said, this. I'm not a proponent." I said, "You're kidding me. Why? Why would "You're kidding me. Why? Why would "You're kidding me. Why? Why would you say this? Guy runs an NIH-funded lab you say this? Guy runs an NIH-funded lab you say this? Guy runs an NIH-funded lab at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine." at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine." at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine." I thought, "Why?" And he said, I thought, "Why?" And he said, I thought, "Why?" And he said, "Because the one session with a trained "Because the one session with a trained "Because the one session with a trained professional that's professional that's professional that's triggering rewiring plasticity that's triggering rewiring plasticity that's triggering rewiring plasticity that's guided is guided is guided is as far as they know from the data." You as far as they know from the data." You as far as they know from the data." You can go back and listen to these are his can go back and listen to these are his can go back and listen to these are his words, not mine, but I he's the expert words, not mine, but I he's the expert words, not mine, but I he's the expert in this area. in this area. in this area. Are encouraging plasticity in a Are encouraging plasticity in a Are encouraging plasticity in a particular direction and he thinks that particular direction and he thinks that particular direction and he thinks that that's far more useful than just kind of that's far more useful than just kind of that's far more useful than just kind of nudging the system a little bit without nudging the system a little bit without nudging the system a little bit without any particular goal or outcome. any particular goal or outcome. any particular goal or outcome. Very interesting and very surprising. Very interesting and very surprising. Very interesting and very surprising. And again, a trained academic at a one And again, a trained academic at a one And again, a trained academic at a one of the most elite institutions in the of the most elite institutions in the of the most elite institutions in the world. I think we're in very exciting world. I think we're in very exciting world. I think we're in very exciting times for those um compounds. And uh times for those um compounds. And uh times for those um compounds. And uh they're like there are studies at they're like there are studies at they're like there are studies at Stanford and elsewhere on ketamine and Stanford and elsewhere on ketamine and Stanford and elsewhere on ketamine and other things, but it's early days. other things, but it's early days. other things, but it's early days. Young people should be very cautious. Young people should be very cautious. Young people should be very cautious. Young young people. Young young people. Young young people. And adults should be cautious, And adults should be cautious, And adults should be cautious, especially people with pre-existing especially people with pre-existing especially people with pre-existing psychiatric issues. And people who have psychiatric issues. And people who have psychiatric issues. And people who have a the propensity for addiction, although a the propensity for addiction, although a the propensity for addiction, although some of those compounds are being used some of those compounds are being used some of those compounds are being used to treat addiction. So, I'd be an idiot to treat addiction. So, I'd be an idiot to treat addiction. So, I'd be an idiot and I would be lying if I didn't say and I would be lying if I didn't say and I would be lying if I didn't say that it is very exciting times for that it is very exciting times for that it is very exciting times for psychedelic therapies. Where do you see the biggest area of pro Where do you see the biggest area of pro Where do you see the biggest area of pro And I've done only one clinical trial. And I've done only one clinical trial. And I've done only one clinical trial. True. I was a part I took part in one True. I was a part I took part in one True. I was a part I took part in one clinical trial. So I don't speak from a clinical trial. So I don't speak from a clinical trial. So I don't speak from a lot of experience there, just a little lot of experience there, just a little lot of experience there, just a little bit. I was a subject in that trial. bit. I was a subject in that trial. bit. I was a subject in that trial. Where do you see the biggest area for Where do you see the biggest area for Where do you see the biggest area for performance enhancement within the elite performance enhancement within the elite performance enhancement within the elite athletes and operators that already hit athletes and operators that already hit athletes and operators that already hit marks of proper sleep and nutrition? Meg marks of proper sleep and nutrition? Meg marks of proper sleep and nutrition? Meg Young, thanks for your question, Meg. Young, thanks for your question, Meg. Young, thanks for your question, Meg. Um Yeah, I think that Yeah, I think that Yeah, I think that Well, first of all, very few of them hit Well, first of all, very few of them hit Well, first of all, very few of them hit marks for proper sleep. But for those marks for proper sleep. But for those marks for proper sleep. But for those that do, I'd So once you have your sleep that do, I'd So once you have your sleep that do, I'd So once you have your sleep dialed in and you got your nutrition dialed in and you got your nutrition dialed in and you got your nutrition dialed in and the motivational component dialed in and the motivational component dialed in and the motivational component is there, is there, is there, I think where there's a lot of work I think where there's a lot of work I think where there's a lot of work still to be done and where people can still to be done and where people can still to be done and where people can really get outsized effects is in this really get outsized effects is in this really get outsized effects is in this weird little cavern of human existence weird little cavern of human existence weird little cavern of human existence that we call creativity. And I didn't that we call creativity. And I didn't that we call creativity. And I didn't have time to talk about it tonight, but have time to talk about it tonight, but have time to talk about it tonight, but there's a very unique brain state that there's a very unique brain state that there's a very unique brain state that we call creativity, which is taking we call creativity, which is taking we call creativity, which is taking pre-existing neural maps and starting to pre-existing neural maps and starting to pre-existing neural maps and starting to combine them in unique ways to create combine them in unique ways to create combine them in unique ways to create new ways of performance. Performance can new ways of performance. Performance can new ways of performance. Performance can be basically summarized in any domain as be basically summarized in any domain as be basically summarized in any domain as essentially four stages. You have essentially four stages. You have essentially four stages. You have unskilled, skilled, mastery, which is unskilled, skilled, mastery, which is unskilled, skilled, mastery, which is when the brain can generate movements or when the brain can generate movements or when the brain can generate movements or cognitive computations that are create very computations that are create very computations that are create very predictable outcomes. And then there's predictable outcomes. And then there's predictable outcomes. And then there's this fourth tier. this fourth tier. this fourth tier. This fourth layer, which is virtuosity. This fourth layer, which is virtuosity. This fourth layer, which is virtuosity. And virtuosity by definition means And virtuosity by definition means And virtuosity by definition means inviting back in a component of inviting back in a component of inviting back in a component of uncertainty. What this looks like in terms of What this looks like in terms of What this looks like in terms of operators or this looks like in terms of operators or this looks like in terms of operators or this looks like in terms of athletes or even we can say musicians or athletes or even we can say musicians or athletes or even we can say musicians or people who are in the cognitive fields people who are in the cognitive fields people who are in the cognitive fields or poets or writers is what it means is or poets or writers is what it means is or poets or writers is what it means is introducing that introducing that introducing that uncertainty about what's going to happen uncertainty about what's going to happen uncertainty about what's going to happen next. And the way to do that is to next. And the way to do that is to next. And the way to do that is to destabilize the system. destabilize the system. destabilize the system. In other words, to create states of mind In other words, to create states of mind In other words, to create states of mind in which there are literally sensory in which there are literally sensory in which there are literally sensory disruptions. It's like what I would like disruptions. It's like what I would like disruptions. It's like what I would like to see is more training in a kind of um to see is more training in a kind of um to see is more training in a kind of um funhouse of mirrors type environment. funhouse of mirrors type environment. funhouse of mirrors type environment. That's when you start to see incredible That's when you start to see incredible That's when you start to see incredible performances emerge. And virtuosos performances emerge. And virtuosos performances emerge. And virtuosos invite in uncertainty. invite in uncertainty. invite in uncertainty. They actually don't know what they're They actually don't know what they're They actually don't know what they're going to do next. going to do next. going to do next. And so this becomes a little bit of a And so this becomes a little bit of a And so this becomes a little bit of a vague concept and what I'm going about vague concept and what I'm going about vague concept and what I'm going about to tell you next might seem a little to tell you next might seem a little to tell you next might seem a little silly, but one of the best ways to silly, but one of the best ways to silly, but one of the best ways to access creative states is to, no access creative states is to, no access creative states is to, no surprise, use your visual system use your visual system use your visual system to view things that are highly unstable to view things that are highly unstable to view things that are highly unstable and uncertain. and uncertain. and uncertain. I don't just love fish tanks, I love I don't just love fish tanks, I love I don't just love fish tanks, I love staring at videos of staring at videos of staring at videos of aquariums in Tokyo aquariums in Tokyo aquariums in Tokyo and actually watching the fish and actually watching the fish and actually watching the fish because it's completely unpredictable. because it's completely unpredictable. because it's completely unpredictable. There's some evidence that doing things There's some evidence that doing things There's some evidence that doing things like that or people will say, "Oh, I was like that or people will say, "Oh, I was like that or people will say, "Oh, I was in the shower. I took a walk in nature in the shower. I took a walk in nature in the shower. I took a walk in nature and then I had this idea." I actually and then I had this idea." I actually and then I had this idea." I actually don't think it was the walk or the don't think it was the walk or the don't think it was the walk or the shower. It's that nature is filled with It's that nature is filled with It's that nature is filled with unpredictable visual stimuli, auditory unpredictable visual stimuli, auditory unpredictable visual stimuli, auditory stimuli. When you can predict what's going to When you can predict what's going to When you can predict what's going to happen next, you have very little happen next, you have very little happen next, you have very little opportunity to up level your game, so to opportunity to up level your game, so to opportunity to up level your game, so to speak. It's only by way of unpredictable speak. It's only by way of unpredictable speak. It's only by way of unpredictable sensory input that you can do that. So, sensory input that you can do that. So, sensory input that you can do that. So, if you're a coach or you're working with if you're a coach or you're working with if you're a coach or you're working with people who are very high-level people who are very high-level people who are very high-level performers, do you want them to stand on performers, do you want them to stand on performers, do you want them to stand on one leg and spin around and then do what one leg and spin around and then do what one leg and spin around and then do what they're doing? Not necessarily. What you they're doing? Not necessarily. What you they're doing? Not necessarily. What you want to do is try and get them into want to do is try and get them into want to do is try and get them into brain states that are different than the brain states that are different than the brain states that are different than the brain states that they're in when they brain states that they're in when they brain states that they're in when they normally enter their practice. The normally enter their practice. The normally enter their practice. The liminal state between sleep and waking. liminal state between sleep and waking. liminal state between sleep and waking. Excuse me. The liminal state between Excuse me. The liminal state between Excuse me. The liminal state between sleep and waking is a very powerful one sleep and waking is a very powerful one sleep and waking is a very powerful one for accessing creativity. Many people for accessing creativity. Many people for accessing creativity. Many people access ideas as they're waking up in the access ideas as they're waking up in the access ideas as they're waking up in the morning. They have great insights. Other morning. They have great insights. Other morning. They have great insights. Other people while strolling in nature. I people while strolling in nature. I people while strolling in nature. I don't think it's the strolling or the don't think it's the strolling or the don't think it's the strolling or the waking up. I think it's the lack of, as waking up. I think it's the lack of, as waking up. I think it's the lack of, as we call it, top-down regulation on we call it, top-down regulation on we call it, top-down regulation on rules. You are able to rules. You are able to rules. You are able to access combinations of neural maps access combinations of neural maps access combinations of neural maps that are unusual. So, you can play with that are unusual. So, you can play with that are unusual. So, you can play with this a little bit. A lot of people this a little bit. A lot of people this a little bit. A lot of people throughout history have used compounds, throughout history have used compounds, throughout history have used compounds, drugs, to do this, right? Great writers drugs, to do this, right? Great writers drugs, to do this, right? Great writers would get drunk and then try and write would get drunk and then try and write would get drunk and then try and write or wake up and they would the amount or wake up and they would the amount or wake up and they would the amount of self-abuse of self-abuse of self-abuse that people, including athletes and that people, including athletes and that people, including athletes and creatives, put themselves through to try creatives, put themselves through to try creatives, put themselves through to try and capture these windows of cognitive and capture these windows of cognitive and capture these windows of cognitive ability is pretty intense and I ability is pretty intense and I ability is pretty intense and I don't think that's a good idea. I don't think that's a good idea. I don't think that's a good idea. I think one should be an explorer think one should be an explorer think one should be an explorer and try and find these cognitive states and try and find these cognitive states and try and find these cognitive states in ways that are non-destructive. in ways that are non-destructive. in ways that are non-destructive. I'm starting to sound like my mother I'm starting to sound like my mother I'm starting to sound like my mother with all this Heelflips unlock, no kickflips. Next Heelflips unlock, no kickflips. Next Heelflips unlock, no kickflips. Next question. The uh There's some skateboarders in the There's some skateboarders in the There's some skateboarders in the audience, my first non-biological audience, my first non-biological audience, my first non-biological family. There's some amazing family. There's some amazing family. There's some amazing skateboarders in this audience and I'm skateboarders in this audience and I'm skateboarders in this audience and I'm not going to be the one doing a kickflip not going to be the one doing a kickflip not going to be the one doing a kickflip anytime soon, but they're great to have. anytime soon, but they're great to have. anytime soon, but they're great to have. One of the reasons we built the podcast One of the reasons we built the podcast One of the reasons we built the podcast with the help of the great Mike Blaback with the help of the great Mike Blaback with the help of the great Mike Blaback is because um is because um is because um I learned a long time ago that if you I learned a long time ago that if you I learned a long time ago that if you want things done right and you want to want things done right and you want to want things done right and you want to do them outside the lane lines and you do them outside the lane lines and you do them outside the lane lines and you want to have control over how things want to have control over how things want to have control over how things come across, you do it with come across, you do it with come across, you do it with skateboarders cuz skateboarders cuz skateboarders cuz I didn't come from a community where I didn't come from a community where I didn't come from a community where I you know I you know I you know I didn't have parents at my I didn't have parents at my I didn't have parents at my sports games and things like that. So, sports games and things like that. So, sports games and things like that. So, um thanks to the skateboarders and the um thanks to the skateboarders and the um thanks to the skateboarders and the misfits and the and the those folks. Do misfits and the and the those folks. Do misfits and the and the those folks. Do you have any tips on how to improve you have any tips on how to improve you have any tips on how to improve memory? Yes, uh Ron Verrecchio. Yes, memory? Yes, uh Ron Verrecchio. Yes, memory? Yes, uh Ron Verrecchio. Yes, okay, this is a wild literature and I okay, this is a wild literature and I okay, this is a wild literature and I love it and it's changing the way that I love it and it's changing the way that I love it and it's changing the way that I do things. I thought that to remember do things. I thought that to remember do things. I thought that to remember things, you're supposed to get really, things, you're supposed to get really, things, you're supposed to get really, really excited, really focused, really excited, really focused, really excited, really focused, and remember them. And guess what? and remember them. And guess what? and remember them. And guess what? That's not how you do it. There's There are data There's There are data There's There are data and there are stories going back to and there are stories going back to and there are stories going back to medieval times medieval times medieval times that they used to teach kids things and that they used to teach kids things and that they used to teach kids things and then throw them in the river. then throw them in the river. then throw them in the river. There's a beautiful annual review of There's a beautiful annual review of There's a beautiful annual review of neuroscience written by the late James neuroscience written by the late James neuroscience written by the late James McGaugh, brilliant researcher who taught McGaugh, brilliant researcher who taught McGaugh, brilliant researcher who taught me that in this review. me that in this review. me that in this review. And it turns out that if you want to And it turns out that if you want to And it turns out that if you want to remember something, you want to spike remember something, you want to spike remember something, you want to spike adrenaline after you acquired that adrenaline after you acquired that adrenaline after you acquired that information. After. information. After. information. After. That means the double espresso That means the double espresso That means the double espresso and the ice bath after you study for and the ice bath after you study for and the ice bath after you study for math. Immediately after. And you think about Immediately after. And you think about Immediately after. And you think about this and that it makes perfect sense, this and that it makes perfect sense, this and that it makes perfect sense, right? Think about the one trial right? Think about the one trial right? Think about the one trial learning that nobody wants to learning that nobody wants to learning that nobody wants to experience, which is a car accident or experience, which is a car accident or experience, which is a car accident or some traumatic thing. You didn't get the some traumatic thing. You didn't get the some traumatic thing. You didn't get the spike of adrenaline first, you got the spike of adrenaline first, you got the spike of adrenaline first, you got the spike of adrenaline after. spike of adrenaline after. spike of adrenaline after. So, again, you know, I discourage the use of again, you know, I discourage the use of again, you know, I discourage the use of excessive stimulants or excessive stimulants or excessive stimulants or you know, anything like that, but if you know, anything like that, but if you know, anything like that, but if you're going to try and you're going to try and you're going to try and remember information, you need to get remember information, you need to get remember information, you need to get your brain and body into a high your brain and body into a high your brain and body into a high autonomic arousal state. Literally, you autonomic arousal state. Literally, you autonomic arousal state. Literally, you need to deploy adrenaline into your need to deploy adrenaline into your need to deploy adrenaline into your system after you system after you system after you have made the attempt to learn some have made the attempt to learn some have made the attempt to learn some information. So much so that if you give people a So much so that if you give people a So much so that if you give people a beta-blocker after learning emotional information, after learning emotional information, after learning emotional information, they don't learn it as well. they don't learn it as well. they don't learn it as well. Incredible. Just incredible data in Incredible. Just incredible data in Incredible. Just incredible data in animals and humans. This is the animals and humans. This is the animals and humans. This is the beautiful work of Larry Cahill at UC beautiful work of Larry Cahill at UC beautiful work of Larry Cahill at UC Irvine and James McGaugh. So, that's how Irvine and James McGaugh. So, that's how Irvine and James McGaugh. So, that's how I would focus on remembering things I would focus on remembering things I would focus on remembering things better. And it's also true that if you better. And it's also true that if you better. And it's also true that if you tell yourself that something's really tell yourself that something's really tell yourself that something's really important to you, you'll be able important to you, you'll be able important to you, you'll be able to learn it better. If you meet people to learn it better. If you meet people to learn it better. If you meet people and they tell you their name and you and they tell you their name and you and they tell you their name and you forget 2 seconds later, well, you should forget 2 seconds later, well, you should forget 2 seconds later, well, you should probably be thinking and now I do this. probably be thinking and now I do this. probably be thinking and now I do this. I meet people and I think, okay, what I meet people and I think, okay, what I meet people and I think, okay, what terrible thing did this person do? what terrible thing did this person do? what terrible thing did this person do? Just try and spike my adrenaline or Just try and spike my adrenaline or Just try and spike my adrenaline or something like that. It's a terrible something like that. It's a terrible something like that. It's a terrible trick, but I haven't figured out a trick, but I haven't figured out a trick, but I haven't figured out a better way, but that's actually one that better way, but that's actually one that better way, but that's actually one that data-supported way to do that. Um easily data-supported way to do that. Um easily data-supported way to do that. Um easily a dozen or more studies in humans on a dozen or more studies in humans on a dozen or more studies in humans on that very topic. How do you manage that very topic. How do you manage that very topic. How do you manage social media addiction, Paul. social media addiction, Paul. social media addiction, Paul. Ooh, yeah. Um Ooh, yeah. Um Ooh, yeah. Um Well, we should be careful with the use Well, we should be careful with the use Well, we should be careful with the use of the word addiction because here I of the word addiction because here I of the word addiction because here I think it's entirely appropriate. think it's entirely appropriate. think it's entirely appropriate. When you're engaging in a behavior over When you're engaging in a behavior over When you're engaging in a behavior over and over and over again and you're and over and over again and you're and over and over again and you're thinking to yourself, thinking to yourself, thinking to yourself, "This isn't even that interesting." "This isn't even that interesting." "This isn't even that interesting." You're officially addicted. You're officially addicted. You're officially addicted. That's the litmus test for addiction. That's the litmus test for addiction. That's the litmus test for addiction. Not this feels so good. People talk Not this feels so good. People talk Not this feels so good. People talk about the dopamine hits of social media. about the dopamine hits of social media. about the dopamine hits of social media. Those only come at the beginning. Those only come at the beginning. Those only come at the beginning. But then when you find yourself But then when you find yourself But then when you find yourself scrolling, like, "What am I doing?" scrolling, like, "What am I doing?" scrolling, like, "What am I doing?" Maybe it's that narrow visual aperture. Maybe it's that narrow visual aperture. Maybe it's that narrow visual aperture. You're a hypnotized chicken. But maybe also you are seeking more But maybe also you are seeking more But maybe also you are seeking more dopamine hits because guess what? That dopamine hits because guess what? That dopamine hits because guess what? That dopamine wave pool is depleted at least dopamine wave pool is depleted at least dopamine wave pool is depleted at least for that activity. It is true that for that activity. It is true that for that activity. It is true that dopamine you have a baseline and then dopamine you have a baseline and then dopamine you have a baseline and then you have peaks on that ride on that you have peaks on that ride on that you have peaks on that ride on that baseline. I do think that we can have baseline. I do think that we can have baseline. I do think that we can have dopamine for one behavior and not for dopamine for one behavior and not for dopamine for one behavior and not for another. But it's a it's a generalized another. But it's a it's a generalized another. But it's a it's a generalized phenomenon. So, how do you manage it? You have to So, how do you manage it? You have to So, how do you manage it? You have to stop seeking within social media. And stop seeking within social media. And stop seeking within social media. And so, I've taken on the practice of so, I've taken on the practice of so, I've taken on the practice of turning off my phone for a couple hours turning off my phone for a couple hours turning off my phone for a couple hours each day. It's incredibly hard. People each day. It's incredibly hard. People each day. It's incredibly hard. People get really upset, too, by the way. In get really upset, too, by the way. In get really upset, too, by the way. In case you haven't noticed. case you haven't noticed. case you haven't noticed. These tethers that people expect. Uh we These tethers that people expect. Uh we These tethers that people expect. Uh we recorded a podcast recently and so I recorded a podcast recently and so I recorded a podcast recently and so I don't want to go into too much depth I don't want to go into too much depth I don't want to go into too much depth now. Um about attachment and grief. And now. Um about attachment and grief. And now. Um about attachment and grief. And you know, we all have a map. Now you know, we all have a map. Now you know, we all have a map. Now you know understand what the maps are of know understand what the maps are of know understand what the maps are of space, time, and space, time, and space, time, and a dimension called closeness to everyone a dimension called closeness to everyone a dimension called closeness to everyone that we know. that we know. that we know. Space, where they are. Time, when they Space, where they are. Time, when they Space, where they are. Time, when they are. Dead, alive. When will I see them are. Dead, alive. When will I see them are. Dead, alive. When will I see them again, etc. And closeness. And the phone again, etc. And closeness. And the phone again, etc. And closeness. And the phone has allowed us to tap into space, time, has allowed us to tap into space, time, has allowed us to tap into space, time, and this closeness map which define all and this closeness map which define all and this closeness map which define all our attachments on a very regular basis. our attachments on a very regular basis. our attachments on a very regular basis. So, you can understand why it's so So, you can understand why it's so So, you can understand why it's so valuable to people, you know, the plane lands and to people, you know, the plane lands and to people, you know, the plane lands and everyone's texting. The plane take off, everyone's texting. The plane take off, everyone's texting. The plane take off, everyone's texting. It's like, "Where everyone's texting. It's like, "Where everyone's texting. It's like, "Where are you?" Well, the plane's in the air, are you?" Well, the plane's in the air, are you?" Well, the plane's in the air, there's this thing called flight there's this thing called flight there's this thing called flight tracker. No one cares about that tracker. No one cares about that tracker. No one cares about that anymore. You want to hear from the anymore. You want to hear from the anymore. You want to hear from the person. So, I do think that I used to do person. So, I do think that I used to do person. So, I do think that I used to do an every odd hour of the day my phone an every odd hour of the day my phone an every odd hour of the day my phone was off and like half the relationships was off and like half the relationships was off and like half the relationships in my life disappeared. in my life disappeared. in my life disappeared. They couldn't talk They couldn't They couldn't talk They couldn't They couldn't talk They couldn't tolerate it. tolerate it. tolerate it. I loved it, but I loved it, but I loved it, but I loved them, too. So, I would say take I loved them, too. So, I would say take I loved them, too. So, I would say take breaks and I would say breaks and I would say breaks and I would say at least an hour. And if you find at least an hour. And if you find at least an hour. And if you find yourself excited to get back on the yourself excited to get back on the yourself excited to get back on the phone, that excitement phone, that excitement phone, that excitement that is the dopamine system. So, you can that is the dopamine system. So, you can that is the dopamine system. So, you can kind of learn where it is for you, but kind of learn where it is for you, but kind of learn where it is for you, but if you find yourself scrolling if you find yourself scrolling if you find yourself scrolling mindlessly and it's not doing anything mindlessly and it's not doing anything mindlessly and it's not doing anything for you, you're for you, you're for you, you're driving that wave pool down, driving that wave pool down, driving that wave pool down, down. So, hopefully that analogy down, down. So, hopefully that analogy down, down. So, hopefully that analogy will help. will help. will help. It's weird to call myself Dr. Huberman. It's weird to call myself Dr. Huberman. It's weird to call myself Dr. Huberman. In my business, if you refer to yourself In my business, if you refer to yourself In my business, if you refer to yourself in the third person, it means you're in the third person, it means you're in the third person, it means you're officially a narcissist. So, officially a narcissist. So, officially a narcissist. So, I'm just going to start with, "Were you I'm just going to start with, "Were you I'm just going to start with, "Were you nervous tonight? If so, what did you do nervous tonight? If so, what did you do nervous tonight? If so, what did you do to prepare?" Brienne. to prepare?" Brienne. to prepare?" Brienne. Uh, you saw my nervousness, didn't you? Uh, you saw my nervousness, didn't you? Uh, you saw my nervousness, didn't you? No, the um No, the um No, the um I asked myself that question. Um I asked myself that question. Um I asked myself that question. Um I was excited and I think I'm good at I was excited and I think I'm good at I was excited and I think I'm good at lying to myself and telling myself that lying to myself and telling myself that lying to myself and telling myself that autonomic arousal that might be autonomic arousal that might be autonomic arousal that might be nervousness is excitement. But in nervousness is excitement. But in nervousness is excitement. But in truth, uh I wasn't I was and am really uh I wasn't I was and am really uh I wasn't I was and am really excited to tell you all these stories excited to tell you all these stories excited to tell you all these stories and about biology. I know this might and about biology. I know this might and about biology. I know this might sound like a little bit of a lie, but I sound like a little bit of a lie, but I sound like a little bit of a lie, but I actually don't feel myself actually don't feel myself actually don't feel myself as a as a like a person when I do the as a as a like a person when I do the as a as a like a person when I do the podcast or I do this stuff. I took a podcast or I do this stuff. I took a podcast or I do this stuff. I took a walk before I got here and I walk before I got here and I walk before I got here and I have to be careful, there are only two I have to be careful, there are only two I have to be careful, there are only two topics that make me cry. One is talking topics that make me cry. One is talking topics that make me cry. One is talking about my bulldog, the other is talking about my bulldog, the other is talking about my bulldog, the other is talking about my graduate advisor. So, I have to about my graduate advisor. So, I have to about my graduate advisor. So, I have to be very careful. But I took a walk and I be very careful. But I took a walk and I be very careful. But I took a walk and I imagined that they were here imagined that they were here imagined that they were here and I know and now don't make me cry. and I know and now don't make me cry. and I know and now don't make me cry. Lex Friedman made me cry on a podcast Lex Friedman made me cry on a podcast Lex Friedman made me cry on a podcast and it was a really unfair and he was and it was a really unfair and he was and it was a really unfair and he was like digging and digging and there are a like digging and digging and there are a like digging and digging and there are a few people in the audience that know few people in the audience that know few people in the audience that know Costello and it's like, you know, Costello and it's like, you know, Costello and it's like, you know, uh and I just kept thinking to myself and I just kept thinking to myself and I just kept thinking to myself before coming in here and like, you before coming in here and like, you before coming in here and like, you know, I love them and miss them and I know, I love them and miss them and I know, I love them and miss them and I um, Costello would be entirely bored um, Costello would be entirely bored um, Costello would be entirely bored with this whole thing. So, I distracted with this whole thing. So, I distracted with this whole thing. So, I distracted myself a bit and not so nervous. Now, I myself a bit and not so nervous. Now, I myself a bit and not so nervous. Now, I do get nervous about things. Sure, I'm do get nervous about things. Sure, I'm do get nervous about things. Sure, I'm human. Um, human. Um, human. Um, but when it comes to biology, I think I but when it comes to biology, I think I but when it comes to biology, I think I still feel like that little kid who just still feel like that little kid who just still feel like that little kid who just wants to tell you all the stuff, you wants to tell you all the stuff, you wants to tell you all the stuff, you know, so. know, so. know, so. You know, can't help it. You know, can't help it. You know, can't help it. Is learning from failure equal to Is learning from failure equal to Is learning from failure equal to learning from success? learning from success? learning from success? Is one more efficient than the other? Is one more efficient than the other? Is one more efficient than the other? Rachel, thanks for your question. Well, Rachel, thanks for your question. Well, Rachel, thanks for your question. Well, on a trial-by-trial basis, we know that on a trial-by-trial basis, we know that on a trial-by-trial basis, we know that when you fail when you fail when you fail at an attempt, on the next attempt, your at an attempt, on the next attempt, your at an attempt, on the next attempt, your forebrain is in a position to engage forebrain is in a position to engage forebrain is in a position to engage better. And this makes total sense, better. And this makes total sense, better. And this makes total sense, right? You feel that frustration. right? You feel that frustration. right? You feel that frustration. And you want to get the next one right? And you want to get the next one right? And you want to get the next one right? Well, you're Well, you're Well, you're harboring or I should say funneling more harboring or I should say funneling more harboring or I should say funneling more neural resources. Your focus, that neural resources. Your focus, that neural resources. Your focus, that aperture tightens. Now, you have to be aperture tightens. Now, you have to be aperture tightens. Now, you have to be mindful of that, too, because when you mindful of that, too, because when you mindful of that, too, because when you have a failure and then you're like have a failure and then you're like have a failure and then you're like you're going to hit the bull's-eye. I'm you're going to hit the bull's-eye. I'm you're going to hit the bull's-eye. I'm thinking about a dartboard cuz I'm thinking about a dartboard cuz I'm thinking about a dartboard cuz I'm terrible at darts. terrible at darts. terrible at darts. You know, sober I'm terrible at darts. You know, sober I'm terrible at darts. You know, sober I'm terrible at darts. I don't even drink. So, that next trial I don't even drink. So, that next trial I don't even drink. So, that next trial part of the problem is that focus can part of the problem is that focus can part of the problem is that focus can narrow so much that you can start to narrow so much that you can start to narrow so much that you can start to lose access to information that might lose access to information that might lose access to information that might help you if you were just to relax a help you if you were just to relax a help you if you were just to relax a little bit and dilate that focus a little bit and dilate that focus a little bit and dilate that focus a little bit. But in general, on a little bit. But in general, on a little bit. But in general, on a trial-by-trial basis, focus is the cue trial-by-trial basis, focus is the cue trial-by-trial basis, focus is the cue that your nervous system is going to be that your nervous system is going to be that your nervous system is going to be positioned to learn better on the next positioned to learn better on the next positioned to learn better on the next trial. Now, in terms of life trial. Now, in terms of life trial. Now, in terms of life experiences, gosh, I wish for everyone fewer failures gosh, I wish for everyone fewer failures gosh, I wish for everyone fewer failures and more successes, but you know, and more successes, but you know, and more successes, but you know, failures keep you humble. And I've had a failures keep you humble. And I've had a failures keep you humble. And I've had a lot of them. I mean, if people ever lot of them. I mean, if people ever lot of them. I mean, if people ever wanted and they, you know, I'd be happy wanted and they, you know, I'd be happy wanted and they, you know, I'd be happy to tell you about to tell you about to tell you about I mean, I've made a ton of mistakes in I mean, I've made a ton of mistakes in I mean, I've made a ton of mistakes in life, like ton of mistakes. Some of life, like ton of mistakes. Some of life, like ton of mistakes. Some of those were mistakes of persistence, those were mistakes of persistence, those were mistakes of persistence, like dumb decisions I kept like it's like dumb decisions I kept like it's like dumb decisions I kept like it's going to change, it's going to change, going to change, it's going to change, going to change, it's going to change, and it's clearly never going to change. and it's clearly never going to change. and it's clearly never going to change. And then some were failures of And then some were failures of And then some were failures of misjudgment about other people or misjudgment about other people or misjudgment about other people or situations, and a lot of them were just situations, and a lot of them were just situations, and a lot of them were just plain failures like the experiment in plain failures like the experiment in plain failures like the experiment in work or work or work or the it just wasn't the right thing. And you it just wasn't the right thing. And you it just wasn't the right thing. And you try and reframe those. I do think that try and reframe those. I do think that try and reframe those. I do think that we owe it to ourselves and to the people we owe it to ourselves and to the people we owe it to ourselves and to the people that we know to try and generate some that we know to try and generate some that we know to try and generate some wins here and there and try and help wins here and there and try and help wins here and there and try and help other people generate wins. Um you know, other people generate wins. Um you know, other people generate wins. Um you know, in running a lab over the years, and I in running a lab over the years, and I in running a lab over the years, and I still do, um you realize that you want still do, um you realize that you want still do, um you realize that you want your students to publish a paper your students to publish a paper your students to publish a paper and feel that success pretty early so and feel that success pretty early so and feel that success pretty early so that they can experience A, how much that they can experience A, how much that they can experience A, how much work it is, work it is, work it is, so they pick problems wisely, but B, so they pick problems wisely, but B, so they pick problems wisely, but B, so they can feel that like, I can do this. they can feel that like, I can do this. they can feel that like, I can do this. And I think that um And I think that um And I think that um you know, this gets into the you know, this gets into the you know, this gets into the psychological as well. I think that yes, psychological as well. I think that yes, psychological as well. I think that yes, failures help, but successes help. And failures help, but successes help. And failures help, but successes help. And there I think, there I think, there I think, you know, you know, you know, I function best in a team, and I think I function best in a team, and I think I function best in a team, and I think that for those of you that are feel like that for those of you that are feel like that for those of you that are feel like you're fighting some challenge alone, I you're fighting some challenge alone, I you're fighting some challenge alone, I do think that there are great resources do think that there are great resources do think that there are great resources to be had in trying to be had in trying to be had in trying to access other, you know, other people as other, you know, other people as other, you know, other people as sources of support. I think that sources of support. I think that sources of support. I think that that's a great tool. There's this whole that's a great tool. There's this whole that's a great tool. There's this whole literature, scientific literature around literature, scientific literature around literature, scientific literature around social connection and how that can help social connection and how that can help social connection and how that can help us reframe motivation and goals. Anyway, us reframe motivation and goals. Anyway, us reframe motivation and goals. Anyway, maybe that's a topic to expand on maybe that's a topic to expand on maybe that's a topic to expand on another time, but uh another time, but uh another time, but uh failure is important on a trial by failure is important on a trial by failure is important on a trial by basis. People who don't experience enough wins People who don't experience enough wins People who don't experience enough wins for a long period of time, the brain is for a long period of time, the brain is for a long period of time, the brain is a prediction machine after all, and they a prediction machine after all, and they a prediction machine after all, and they start to predict failure. So, takes a start to predict failure. So, takes a start to predict failure. So, takes a bit more work to bit more work to bit more work to wedge oneself out of that. wedge oneself out of that. wedge oneself out of that. When are you going to start training When are you going to start training When are you going to start training jiu-jitsu? Lex made me ask, Ryan Flores. jiu-jitsu? Lex made me ask, Ryan Flores. jiu-jitsu? Lex made me ask, Ryan Flores. Okay, here's the story with that. Okay, here's the story with that. Okay, here's the story with that. Lex said, "Do you want to try Lex said, "Do you want to try Lex said, "Do you want to try jiu-jitsu?" I said, "Sure." jiu-jitsu?" I said, "Sure." jiu-jitsu?" I said, "Sure." Lex said, "Okay, Lex said, "Okay, Lex said, "Okay, it'll be great to show people a it'll be great to show people a it'll be great to show people a beginner's mind. beginner's mind. beginner's mind. Said, "Sure." We went and did a Said, "Sure." We went and did a Said, "Sure." We went and did a jiu-jitsu class. He was very nice, nice jiu-jitsu class. He was very nice, nice jiu-jitsu class. He was very nice, nice Russian nice, like, "Oh, yeah nice Russian nice, like, "Oh, yeah nice Russian nice, like, "Oh, yeah yeah." Then he puts it on the internet with me Then he puts it on the internet with me Then he puts it on the internet with me in a rear naked, him putting me in a in a rear naked, him putting me in a in a rear naked, him putting me in a rear naked choke. It was actually Lex rear naked choke. It was actually Lex rear naked choke. It was actually Lex Friedman choking out Andrew Huberman. Friedman choking out Andrew Huberman. Friedman choking out Andrew Huberman. There I just talked about myself in the There I just talked about myself in the There I just talked about myself in the third person, damn it. third person, damn it. third person, damn it. Um edit that one. edit that one. edit that one. I have not had the time for jiu-jitsu. I have not had the time for jiu-jitsu. I have not had the time for jiu-jitsu. I like my ears the way they are, you know? like my ears the way they are, you know? like my ears the way they are, you know? Have you ever seen these people that do Have you ever seen these people that do Have you ever seen these people that do jiu-jitsu? Their ears literally look jiu-jitsu? Their ears literally look jiu-jitsu? Their ears literally look like stumps. No, I should do it. It like stumps. No, I should do it. It like stumps. No, I should do it. It looks like a great sport. And unlike the looks like a great sport. And unlike the looks like a great sport. And unlike the other sports I've been involved in my other sports I've been involved in my other sports I've been involved in my life, boxing, please don't do it. It's life, boxing, please don't do it. It's life, boxing, please don't do it. It's not healthy. Skateboarding all this you not healthy. Skateboarding all this you not healthy. Skateboarding all this you don't really damage your head doing you don't really damage your head doing you don't really damage your head doing jiu-jitsu. So, no. jiu-jitsu. So, no. jiu-jitsu. So, no. I'm going to get you back for that one, I'm going to get you back for that one, I'm going to get you back for that one, Lex. Okay. Lex. Okay. Lex. Okay. Uh can you go through Oh, wow. Uh John Uh can you go through Oh, wow. Uh John Uh can you go through Oh, wow. Uh John Edwards. There's a joke that my friends Edwards. There's a joke that my friends Edwards. There's a joke that my friends used to tell about the supplements I used to tell about the supplements I used to tell about the supplements I take. They used to say, uh take. They used to say, uh take. They used to say, uh someone would say, "What supplements do someone would say, "What supplements do someone would say, "What supplements do you take?" And they would just go, "All you take?" And they would just go, "All you take?" And they would just go, "All of them." of them." of them." I don't take all of them, but I have I don't take all of them, but I have I don't take all of them, but I have been very systematic for about 30 years been very systematic for about 30 years been very systematic for about 30 years I've been interested in compounds that I've been interested in compounds that I've been interested in compounds that change the nervous system. And I do change the nervous system. And I do change the nervous system. And I do think that the um the events of the last think that the um the events of the last think that the um the events of the last few years have changed the way that few years have changed the way that few years have changed the way that people view supplements. I think that people view supplements. I think that people view supplements. I think that more people are starting to think about more people are starting to think about more people are starting to think about how to um take better care of their how to um take better care of their how to um take better care of their health. And they people are realizing health. And they people are realizing health. And they people are realizing that obviously great sleep, mindsets, social obviously great sleep, mindsets, social obviously great sleep, mindsets, social connection, exercise, nutrition, and so forth are very nutrition, and so forth are very nutrition, and so forth are very important. But I actually don't know important. But I actually don't know important. But I actually don't know anybody, granted I run with a strange anybody, granted I run with a strange anybody, granted I run with a strange crowd, but I don't know anybody crowd, but I don't know anybody crowd, but I don't know anybody that doesn't take something nowadays. Um that doesn't take something nowadays. Um that doesn't take something nowadays. Um you know, I could go through the whole you know, I could go through the whole you know, I could go through the whole list, but list, but list, but I would say the most fundamental I would say the most fundamental I would say the most fundamental things, and there's no product pitch things, and there's no product pitch things, and there's no product pitch here. The most fundamental things are here. The most fundamental things are here. The most fundamental things are the things that are going to support the things that are going to support the things that are going to support your kind of foundational health. So, your kind of foundational health. So, your kind of foundational health. So, for that's going to mean mainly getting for that's going to mean mainly getting for that's going to mean mainly getting either by food sources or supplements is either by food sources or supplements is either by food sources or supplements is going to be getting sufficient amounts going to be getting sufficient amounts going to be getting sufficient amounts of these essential fatty acids, so of these essential fatty acids, so of these essential fatty acids, so important. Um for some people that's important. Um for some people that's important. Um for some people that's taking liquid fish oil, for some people taking liquid fish oil, for some people taking liquid fish oil, for some people it's capsules, for some people it's capsules, for some people it's capsules, for some people it's eating fish. I don't like the way fish eating fish. I don't like the way fish eating fish. I don't like the way fish tastes unless I'm in Seattle. By the tastes unless I'm in Seattle. By the tastes unless I'm in Seattle. By the way, the seafood here is amazing. Um not way, the seafood here is amazing. Um not way, the seafood here is amazing. Um not so much in California. so much in California. so much in California. Um so, I think Um so, I think Um so, I think uh the essential fatty acids and then I'm the essential fatty acids and then I'm the essential fatty acids and then I'm big on the data big on the data big on the data dare I say out of Stanford, Justin dare I say out of Stanford, Justin dare I say out of Stanford, Justin Sonnenburg's lab and Sonnenburg's lab and Sonnenburg's lab and Chris Gardner's lab that these fermented Chris Gardner's lab that these fermented Chris Gardner's lab that these fermented foods, of which all these cultures have foods, of which all these cultures have foods, of which all these cultures have interesting fermented foods, kefir and interesting fermented foods, kefir and interesting fermented foods, kefir and sauerkraut and kimchi and you know, pick sauerkraut and kimchi and you know, pick sauerkraut and kimchi and you know, pick your pick your fermented food, that your pick your fermented food, that your pick your fermented food, that those seem to really encourage health of those seem to really encourage health of those seem to really encourage health of the gut microbiome. So, I started eating the gut microbiome. So, I started eating the gut microbiome. So, I started eating a lot of those and taking a lot of those and taking a lot of those and taking no probiotics except in, you know, a few no probiotics except in, you know, a few no probiotics except in, you know, a few of the supplements that I was already of the supplements that I was already of the supplements that I was already taking. So, I I'm not trying to dodge taking. So, I I'm not trying to dodge taking. So, I I'm not trying to dodge the question, but I think the question, but I think the question, but I think by and large if you're eating well and by and large if you're eating well and by and large if you're eating well and doing the other foundational behaviors doing the other foundational behaviors doing the other foundational behaviors well, you can get away with well, you can get away with well, you can get away with a minimum of supplements. a minimum of supplements. a minimum of supplements. D3 it seems to be a lot of people D3 it seems to be a lot of people D3 it seems to be a lot of people deficient D3, but not everybody. So, I deficient D3, but not everybody. So, I deficient D3, but not everybody. So, I think um think um think um that those are the main ones. However, I that those are the main ones. However, I that those are the main ones. However, I do think that nutrition should be the do think that nutrition should be the do think that nutrition should be the primary entry point. Again, it should be primary entry point. Again, it should be primary entry point. Again, it should be behaviors first, then nutrition, then behaviors first, then nutrition, then behaviors first, then nutrition, then supplements, then prescription drugs supplements, then prescription drugs supplements, then prescription drugs only if you need them, and then only if you need them, and then only if you need them, and then you know, for some people their brain you know, for some people their brain you know, for some people their brain machine interface like TMS and things machine interface like TMS and things machine interface like TMS and things like that are going to be useful, but like that are going to be useful, but like that are going to be useful, but behaviors change your nervous system. behaviors change your nervous system. behaviors change your nervous system. No supplement actually rewires you or No supplement actually rewires you or No supplement actually rewires you or changes your nervous system. Behaviors changes your nervous system. Behaviors changes your nervous system. Behaviors do that. do that. do that. I hope I didn't um dodge that question I hope I didn't um dodge that question I hope I didn't um dodge that question entirely. I do take some of the things entirely. I do take some of the things entirely. I do take some of the things that we talk about on the podcast to do that we talk about on the podcast to do that we talk about on the podcast to do some focused work sometimes, alpha GPC, some focused work sometimes, alpha GPC, some focused work sometimes, alpha GPC, but lately I've been doing this whole but lately I've been doing this whole but lately I've been doing this whole thing of cold water exposure to spike my thing of cold water exposure to spike my thing of cold water exposure to spike my adrenaline cuz I hate it and it spikes adrenaline cuz I hate it and it spikes adrenaline cuz I hate it and it spikes my adrenaline after learning based on my adrenaline after learning based on my adrenaline after learning based on the McGaugh and Cahill data. the McGaugh and Cahill data. the McGaugh and Cahill data. What would be your best one or two What would be your best one or two What would be your best one or two pieces of advice to recommend protocols pieces of advice to recommend protocols pieces of advice to recommend protocols for improving learning and retention for improving learning and retention for improving learning and retention for graduate students in science and graduate students in science and graduate students in science and medicine? We try to sleep sometimes. Uh medicine? We try to sleep sometimes. Uh medicine? We try to sleep sometimes. Uh thank you, JD. Oh, great. Uh you're you thank you, JD. Oh, great. Uh you're you thank you, JD. Oh, great. Uh you're you W JD. So, you know, I used to teach you W JD. So, you know, I used to teach you W JD. So, you know, I used to teach this course at Cold Spring Harbor um on this course at Cold Spring Harbor um on this course at Cold Spring Harbor um on career development for scientists, and career development for scientists, and career development for scientists, and there's a lot in there, but the two there's a lot in there, but the two there's a lot in there, but the two things that are most important things that are most important things that are most important are I pre- answering this question, I would I pre- answering this question, I would I pre- answering this question, I would say are say are say are find non- destructive ways to reset your dopamine destructive ways to reset your dopamine destructive ways to reset your dopamine and your energy levels, and your energy levels, and your energy levels, and do those at least every 3 days. and do those at least every 3 days. and do those at least every 3 days. So, for me, it was kind of a tough So, for me, it was kind of a tough So, for me, it was kind of a tough thing to take a long walk or to spend I thing to take a long walk or to spend I thing to take a long walk or to spend I used to work really hard on Mondays, used to work really hard on Mondays, used to work really hard on Mondays, really hard on Tuesdays, and I would not really hard on Tuesdays, and I would not really hard on Tuesdays, and I would not go in until the afternoon on Wednesdays, go in until the afternoon on Wednesdays, go in until the afternoon on Wednesdays, and sometimes not at all. and sometimes not at all. and sometimes not at all. And then I go in Thursday, Friday, and And then I go in Thursday, Friday, and And then I go in Thursday, Friday, and work really, really hard, and then not work really, really hard, and then not work really, really hard, and then not at all on Saturday, and then maybe do a at all on Saturday, and then maybe do a at all on Saturday, and then maybe do a little bit of work from home on Sunday. little bit of work from home on Sunday. little bit of work from home on Sunday. And I was very productive that way. The And I was very productive that way. The And I was very productive that way. The those breaks are absolutely key, and those breaks are absolutely key, and those breaks are absolutely key, and it's not encouraged so much in academic it's not encouraged so much in academic it's not encouraged so much in academic or tech, or tech, or tech, or maybe anything now. I hear about so or maybe anything now. I hear about so or maybe anything now. I hear about so much stress and overwork. I say you just much stress and overwork. I say you just much stress and overwork. I say you just do it and define the culture and let the do it and define the culture and let the do it and define the culture and let the results and your focus be the thing results and your focus be the thing results and your focus be the thing that defines you, not how many hours that defines you, not how many hours that defines you, not how many hours you're in there. But I realize there's a you're in there. But I realize there's a you're in there. But I realize there's a huge cognitive load and energetic load, huge cognitive load and energetic load, huge cognitive load and energetic load, and for that, I do think these non-sleep and for that, I do think these non-sleep and for that, I do think these non-sleep deep rest protocols are where it comes deep rest protocols are where it comes deep rest protocols are where it comes in really handy. There are at least two in really handy. There are at least two in really handy. There are at least two faculty I know at Stanford, one who's a faculty I know at Stanford, one who's a faculty I know at Stanford, one who's a so-called Howard Hughes investigator, so-called Howard Hughes investigator, so-called Howard Hughes investigator, who's big is those are big deal who's big is those are big deal who's big is those are big deal appointments. They get tons of money, appointments. They get tons of money, appointments. They get tons of money, etc., etc. etc., etc. etc., etc. And they do amazing science most of the And they do amazing science most of the And they do amazing science most of the time. Um these individuals certainly do, and Um these individuals certainly do, and Um these individuals certainly do, and they take two 20-minute naps per day in they take two 20-minute naps per day in they take two 20-minute naps per day in their office. When this guy came and their office. When this guy came and their office. When this guy came and visited me years ago when I was at a visited me years ago when I was at a visited me years ago when I was at a different university, he took the time different university, he took the time different university, he took the time that we were supposed to meet in my that we were supposed to meet in my that we were supposed to meet in my office and talk about data. He asked if office and talk about data. He asked if office and talk about data. He asked if he could take a nap. he could take a nap. he could take a nap. And he gave a great talk that afternoon. And he gave a great talk that afternoon. And he gave a great talk that afternoon. So, there you go. I do think you have to there you go. I do think you have to there you go. I do think you have to take control of your schedule and do take control of your schedule and do take control of your schedule and do those things. I hope that helps. And those things. I hope that helps. And those things. I hope that helps. And then of course for some people then of course for some people then of course for some people exercise and so on is the way they exercise and so on is the way they exercise and so on is the way they reset. What research are working you reset. What research are working you reset. What research are working you doing or that your colleagues are doing or that your colleagues are doing or that your colleagues are doing that you're most excited about lately? that you're most excited about lately? that you're most excited about lately? Glenn, yeah. Glenn, yeah. Glenn, yeah. One project in particular, I hope this One project in particular, I hope this One project in particular, I hope this paper gets accepted soon. It's been out paper gets accepted soon. It's been out paper gets accepted soon. It's been out for review forever and if the reviewers for review forever and if the reviewers for review forever and if the reviewers are in the audience, please are in the audience, please are in the audience, please just tell us one way or the other, you just tell us one way or the other, you just tell us one way or the other, you know. Um we did a very large-scale study during we did a very large-scale study during we did a very large-scale study during the pandemic. We meaning David Spiegel the pandemic. We meaning David Spiegel the pandemic. We meaning David Spiegel and I and an amazing and I and an amazing and I and an amazing PhD named Melis Yil PhD named Melis Yil PhD named Melis Yil She now has two last names, excuse me, She now has two last names, excuse me, She now has two last names, excuse me, Balban Yilmaz Balban. And Melis, we Balban Yilmaz Balban. And Melis, we Balban Yilmaz Balban. And Melis, we essentially equipped people with remote essentially equipped people with remote essentially equipped people with remote monitoring devices and measured sleep monitoring devices and measured sleep monitoring devices and measured sleep and heart rate variability and a bunch and heart rate variability and a bunch and heart rate variability and a bunch of stress and bunch of other things and of stress and bunch of other things and of stress and bunch of other things and we gave them a very brief set of pro we gave them a very brief set of pro we gave them a very brief set of pro breathing protocols and it turns out breathing protocols and it turns out breathing protocols and it turns out that this thing that I'm talking about a that this thing that I'm talking about a that this thing that I'm talking about a lot on the podcast these days of this lot on the podcast these days of this lot on the podcast these days of this double inhale long exhale, the so-called double inhale long exhale, the so-called double inhale long exhale, the so-called physiological sigh, physiological sigh, physiological sigh, was the most effective breathing was the most effective breathing was the most effective breathing practice for allowing people to control practice for allowing people to control practice for allowing people to control their heart rate variability, reduce their heart rate variability, reduce their heart rate variability, reduce overall heart rate, access better sleep. overall heart rate, access better sleep. overall heart rate, access better sleep. And these were extremely short And these were extremely short And these were extremely short protocols. So, I'm very excited about protocols. So, I'm very excited about protocols. So, I'm very excited about this. I didn't discover physiological this. I didn't discover physiological this. I didn't discover physiological sighs. I love the idea that people can sighs. I love the idea that people can sighs. I love the idea that people can do a very brief protocol once a day, do a very brief protocol once a day, do a very brief protocol once a day, maybe even just while walking down the maybe even just while walking down the maybe even just while walking down the street or in the moment and actually street or in the moment and actually street or in the moment and actually learn to control that autonomic seesaw learn to control that autonomic seesaw learn to control that autonomic seesaw better. So, I'm very excited about that. better. So, I'm very excited about that. better. So, I'm very excited about that. And then we are gearing up to do some And then we are gearing up to do some And then we are gearing up to do some studies on people who have more severe studies on people who have more severe studies on people who have more severe forms of anxiety and panic attack using forms of anxiety and panic attack using forms of anxiety and panic attack using um mainly um mainly um mainly respiration but also looking at some of respiration but also looking at some of respiration but also looking at some of these uh these uh these uh eye vision-related ways of controlling eye vision-related ways of controlling eye vision-related ways of controlling the nervous system. I love that stuff. the nervous system. I love that stuff. the nervous system. I love that stuff. If I keep talking about it, I'm going to If I keep talking about it, I'm going to If I keep talking about it, I'm going to give you a data presentation. So, I'm give you a data presentation. So, I'm give you a data presentation. So, I'm going to turn around. How does dopamine going to turn around. How does dopamine going to turn around. How does dopamine factor into neuroplasticity if at all? factor into neuroplasticity if at all? factor into neuroplasticity if at all? Colin, great question. It's a very Colin, great question. It's a very Colin, great question. It's a very strong trigger of plasticity. So much so strong trigger of plasticity. So much so strong trigger of plasticity. So much so in fact that in fact that in fact that uh there's some work that shows if you uh there's some work that shows if you uh there's some work that shows if you stimulate with an electrode the brain stimulate with an electrode the brain stimulate with an electrode the brain area that releases dopamine and you pair area that releases dopamine and you pair area that releases dopamine and you pair that with anything that with anything that with anything even just like an 8 kilohertz anything even just like an 8 kilohertz anything even just like an 8 kilohertz tone the brain remaps and it's like oh I love the brain remaps and it's like oh I love the brain remaps and it's like oh I love that 8 kilohertz tone. Remember dopamine that 8 kilohertz tone. Remember dopamine that 8 kilohertz tone. Remember dopamine is dumb and it's just dumb and it's just is dumb and it's just dumb and it's just is dumb and it's just dumb and it's just you know it's like Costello when he used you know it's like Costello when he used you know it's like Costello when he used to this dog I could hang a rope from a to this dog I could hang a rope from a to this dog I could hang a rope from a tree. This dog was so lazy wouldn't tree. This dog was so lazy wouldn't tree. This dog was so lazy wouldn't cross a room for a steak. You had to cross a room for a steak. You had to cross a room for a steak. You had to give the steak to him. But it would run give the steak to him. But it would run give the steak to him. But it would run across a field. He would run and jump on across a field. He would run and jump on across a field. He would run and jump on and hold on to that rope and hold on to that rope and hold on to that rope and he would suddenly bite through his and he would suddenly bite through his and he would suddenly bite through his lip with like blood dripping down and I lip with like blood dripping down and I lip with like blood dripping down and I was like oh my god it's like breaking my was like oh my god it's like breaking my was like oh my god it's like breaking my heart. He loved every set. That's heart. He loved every set. That's heart. He loved every set. That's dopamine. Turns us into idiots. dopamine. Turns us into idiots. dopamine. Turns us into idiots. He was He was He was He was as smart about what he needed to He was as smart about what he needed to He was as smart about what he needed to be smart about. Dopamine So if you be smart about. Dopamine So if you be smart about. Dopamine So if you trigger dopamine release with Ritalin, trigger dopamine release with Ritalin, trigger dopamine release with Ritalin, Adderall to a lesser extent L-tyrosine and to a lesser extent L-tyrosine and to a lesser extent L-tyrosine and certainly please don't do this but certainly please don't do this but certainly please don't do this but cocaine amphetamine cocaine amphetamine cocaine amphetamine whatever you're doing seems super whatever you're doing seems super whatever you're doing seems super interesting. It's true and that's why it's such a It's true and that's why it's such a It's true and that's why it's such a slippery slope. It makes anything you're slippery slope. It makes anything you're slippery slope. It makes anything you're doing seem interesting and important. doing seem interesting and important. doing seem interesting and important. And actually I'll use this as an And actually I'll use this as an And actually I'll use this as an opportunity to say something about the opportunity to say something about the opportunity to say something about the psychedelic thing earlier. One of the psychedelic thing earlier. One of the psychedelic thing earlier. One of the issues with MDMA it's a very unusual issues with MDMA it's a very unusual issues with MDMA it's a very unusual brain state. It's high dopamine high brain state. It's high dopamine high brain state. It's high dopamine high serotonin. Completely synthetic compound. There are Completely synthetic compound. There are Completely synthetic compound. There are other things in there that it does as other things in there that it does as other things in there that it does as well. One of the problems with people I well. One of the problems with people I well. One of the problems with people I see with the problem with people taking see with the problem with people taking see with the problem with people taking MDMA just MDMA just MDMA just at a basic level is that if you're not at a basic level is that if you're not at a basic level is that if you're not pushing that towards some therapeutic pushing that towards some therapeutic pushing that towards some therapeutic outcome. Music sounds amazing. Music sounds amazing. Music sounds amazing. Everything feels and sounds amazing, but Everything feels and sounds amazing, but Everything feels and sounds amazing, but it's a very neurochemically, it's a very neurochemically, it's a very neurochemically, you know, severe state. So, that's why I you know, severe state. So, that's why I you know, severe state. So, that's why I think if people are going to explore think if people are going to explore think if people are going to explore those things, do it as part of one of those things, do it as part of one of those things, do it as part of one of the university supported clinical trials. university supported clinical trials. university supported clinical trials. One of the Those drugs make everything One of the Those drugs make everything One of the Those drugs make everything seem interesting, even stuff that's not seem interesting, even stuff that's not seem interesting, even stuff that's not terribly interesting. Now, they also terribly interesting. Now, they also terribly interesting. Now, they also have the potential for have the potential for have the potential for trauma healing capacity. These are the trauma healing capacity. These are the trauma healing capacity. These are the maps studies and so on. So, you have to maps studies and so on. So, you have to maps studies and so on. So, you have to be very careful with what you pair with be very careful with what you pair with be very careful with what you pair with dopamine and what you pair dopamine and what you pair dopamine and what you pair dopamine with. And for those of you that are high And for those of you that are high And for those of you that are high sensation seeking, novelty seeking, sensation seeking, novelty seeking, sensation seeking, novelty seeking, and everything's interesting to you, and everything's interesting to you, and everything's interesting to you, and you want more and more and more you want more and more and more you want more and more and more experiences, I would You basically have experiences, I would You basically have experiences, I would You basically have a eight-cylinder car a eight-cylinder car a eight-cylinder car in you, and you need to be very careful in you, and you need to be very careful in you, and you need to be very careful how you drive that thing. Like any how you drive that thing. Like any how you drive that thing. Like any high-performance automobile, it's going high-performance automobile, it's going high-performance automobile, it's going to spend more time in the shop. to spend more time in the shop. to spend more time in the shop. So, learn to learn to learn to drive appropriately. What advice can you offer to future What advice can you offer to future What advice can you offer to future scientists who want to make an impact scientists who want to make an impact scientists who want to make an impact like you have? Ryan O'Boyle, get tenure like you have? Ryan O'Boyle, get tenure like you have? Ryan O'Boyle, get tenure first. No, I'm kidding. The um first. No, I'm kidding. The um first. No, I'm kidding. The um Uh So, I have this weird history in Uh So, I have this weird history in Uh So, I have this weird history in science, and I'm not looking for science, and I'm not looking for science, and I'm not looking for sympathy here, but um my undergraduate sympathy here, but um my undergraduate sympathy here, but um my undergraduate advisor, who I adored, is like a father advisor, who I adored, is like a father advisor, who I adored, is like a father to me. My graduate advisor and my post to me. My graduate advisor and my post to me. My graduate advisor and my post doc advisor, who I also adored, all doc advisor, who I also adored, all doc advisor, who I also adored, all three of them died. Suicide, cancer, three of them died. Suicide, cancer, three of them died. Suicide, cancer, cancer. Really young. So, the joke in my cancer. Really young. So, the joke in my cancer. Really young. So, the joke in my field is you don't want me to work for field is you don't want me to work for field is you don't want me to work for you. It But in all seriousness, all three of It But in all seriousness, all three of It But in all seriousness, all three of them had a really morbid sense of humor. them had a really morbid sense of humor. them had a really morbid sense of humor. All amazing people. But it is this kind All amazing people. But it is this kind All amazing people. But it is this kind of weird curse that I've had. of weird curse that I've had. of weird curse that I've had. So, what scientists, you know, what So, what scientists, you know, what So, what scientists, you know, what advice, you know, advice, you know, advice, you know, Well, Ben Barres, the late Ben Barres, Well, Ben Barres, the late Ben Barres, Well, Ben Barres, the late Ben Barres, died of pancreatic cancer, an amazing died of pancreatic cancer, an amazing died of pancreatic cancer, an amazing individual. They're actually making a individual. They're actually making a individual. They're actually making a documentary about Ben's life. He is documentary about Ben's life. He is documentary about Ben's life. He is transgender. He was a totally transgender. He was a totally transgender. He was a totally irreverent. He said whatever he thought. irreverent. He said whatever he thought. irreverent. He said whatever he thought. He offended everybody. He was awesome. He offended everybody. He was awesome. He offended everybody. He was awesome. Brilliant, too. Brilliant, too. Brilliant, too. Ben and I had a conversation as he was Ben and I had a conversation as he was Ben and I had a conversation as he was dying. I recorded a lot of conversations dying. I recorded a lot of conversations dying. I recorded a lot of conversations with him. with him. with him. And I told him I was interested in doing And I told him I was interested in doing And I told him I was interested in doing public facing education. And he said, public facing education. And he said, public facing education. And he said, "Well, you're tenured now and "Well, you're tenured now and "Well, you're tenured now and people are going to be upset and they're people are going to be upset and they're people are going to be upset and they're not going to like it and your colleagues not going to like it and your colleagues not going to like it and your colleagues are probably going to hate it. So, are probably going to hate it. So, are probably going to hate it. So, whatever you do, you better make it whatever you do, you better make it whatever you do, you better make it good." And I was like, "Well, that doesn't And I was like, "Well, that doesn't And I was like, "Well, that doesn't really help much, Ben." And he said, really help much, Ben." And he said, really help much, Ben." And he said, "You know, you seem to have a compulsion "You know, you seem to have a compulsion "You know, you seem to have a compulsion for it." So, for it." So, for it." So, he was right. I think that if you are he was right. I think that if you are he was right. I think that if you are excited about science excited about science excited about science share and sharing what you know, then do share and sharing what you know, then do share and sharing what you know, then do that. And even if it seems super nerdy, that. And even if it seems super nerdy, that. And even if it seems super nerdy, I mean, there are these I think they I mean, there are these I think they I mean, there are these I think they call themselves entomologist that call themselves entomologist that call themselves entomologist that they're the insect people. They I mean, they're the insect people. They I mean, they're the insect people. They I mean, they make insects seem really, really they make insects seem really, really they make insects seem really, really cool. And cool. And cool. And if you are excited about spindle if you are excited about spindle if you are excited about spindle kinetics or whatever, you know, kinetics or whatever, you know, kinetics or whatever, you know, tell people about it. I really mean it. tell people about it. I really mean it. tell people about it. I really mean it. I think that the one caveat is that I do I think that the one caveat is that I do I think that the one caveat is that I do think it's important to get a formal think it's important to get a formal think it's important to get a formal rigorous training in it first. rigorous training in it first. rigorous training in it first. I think that you will go further and I think that you will go further and I think that you will go further and faster in the long run. And there's some faster in the long run. And there's some faster in the long run. And there's some amazing people out there. There's a amazing people out there. There's a amazing people out there. There's a postdoc at Stanford. I think his name is postdoc at Stanford. I think his name is postdoc at Stanford. I think his name is Ben Rein. I think if you shorten it up Ben Rein. I think if you shorten it up Ben Rein. I think if you shorten it up on Instagram, it's actually Brain. B on Instagram, it's actually Brain. B on Instagram, it's actually Brain. B Brain cuz he works he talks about brain Brain cuz he works he talks about brain Brain cuz he works he talks about brain science. So, that's why it's weird. B science. So, that's why it's weird. B science. So, that's why it's weird. B R E I N. He does a great job and he's a R E I N. He does a great job and he's a R E I N. He does a great job and he's a really good example of someone who's really good example of someone who's really good example of someone who's still on the ascent with his career still on the ascent with his career still on the ascent with his career doing serious science and doing science doing serious science and doing science doing serious science and doing science communication. But you have to be communication. But you have to be communication. But you have to be careful. It's time-consuming. careful. It's time-consuming. careful. It's time-consuming. Look, you Look, you Look, you people will dislike you for whatever. I people will dislike you for whatever. I people will dislike you for whatever. I made the mistake once of saying that I made the mistake once of saying that I made the mistake once of saying that I eat butter. eat butter. eat butter. Apparently, that's a sin on the Apparently, that's a sin on the Apparently, that's a sin on the internet. I like little bits of I internet. I like little bits of I internet. I like little bits of I actually like a lot of butter, but I try actually like a lot of butter, but I try actually like a lot of butter, but I try and eat little bits of butter. But and eat little bits of butter. But and eat little bits of butter. But somehow, it's like there's this idea somehow, it's like there's this idea somehow, it's like there's this idea that I eat sticks of butter. So, you that I eat sticks of butter. So, you that I eat sticks of butter. So, you have to be careful. Like have to be careful. Like have to be careful. Like I mean, all the things I've heard, I mean, all the things I've heard, I mean, all the things I've heard, I was dead. That was cool. was dead. That was cool. was dead. That was cool. The um So, you have to be careful and The um So, you have to be careful and The um So, you have to be careful and remember everything is stamped into the remember everything is stamped into the remember everything is stamped into the cloud now in the metaverse the cloud now in the metaverse the cloud now in the metaverse or whatever it's called. So, I would say or whatever it's called. So, I would say or whatever it's called. So, I would say here are the rules that we have here are the rules that we have here are the rules that we have at the podcast and on Here's the rules at the podcast and on Here's the rules at the podcast and on Here's the rules that I created for myself. I truly don't that I created for myself. I truly don't that I created for myself. I truly don't do it for me. I do it cuz I think people do it for me. I do it cuz I think people do it for me. I do it cuz I think people want to hear about it. But, I've been want to hear about it. But, I've been want to hear about it. But, I've been telling to myself that since I was 6 telling to myself that since I was 6 telling to myself that since I was 6 years old. years old. years old. The other thing is never ever do it The other thing is never ever do it The other thing is never ever do it just for your own gratification. just for your own gratification. just for your own gratification. You should really try and think is You should really try and think is You should really try and think is anyone going to get anything useful out anyone going to get anything useful out anyone going to get anything useful out of this potentially. That's the goal. If of this potentially. That's the goal. If of this potentially. That's the goal. If you're doing that, it'll work out for you're doing that, it'll work out for you're doing that, it'll work out for you. If you are thinking about how to you. If you are thinking about how to you. If you are thinking about how to get followers or something like that, it get followers or something like that, it get followers or something like that, it ain't going to work out. ain't going to work out. ain't going to work out. That's my advice. That's my advice. That's my advice. Is age 66 too old for neuroplasticity? Is age 66 too old for neuroplasticity? Is age 66 too old for neuroplasticity? No. No, I'll cut myself off to begin No, I'll cut myself off to begin No, I'll cut myself off to begin learning a Sandra Chizarri. No. learning a Sandra Chizarri. No. learning a Sandra Chizarri. No. Did I pronounce that right? Thank you, Did I pronounce that right? Thank you, Did I pronounce that right? Thank you, Sandra. No, uh Richard Feynman, the great Richard uh Richard Feynman, the great Richard uh Richard Feynman, the great Richard Feynman, taught himself to draw what later in taught himself to draw what later in taught himself to draw what later in life. He was also really into flotation life. He was also really into flotation life. He was also really into flotation tanks. Did you know that? Yeah, he was tanks. Did you know that? Yeah, he was tanks. Did you know that? Yeah, he was He was also into bongo drumming naked on He was also into bongo drumming naked on He was also into bongo drumming naked on the roof of Caltech. the roof of Caltech. the roof of Caltech. Richard Feynman, you know, did so many Richard Feynman, you know, did so many Richard Feynman, you know, did so many things that would get most people fired things that would get most people fired things that would get most people fired nowadays. He's just lucky he was alive nowadays. He's just lucky he was alive nowadays. He's just lucky he was alive when he was. when he was. when he was. You can absolutely learn at 66 and way You can absolutely learn at 66 and way You can absolutely learn at 66 and way beyond. There's an amazing study from beyond. There's an amazing study from beyond. There's an amazing study from Rusty Gage's lab at the Salk Institute Rusty Gage's lab at the Salk Institute Rusty Gage's lab at the Salk Institute years ago showing that even people who years ago showing that even people who years ago showing that even people who are very late in life, terminally ill in are very late in life, terminally ill in are very late in life, terminally ill in fact, are still producing new neurons in the are still producing new neurons in the are still producing new neurons in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. These dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. These dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. These people that were gracious enough to people that were gracious enough to people that were gracious enough to allow researchers to inject them with allow researchers to inject them with allow researchers to inject them with dyes that would label these neurons for dyes that would label these neurons for dyes that would label these neurons for analysis postmortem after they died. analysis postmortem after they died. analysis postmortem after they died. Absolutely, you can learn. What's harder Absolutely, you can learn. What's harder Absolutely, you can learn. What's harder is focus. is focus. is focus. Oftentimes what's harder is sleep as Oftentimes what's harder is sleep as Oftentimes what's harder is sleep as well, but the same mechanisms apply. well, but the same mechanisms apply. well, but the same mechanisms apply. There's no evidence whatsoever There's no evidence whatsoever There's no evidence whatsoever that neuroplasticity disappears at any that neuroplasticity disappears at any that neuroplasticity disappears at any stage. Despite what you will weasel told the Despite what you will weasel told the Despite what you will weasel told the BBC. How do you tackle reading research BBC. How do you tackle reading research BBC. How do you tackle reading research papers? Do you have a specific strategy papers? Do you have a specific strategy papers? Do you have a specific strategy and hunt? Yes, I do. Um and hunt? Yes, I do. Um and hunt? Yes, I do. Um I do. I do. I do. I take notes on everything. I try and I take notes on everything. I try and I take notes on everything. I try and I so I have there's four questions that we so I have there's four questions that we so I have there's four questions that we teach students and that I think I that I teach students and that I think I that I teach students and that I think I that I use. The first one is what's the use. The first one is what's the use. The first one is what's the question they're asking, major and more question they're asking, major and more question they're asking, major and more specific. Second is what do they do? specific. Second is what do they do? specific. Second is what do they do? What are the like methods-wise, what do What are the like methods-wise, what do What are the like methods-wise, what do they do? You don't have to know all the they do? You don't have to know all the they do? You don't have to know all the details in the methods necessarily, details in the methods necessarily, details in the methods necessarily, but be versed in those methods. But you but be versed in those methods. But you but be versed in those methods. But you have to kind of understand like are they have to kind of understand like are they have to kind of understand like are they looking at mice? Are they looking at looking at mice? Are they looking at looking at mice? Are they looking at humans? Is this a humans? Is this a humans? Is this a you know, did they have people in two you know, did they have people in two you know, did they have people in two different conditions or just one? You different conditions or just one? You different conditions or just one? You have to understand what do they do? Then have to understand what do they do? Then have to understand what do they do? Then you ask what did they find? And then the you ask what did they find? And then the you ask what did they find? And then the last question is the most important one last question is the most important one last question is the most important one and you should write down the answer to and you should write down the answer to and you should write down the answer to this is what did they this is what did they this is what did they conclude? And then you look back at the conclude? And then you look back at the conclude? And then you look back at the first question and you go, did they first question and you go, did they first question and you go, did they actually answer that question? actually answer that question? actually answer that question? Or is it something unrelated? And those Or is it something unrelated? And those Or is it something unrelated? And those four questions are actually the way four questions are actually the way four questions are actually the way that I parse each paper. Learning to that I parse each paper. Learning to that I parse each paper. Learning to parse papers is tricky for the podcast. parse papers is tricky for the podcast. parse papers is tricky for the podcast. I use the telephone. I call people and I use the telephone. I call people and I use the telephone. I call people and I badger them and I ask them, you know, I badger them and I ask them, you know, I badger them and I ask them, you know, like who's doing the really good work in like who's doing the really good work in like who's doing the really good work in this area? And I spend a lot of hours this area? And I spend a lot of hours this area? And I spend a lot of hours doing it. And then doing it. And then doing it. And then the best way to remember science the best way to remember science the best way to remember science is to tell someone about it. So before is to tell someone about it. So before is to tell someone about it. So before each podcast I'll call someone and be each podcast I'll call someone and be each podcast I'll call someone and be like, "Hey, did you know that they used like, "Hey, did you know that they used like, "Hey, did you know that they used to throw kids in the river? to throw kids in the river? to throw kids in the river? After I do this and my sister, my poor After I do this and my sister, my poor After I do this and my sister, my poor sister, and she's like, "Yeah." My sister, and she's like, "Yeah." My sister, and she's like, "Yeah." My sister, by the way, does not watch the sister, by the way, does not watch the sister, by the way, does not watch the podcast. I She's a therapist and she's podcast. I She's a therapist and she's podcast. I She's a therapist and she's like, "Hey, I learned this amazing like, "Hey, I learned this amazing like, "Hey, I learned this amazing breathing technique." I was like, "Oh breathing technique." I was like, "Oh breathing technique." I was like, "Oh yeah, really? Tell me about it." And yeah, really? Tell me about it." And yeah, really? Tell me about it." And it's like someone else is there. I'm it's like someone else is there. I'm it's like someone else is there. I'm like, "You know I have a podcast." She's like, "You know I have a podcast." She's like, "You know I have a podcast." She's like, "I don't like your podcast." like, "I don't like your podcast." like, "I don't like your podcast." Yeah, that's old older sister. Older Yeah, that's old older sister. Older Yeah, that's old older sister. Older sister. It she's not lying. What is your It she's not lying. What is your It she's not lying. What is your favorite sauce, condiment, seasoning, favorite sauce, condiment, seasoning, favorite sauce, condiment, seasoning, sauce? There's one in every audience. There's one in every audience. There's one in every audience. Um I like the spicy stuff. We've been I like the spicy stuff. We've been I like the spicy stuff. We've been fermenting our own food at home. fermenting our own food at home. fermenting our own food at home. Um it's kind of cool. You put the Um it's kind of cool. You put the Um it's kind of cool. You put the cabbage in the stuff in the little cabbage in the stuff in the little cabbage in the stuff in the little ceramic thing outside and then it ceramic thing outside and then it ceramic thing outside and then it goes pop pop. It makes this amazing goes pop pop. It makes this amazing goes pop pop. It makes this amazing sound and then you can like eat make sound and then you can like eat make sound and then you can like eat make your own sauerkraut and you know that your own sauerkraut and you know that your own sauerkraut and you know that with peppers and like fermenting that with peppers and like fermenting that with peppers and like fermenting that stuff. It's really good. Okay, they're stuff. It's really good. Okay, they're stuff. It's really good. Okay, they're telling me one more question so we'll do telling me one more question so we'll do telling me one more question so we'll do two. What's most important from your two. What's most important from your two. What's most important from your ADHD ah ADHD ah ADHD ah Gabriel. Um got a lot of questions about ADHD. For people on medication or not on For people on medication or not on For people on medication or not on medication. So I'll do I'll answer both. medication. So I'll do I'll answer both. medication. So I'll do I'll answer both. For people on medication, I think For people on medication, I think For people on medication, I think work with somebody work with somebody work with somebody really good who's willing to really good who's willing to really good who's willing to work with you to allow you to find that work with you to allow you to find that work with you to allow you to find that minimal effective dose and also timing minimal effective dose and also timing minimal effective dose and also timing that dose. One of the key things that we that dose. One of the key things that we that dose. One of the key things that we know now is that from that waking know now is that from that waking know now is that from that waking up point in your morning until about up point in your morning until about up point in your morning until about eight or nine hours later, we've sort of eight or nine hours later, we've sort of eight or nine hours later, we've sort of named that phase one of the day for lack named that phase one of the day for lack named that phase one of the day for lack of a better naming protocol. of a better naming protocol. of a better naming protocol. The systems that release cortisol, The systems that release cortisol, The systems that release cortisol, dopamine and epinephrine are essentially dopamine and epinephrine are essentially dopamine and epinephrine are essentially more effective at producing those than more effective at producing those than more effective at producing those than they are in the later periods of the they are in the later periods of the they are in the later periods of the day, which makes sense if you think day, which makes sense if you think day, which makes sense if you think about the way that the autonomic nervous about the way that the autonomic nervous about the way that the autonomic nervous system works, etc. So there's an system works, etc. So there's an system works, etc. So there's an important question that I can't answer important question that I can't answer important question that I can't answer for you but you can answer for you, for you but you can answer for you, for you but you can answer for you, which is if you're using which is if you're using which is if you're using Ritalin, Adderall, Ritalin, Adderall, Ritalin, Adderall, Vyvanse, these things that enhance Vyvanse, these things that enhance Vyvanse, these things that enhance dopaminergic transmission, modafinil, dopaminergic transmission, modafinil, dopaminergic transmission, modafinil, armodafinil, by the way, for the by the way, for the by the way, for the people in the audience like me who people in the audience like me who people in the audience like me who didn't go to college when these things didn't go to college when these things didn't go to college when these things were all in use, were all in use, were all in use, the numbers of people that use these the numbers of people that use these the numbers of people that use these compounds on and off prescription is compounds on and off prescription is compounds on and off prescription is astronomical. It's incredible. I didn't realize it. I It's incredible. I didn't realize it. I It's incredible. I didn't realize it. I think something like 80% of college think something like 80% of college think something like 80% of college students use these at some point. In- students use these at some point. In- students use these at some point. In- incredible. Cuz they put you into a incredible. Cuz they put you into a incredible. Cuz they put you into a narrow aperture tunnel of concentration. narrow aperture tunnel of concentration. narrow aperture tunnel of concentration. So you want to with a physician's So you want to with a physician's So you want to with a physician's support, of course, to help get support, of course, to help get support, of course, to help get permission or not permission or not permission or not to figure out what time of day to take to figure out what time of day to take to figure out what time of day to take your medication. Now, for people who are your medication. Now, for people who are your medication. Now, for people who are not on medication, I'll just go right not on medication, I'll just go right not on medication, I'll just go right back to what I said earlier, which is back to what I said earlier, which is back to what I said earlier, which is that you can train focus, but it feels that you can train focus, but it feels that you can train focus, but it feels terrible to train it. It is hard. terrible to train it. It is hard. terrible to train it. It is hard. Again, there are these Again, there are these Again, there are these large-scale studies in China and large-scale studies in China and large-scale studies in China and elsewhere of people elsewhere of people elsewhere of people literally teaching themselves, and yes, they teaching themselves, and yes, they teaching themselves, and yes, they blink, although less often, to focus blink, although less often, to focus blink, although less often, to focus their vision on a narrow aperture their vision on a narrow aperture their vision on a narrow aperture and to really and to really and to really battle through that agitation, battle through that agitation, battle through that agitation, stress, and learn how to keep their stress, and learn how to keep their stress, and learn how to keep their focus. Now, focus will drift, right? focus. Now, focus will drift, right? focus. Now, focus will drift, right? Focus is not a constant. Focus will Focus is not a constant. Focus will Focus is not a constant. Focus will drift, and you pop out of focus states drift, and you pop out of focus states drift, and you pop out of focus states and then refocus and pop out and then refocus and pop out and then refocus and pop out and refocus. That's something that you can refocus. That's something that you can refocus. That's something that you can train up. I've heard from many people train up. I've heard from many people train up. I've heard from many people who've managed to train themselves off who've managed to train themselves off who've managed to train themselves off medication or to lower doses of medication or to lower doses of medication or to lower doses of medication. And look, some people can't medication. And look, some people can't medication. And look, some people can't do that. They absolutely have to do that. They absolutely have to do that. They absolutely have to maintain their standard medication maintain their standard medication maintain their standard medication protocols. Um this is a larger discussion, obviously, this is a larger discussion, obviously, this is a larger discussion, obviously, as it relates to ADHD. We're going to do as it relates to ADHD. We're going to do as it relates to ADHD. We're going to do another episode on ADHD because the data another episode on ADHD because the data another episode on ADHD because the data are coming out so, so fast. are coming out so, so fast. are coming out so, so fast. What future episodes are in the What future episodes are in the What future episodes are in the pipeline, David Nguyen? Okay, uh thank pipeline, David Nguyen? Okay, uh thank pipeline, David Nguyen? Okay, uh thank you for that question. We have one on you for that question. We have one on you for that question. We have one on grief. We have an amazing episode with grief. We have an amazing episode with grief. We have an amazing episode with a guy from the Rockefeller University on a guy from the Rockefeller University on a guy from the Rockefeller University on the This is Am I allowed to say it's the This is Am I allowed to say it's the This is Am I allowed to say it's going to be my favorite episode? I love going to be my favorite episode? I love going to be my favorite episode? I love all the guests, but this episode just all the guests, but this episode just all the guests, but this episode just blew me away. It's on the relationship blew me away. It's on the relationship blew me away. It's on the relationship between language, speech, dance, and between language, speech, dance, and between language, speech, dance, and music. And I have no musical talent, and I'm And I have no musical talent, and I'm And I have no musical talent, and I'm not a very good dancer. So, that's being not a very good dancer. So, that's being not a very good dancer. So, that's being generous. Amazing interplay between generous. Amazing interplay between generous. Amazing interplay between those things. Um those things. Um those things. Um exercise in the brain, OCD, bulimia, exercise in the brain, OCD, bulimia, exercise in the brain, OCD, bulimia, binge eating disorder, binge eating disorder, binge eating disorder, um Peter Attia's coming on. He'll teach us Peter Attia's coming on. He'll teach us Peter Attia's coming on. He'll teach us about everything, medicine, um about everything, medicine, um about everything, medicine, um good and longevity. And I'm kind of good and longevity. And I'm kind of good and longevity. And I'm kind of blanking at the moment. Uh blanking at the moment. Uh blanking at the moment. Uh David Anderson from Caltech on David Anderson from Caltech on David Anderson from Caltech on aggression and emotional states. aggression and emotional states. aggression and emotional states. Amazing. Um and then there are a number Amazing. Um and then there are a number Amazing. Um and then there are a number of people of people of people uh Lisa Feldman Barrett or Barrett Feldman, Lisa Feldman Barrett or Barrett Feldman, Lisa Feldman Barrett or Barrett Feldman, I always get it backwards. Sorry, Lisa, I always get it backwards. Sorry, Lisa, I always get it backwards. Sorry, Lisa, on emotions in the brain. And really we on emotions in the brain. And really we on emotions in the brain. And really we do take suggestions about who to bring do take suggestions about who to bring do take suggestions about who to bring on the podcast very seriously. What I'm on the podcast very seriously. What I'm on the podcast very seriously. What I'm What we're mostly looking for What we're What we're mostly looking for What we're What we're mostly looking for What we're mostly looking for are the people that mostly looking for are the people that mostly looking for are the people that no one else has heard that people no one else has heard that people no one else has heard that people haven't heard of haven't heard of haven't heard of who are not going on podcasts every week who are not going on podcasts every week who are not going on podcasts every week and that people should abso- absolutely and that people should abso- absolutely and that people should abso- absolutely hear from. And then I will tell you, hear from. And then I will tell you, hear from. And then I will tell you, they're going to kill me for saying they're going to kill me for saying they're going to kill me for saying this, but I'm going to do it anyway. Um this, but I'm going to do it anyway. Um this, but I'm going to do it anyway. Um we have a some short series coming up we have a some short series coming up we have a some short series coming up with expert professionals. I'm going to with expert professionals. I'm going to with expert professionals. I'm going to do a short series on trauma. do a short series on trauma. do a short series on trauma. And my hope for this series is that And my hope for this series is that And my hope for this series is that you'll actually get to see an you'll actually get to see an you'll actually get to see an exquisitely skilled trauma therapist exquisitely skilled trauma therapist exquisitely skilled trauma therapist take someone through L- Excuse me, I take someone through L- Excuse me, I take someone through L- Excuse me, I seem so excited, I'm spitting on the seem so excited, I'm spitting on the seem so excited, I'm spitting on the audience. Excuse me. So, Excuse me. So, Excuse me. So, to take someone through actual trauma to take someone through actual trauma to take someone through actual trauma therapy. This isn't staged. This is therapy. This isn't staged. This is therapy. This isn't staged. This is somebody who's actually in a point of somebody who's actually in a point of somebody who's actually in a point of near-suicidal grief and trauma, taking near-suicidal grief and trauma, taking near-suicidal grief and trauma, taking them through it in the course of the them through it in the course of the them through it in the course of the podcast so people can see what this podcast so people can see what this podcast so people can see what this process actually entails. That's a process actually entails. That's a process actually entails. That's a very meaningful project to me for a very meaningful project to me for a very meaningful project to me for a number of reasons. Um number of reasons. Um number of reasons. Um so, we're really excited about that. And so, we're really excited about that. And so, we're really excited about that. And you know, to be honest, I feel like you know, to be honest, I feel like you know, to be honest, I feel like there's just such a treasure trove of there's just such a treasure trove of there's just such a treasure trove of information out there. I just want to information out there. I just want to information out there. I just want to grab it all and tell you all about it. grab it all and tell you all about it. grab it all and tell you all about it. So, I always say, if nothing else So, I always say, if nothing else So, I always say, if nothing else I'll cure insomnia. So, the uh Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank you so much for your time. I Thank you so much for your time. I Thank you so much for your time. I really appreciate everyone coming out on really appreciate everyone coming out on really appreciate everyone coming out on the weekday and I'd be remiss if I the weekday and I'd be remiss if I the weekday and I'd be remiss if I didn't say thank you for your interest didn't say thank you for your interest didn't say thank you for your interest in science.