Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. health, and performance. health, and performance. And now, my discussion with Dr. Matt And now, my discussion with Dr. Matt And now, my discussion with Dr. Matt Walker. Let's start off very basic. What Walker. Let's start off very basic. What Walker. Let's start off very basic. What is sleep? is sleep? is sleep? Sleep is probably the single most Sleep is probably the single most Sleep is probably the single most effective thing you can do to reset your effective thing you can do to reset your effective thing you can do to reset your brain and body health. Sleep is a brain and body health. Sleep is a brain and body health. Sleep is a process though is an incredibly complex process though is an incredibly complex process though is an incredibly complex physiological ballet. Sleep is broadly physiological ballet. Sleep is broadly physiological ballet. Sleep is broadly separated into these two main types and separated into these two main types and separated into these two main types and we've got non-rapid eye movement sleep we've got non-rapid eye movement sleep we've got non-rapid eye movement sleep on the one hand and then we've got rapid on the one hand and then we've got rapid on the one hand and then we've got rapid eye movement sleep on the other. When eye movement sleep on the other. When eye movement sleep on the other. When you go into REM sleep, you are you go into REM sleep, you are you go into REM sleep, you are completely paralyzed. You are locked completely paralyzed. You are locked completely paralyzed. You are locked into a physical incarceration of your into a physical incarceration of your into a physical incarceration of your own body. Amazing. The brain paralyzes own body. Amazing. The brain paralyzes own body. Amazing. The brain paralyzes the body so that the mind can dream the body so that the mind can dream the body so that the mind can dream safely. Because think about how quickly we would Because think about how quickly we would Because think about how quickly we would have all been popped out of the gene have all been popped out of the gene have all been popped out of the gene pool, you know, if I think I'm, you pool, you know, if I think I'm, you pool, you know, if I think I'm, you know, one of the best skydivers who can know, one of the best skydivers who can know, one of the best skydivers who can just simply fly and I get up on my just simply fly and I get up on my just simply fly and I get up on my apartment window and I leap out. You're apartment window and I leap out. You're apartment window and I leap out. You're done. You're done. Now, of course, the You're done. Now, of course, the You're done. Now, of course, the involuntary muscles, thankfully, aren't involuntary muscles, thankfully, aren't involuntary muscles, thankfully, aren't um paralyzed so you keep breathing, your um paralyzed so you keep breathing, your um paralyzed so you keep breathing, your heart keeps beating. You go through heart keeps beating. You go through heart keeps beating. You go through these bizarre, what we call, autonomic these bizarre, what we call, autonomic these bizarre, what we call, autonomic storms. There are only two voluntary storms. There are only two voluntary storms. There are only two voluntary muscle groups that are spurred from the muscle groups that are spurred from the muscle groups that are spurred from the paralysis. Bizarre. One, your paralysis. Bizarre. One, your paralysis. Bizarre. One, your extraocular muscles because if they were extraocular muscles because if they were extraocular muscles because if they were paralyzed, you wouldn't be able to have paralyzed, you wouldn't be able to have paralyzed, you wouldn't be able to have rapid eye movements. rapid eye movements. rapid eye movements. Mhm. And the other that we later Mhm. And the other that we later Mhm. And the other that we later discovered was the inner ear muscle. discovered was the inner ear muscle. discovered was the inner ear muscle. Some people have argued that the reason Some people have argued that the reason Some people have argued that the reason the eyeballs are spurred from the eyeballs are spurred from the eyeballs are spurred from the paralysis is because if your eyeballs paralysis is because if your eyeballs paralysis is because if your eyeballs are left for long periods of time are left for long periods of time are left for long periods of time inactive, you may get things such as inactive, you may get things such as inactive, you may get things such as oxygen sort of issues in the um oxygen sort of issues in the um oxygen sort of issues in the um aqueous or vitreous humor. And so, the aqueous or vitreous humor. And so, the aqueous or vitreous humor. And so, the eyeballs have to keep the brain in some eyeballs have to keep the brain in some eyeballs have to keep the brain in some way The systems of anterior eye are way The systems of anterior eye are way The systems of anterior eye are made to require movement. made to require movement. made to require movement. People with glaucoma have deficits in People with glaucoma have deficits in People with glaucoma have deficits in drainage through the anterior chamber. drainage through the anterior chamber. drainage through the anterior chamber. So, maybe take me through the arc of a So, maybe take me through the arc of a So, maybe take me through the arc of a night. When I first fall asleep, I'll go night. When I first fall asleep, I'll go night. When I first fall asleep, I'll go into the light stages of non-REM sleep, into the light stages of non-REM sleep, into the light stages of non-REM sleep, stages one and two of non-REM, and then stages one and two of non-REM, and then stages one and two of non-REM, and then I'll start to descend down into the I'll start to descend down into the I'll start to descend down into the deeper stages of non-REM sleep. So, deeper stages of non-REM sleep. So, deeper stages of non-REM sleep. So, after about maybe 20 minutes, I'm after about maybe 20 minutes, I'm after about maybe 20 minutes, I'm starting to head down into stage three starting to head down into stage three starting to head down into stage three non-REM and then into stage four non-REM and then into stage four non-REM and then into stage four non-REM sleep. And as I'm starting to fall asleep, as And as I'm starting to fall asleep, as And as I'm starting to fall asleep, as I've cast off from the usually with me I've cast off from the usually with me I've cast off from the usually with me murky waters of wakefulness, murky waters of wakefulness, murky waters of wakefulness, and I'm in the shadows of sleep, stages and I'm in the shadows of sleep, stages and I'm in the shadows of sleep, stages one and two, my heart rate starts to one and two, my heart rate starts to one and two, my heart rate starts to drop a little bit. And then my brain drop a little bit. And then my brain drop a little bit. And then my brain wave pattern activity starts to slow wave pattern activity starts to slow wave pattern activity starts to slow down. Normally, when I'm awake, it's down. Normally, when I'm awake, it's down. Normally, when I'm awake, it's going up and down maybe 20, 30, 40, 50 going up and down maybe 20, 30, 40, 50 going up and down maybe 20, 30, 40, 50 times a second. times a second. times a second. As I'm going into light non-REM sleep, As I'm going into light non-REM sleep, As I'm going into light non-REM sleep, it will slow down to maybe 15, 20, and it will slow down to maybe 15, 20, and it will slow down to maybe 15, 20, and then really starts to slow down to then really starts to slow down to then really starts to slow down to about sort of 10 or eight cycles per about sort of 10 or eight cycles per about sort of 10 or eight cycles per second, eight cycle waves per second. second, eight cycle waves per second. second, eight cycle waves per second. Then as I'm starting to move into stages Then as I'm starting to move into stages Then as I'm starting to move into stages three and four non-REM sleep, several three and four non-REM sleep, several three and four non-REM sleep, several remarkable things happen. All of a remarkable things happen. All of a remarkable things happen. All of a sudden, my heart rate really does start sudden, my heart rate really does start sudden, my heart rate really does start to drop. Hundreds of thousands of cells to drop. Hundreds of thousands of cells to drop. Hundreds of thousands of cells in my cortex all decide to fire together in my cortex all decide to fire together in my cortex all decide to fire together and then they all go silent together. and then they all go silent together. and then they all go silent together. And it's this remarkable physiological And it's this remarkable physiological And it's this remarkable physiological coordination of the likes that we just coordination of the likes that we just coordination of the likes that we just don't see at during any other brain don't see at during any other brain don't see at during any other brain state. I will then stay there for about state. I will then stay there for about state. I will then stay there for about another 20 or 30 minutes. So, now I'm another 20 or 30 minutes. So, now I'm another 20 or 30 minutes. So, now I'm maybe 60 or 70 minutes into my first maybe 60 or 70 minutes into my first maybe 60 or 70 minutes into my first sleep cycle. sleep cycle. sleep cycle. And then I'll start to rise back up back And then I'll start to rise back up back And then I'll start to rise back up back up into stage two non-REM sleep. And up into stage two non-REM sleep. And up into stage two non-REM sleep. And then after about 80 or so minutes, I'll then after about 80 or so minutes, I'll then after about 80 or so minutes, I'll pop up and I'll have a short REM sleep pop up and I'll have a short REM sleep pop up and I'll have a short REM sleep period. And then back down I go again, down into And then back down I go again, down into And then back down I go again, down into non-REM, up into REM. non-REM, up into REM. non-REM, up into REM. And you do that reliably, repeatedly, And you do that reliably, repeatedly, And you do that reliably, repeatedly, and I will be doing that every 90 and I will be doing that every 90 and I will be doing that every 90 minutes. At least that's the average for minutes. At least that's the average for minutes. At least that's the average for most adults. In the first half of the most adults. In the first half of the most adults. In the first half of the night, the majority of those 90-minute night, the majority of those 90-minute night, the majority of those 90-minute cycles are comprised of lots of deep cycles are comprised of lots of deep cycles are comprised of lots of deep non-REM sleep. That's when I get my non-REM sleep. That's when I get my non-REM sleep. That's when I get my stage three and four of deep non-REM stage three and four of deep non-REM stage three and four of deep non-REM sleep. Once I push through to the second half Once I push through to the second half Once I push through to the second half of the night, now that seesaw balance of the night, now that seesaw balance of the night, now that seesaw balance changes, and instead the majority of changes, and instead the majority of changes, and instead the majority of those 90-minute cycles are comprised those 90-minute cycles are comprised those 90-minute cycles are comprised either of this lighter form of non-REM either of this lighter form of non-REM either of this lighter form of non-REM sleep, stage two non-REM sleep, and much sleep, stage two non-REM sleep, and much sleep, stage two non-REM sleep, and much more and increasingly more rapid eye more and increasingly more rapid eye more and increasingly more rapid eye movement sleep. movement sleep. movement sleep. suffers more, those that lack the early suffers more, those that lack the early suffers more, those that lack the early phase or those that lack the later phase or those that lack the later phase or those that lack the later phase of the night? Depends on what you the of the night? Depends on what you the of the night? Depends on what you the outcome measure is. For example, during outcome measure is. For example, during outcome measure is. For example, during deep non-REM sleep, that's where we get deep non-REM sleep, that's where we get deep non-REM sleep, that's where we get this It's almost a form of natural blood this It's almost a form of natural blood this It's almost a form of natural blood pressure medication. And so when I take pressure medication. And so when I take pressure medication. And so when I take that away from you, the next day, that away from you, the next day, that away from you, the next day, usually going to see autonomic usually going to see autonomic usually going to see autonomic dysfunction, we're usually going to see dysfunction, we're usually going to see dysfunction, we're usually going to see abnormalities in heart rate, blood abnormalities in heart rate, blood abnormalities in heart rate, blood pressure. We also know that it's during pressure. We also know that it's during pressure. We also know that it's during deep non-REM sleep that there is a deep non-REM sleep that there is a deep non-REM sleep that there is a certain control of specific hormones. certain control of specific hormones. certain control of specific hormones. For example, we know that the insulin For example, we know that the insulin For example, we know that the insulin regulation of sort of metabolism, regulation of sort of metabolism, regulation of sort of metabolism, meaning how will you look from a meaning how will you look from a meaning how will you look from a regulated blood sugar perspective versus regulated blood sugar perspective versus regulated blood sugar perspective versus dysregulated, pre-diabetic look of dysregulated, pre-diabetic look of dysregulated, pre-diabetic look of profile. That's where deep sleep seems to matter. That's where deep sleep seems to matter. That's where deep sleep seems to matter. If we selectively deprive you of that, If we selectively deprive you of that, If we selectively deprive you of that, we can see um we can see um we can see um Growth hormone is different actually. So Growth hormone is different actually. So Growth hormone is different actually. So that's a that's a beautiful that's a that's a beautiful that's a that's a beautiful demonstration where growth hormone seems demonstration where growth hormone seems demonstration where growth hormone seems to be more REM sleep dependent, and to be more REM sleep dependent, and to be more REM sleep dependent, and that's why we can come on to the effects that's why we can come on to the effects that's why we can come on to the effects of alcohol. And there's some of alcohol. And there's some of alcohol. And there's some really impressive, frightening data on really impressive, frightening data on really impressive, frightening data on alcohol and its disruption of um of on alcohol and its disruption of um of on alcohol and its disruption of um of sleep. But then we also know sleep. But then we also know sleep. But then we also know testosterone. You know, peak levels of testosterone. You know, peak levels of testosterone. You know, peak levels of testosterone happen during REM sleep. testosterone happen during REM sleep. testosterone happen during REM sleep. So, the second half of the night. It So, the second half of the night. It So, the second half of the night. It Which is the second half of the night. Which is the second half of the night. Which is the second half of the night. So, it really just means that the So, it really just means that the So, it really just means that the your profile of mental and physical your profile of mental and physical your profile of mental and physical dysfunction will be different under both dysfunction will be different under both dysfunction will be different under both of those conditions. Which one would you of those conditions. Which one would you of those conditions. Which one would you prefer? I would prefer neither of them, prefer? I would prefer neither of them, prefer? I would prefer neither of them, and it really depends on what you're and it really depends on what you're and it really depends on what you're trying to optimize for. So, it's trying to optimize for. So, it's trying to optimize for. So, it's just so complicated. You know, sleep is just so complicated. You know, sleep is just so complicated. You know, sleep is just so profoundly detrimental to us if just so profoundly detrimental to us if just so profoundly detrimental to us if you were to take it at face value. You you were to take it at face value. You you were to take it at face value. You know, you're not finding a mate, you're know, you're not finding a mate, you're know, you're not finding a mate, you're not reproducing, you're not foraging for not reproducing, you're not foraging for not reproducing, you're not foraging for food, you're not caring for your young, food, you're not caring for your young, food, you're not caring for your young, and worst of all, you're vulnerable to and worst of all, you're vulnerable to and worst of all, you're vulnerable to predation. On any one of those grounds, predation. On any one of those grounds, predation. On any one of those grounds, sleep probably should have been selected sleep probably should have been selected sleep probably should have been selected against. But, it wasn't. Sleep has against. But, it wasn't. Sleep has against. But, it wasn't. Sleep has fought its way through heroically at fought its way through heroically at fought its way through heroically at every step along the evolutionary path. every step along the evolutionary path. every step along the evolutionary path. And therefore, every sleep stage has And therefore, every sleep stage has And therefore, every sleep stage has also survived as best we can tell. also survived as best we can tell. also survived as best we can tell. What that means is that those are What that means is that those are What that means is that those are non-negotiable. If Mother Nature had non-negotiable. If Mother Nature had non-negotiable. If Mother Nature had found a way to even just sort of, you found a way to even just sort of, you found a way to even just sort of, you know, thin slice some of that sleep from us, thin slice some of that sleep from us, thin slice some of that sleep from us, there would have been fast, I'm sure, there would have been fast, I'm sure, there would have been fast, I'm sure, evolutionary benefits, but it looks as evolutionary benefits, but it looks as evolutionary benefits, but it looks as though she hasn't, and I'm usually in though she hasn't, and I'm usually in though she hasn't, and I'm usually in favor of her wisdom after 3.6 million favor of her wisdom after 3.6 million favor of her wisdom after 3.6 million years. So, in this arc of the night, uh years. So, in this arc of the night, uh years. So, in this arc of the night, uh slow wave sleep predominates uh early in slow wave sleep predominates uh early in slow wave sleep predominates uh early in the night, and then REM sleep. the night, and then REM sleep. the night, and then REM sleep. There's a scenario that many people, There's a scenario that many people, There's a scenario that many people, including myself, experience on a including myself, experience on a including myself, experience on a regular basis, which is regular basis, which is regular basis, which is they go to sleep, sleeping just fine, 3 they go to sleep, sleeping just fine, 3 they go to sleep, sleeping just fine, 3 4 hours into it, they wake up. 4 hours into it, they wake up. 4 hours into it, they wake up. They wake up for whatever reason. Maybe They wake up for whatever reason. Maybe They wake up for whatever reason. Maybe there was a noise, maybe the temperature there was a noise, maybe the temperature there was a noise, maybe the temperature isn't right. We will certainly talk isn't right. We will certainly talk isn't right. We will certainly talk about sleep hygiene, etc. about sleep hygiene, etc. about sleep hygiene, etc. They get up, they go to the restroom. They get up, they go to the restroom. They get up, they go to the restroom. They might flip on the lights, they They might flip on the lights, they They might flip on the lights, they might not. They go back to sleep. Let's might not. They go back to sleep. Let's might not. They go back to sleep. Let's say after about 10 15 minutes, they're say after about 10 15 minutes, they're say after about 10 15 minutes, they're able to fall back asleep. able to fall back asleep. able to fall back asleep. How detrimental is that wake up How detrimental is that wake up How detrimental is that wake up episode or um episode or um episode or um event in terms of event in terms of event in terms of longevity, learning, etc. It is longevity, learning, etc. It is longevity, learning, etc. It is perfectly natural and normal, perfectly natural and normal, perfectly natural and normal, particularly as we progress with age. At particularly as we progress with age. At particularly as we progress with age. At the end of our REM sleep period of the end of our REM sleep period of the end of our REM sleep period of the 90-minute cycle, almost everybody wakes 90-minute cycle, almost everybody wakes 90-minute cycle, almost everybody wakes up and we make a postural movement. We up and we make a postural movement. We up and we make a postural movement. We turn over because we've been paralyzed turn over because we've been paralyzed turn over because we've been paralyzed for so long and the body will also like for so long and the body will also like for so long and the body will also like to shift. For the most part, I think we to shift. For the most part, I think we to shift. For the most part, I think we can be more relaxed about that. Where we can be more relaxed about that. Where we can be more relaxed about that. Where we have to be a bit more attentive though have to be a bit more attentive though have to be a bit more attentive though is if you are spending long periods of is if you are spending long periods of is if you are spending long periods of time not being able to get back to sleep time not being able to get back to sleep time not being able to get back to sleep and usually we define that by saying if and usually we define that by saying if and usually we define that by saying if it's been 20 25 minutes. The other thing it's been 20 25 minutes. The other thing it's been 20 25 minutes. The other thing is if it's happening very frequently. is if it's happening very frequently. is if it's happening very frequently. So, even if you're um So, even if you're um So, even if you're um you know, not awake for 25 minutes you know, not awake for 25 minutes you know, not awake for 25 minutes stretches, but you're finding yourself stretches, but you're finding yourself stretches, but you're finding yourself waking up and being consciously aware waking up and being consciously aware waking up and being consciously aware that you've woken up for maybe six, that you've woken up for maybe six, that you've woken up for maybe six, seven, or eight times throughout the seven, or eight times throughout the seven, or eight times throughout the night and your sleep is very what we night and your sleep is very what we night and your sleep is very what we call fragmented. call fragmented. call fragmented. The great science of sleep in the past 5 The great science of sleep in the past 5 The great science of sleep in the past 5 or 10 years has been yes, quantity or 10 years has been yes, quantity or 10 years has been yes, quantity is important, but quality is just as is important, but quality is just as is important, but quality is just as important and you can't have one without important and you can't have one without important and you can't have one without the other in terms of a good beneficial the other in terms of a good beneficial the other in terms of a good beneficial next day outcome. next day outcome. next day outcome. You can't just get 4 hours of sleep but You can't just get 4 hours of sleep but You can't just get 4 hours of sleep but brilliant quality of sleep and be brilliant quality of sleep and be brilliant quality of sleep and be unimpaired. Nor can you get 8 hours of unimpaired. Nor can you get 8 hours of unimpaired. Nor can you get 8 hours of sleep but have very poor quality of sleep but have very poor quality of sleep but have very poor quality of sleep and be unimpaired the next day. sleep and be unimpaired the next day. sleep and be unimpaired the next day. I'm a big proponent of people getting I'm a big proponent of people getting I'm a big proponent of people getting uh some sunlight, ideally sunlight, but uh some sunlight, ideally sunlight, but uh some sunlight, ideally sunlight, but other forms of bright light into their other forms of bright light into their other forms of bright light into their eyes early in the day and when they want eyes early in the day and when they want eyes early in the day and when they want to be awake. Yep. to be awake. Yep. to be awake. Yep. Essentially during the phase of their Essentially during the phase of their Essentially during the phase of their 24-hour circadian cycle when temperature 24-hour circadian cycle when temperature 24-hour circadian cycle when temperature is rising and then starting to less is rising and then starting to less is rising and then starting to less light in their eyes light in their eyes light in their eyes as our temperature's going down in term as our temperature's going down in term as our temperature's going down in term of later in the day and in the evening. of later in the day and in the evening. of later in the day and in the evening. I think that's exactly what we recommend I think that's exactly what we recommend I think that's exactly what we recommend right now, which is try to get at least right now, which is try to get at least right now, which is try to get at least 30 to 40 minutes of exposure to some 30 to 40 minutes of exposure to some 30 to 40 minutes of exposure to some kind of natural daylight. There was some kind of natural daylight. There was some kind of natural daylight. There was some great work recently coming out in the great work recently coming out in the great work recently coming out in the occupational health domain where they occupational health domain where they occupational health domain where they moved workers from offices that were moved workers from offices that were moved workers from offices that were just facing walls and you know, didn't just facing walls and you know, didn't just facing walls and you know, didn't have any exposure to natural daylight have any exposure to natural daylight have any exposure to natural daylight and then they did a time period during and then they did a time period during and then they did a time period during that study where they actually were in that study where they actually were in that study where they actually were in front of a window and working and they front of a window and working and they front of a window and working and they measured their sleep. And their sleep measured their sleep. And their sleep measured their sleep. And their sleep time and their sleep efficiency time and their sleep efficiency time and their sleep efficiency increased quite dramatically. I think increased quite dramatically. I think increased quite dramatically. I think the increase in total sleep time was the increase in total sleep time was the increase in total sleep time was well over 30 minutes and the improvement well over 30 minutes and the improvement well over 30 minutes and the improvement in sleep efficiency was 5 to 10%. You in sleep efficiency was 5 to 10%. You in sleep efficiency was 5 to 10%. You know, and if you're batting an 80%, you know, and if you're batting an 80%, you know, and if you're batting an 80%, you know, sleep efficiency average, we're a know, sleep efficiency average, we're a know, sleep efficiency average, we're a bit concerned about that. But add 10% to bit concerned about that. But add 10% to bit concerned about that. But add 10% to that and now you're in, you know, a that and now you're in, you know, a that and now you're in, you know, a great echelon of healthy sleepers. These great echelon of healthy sleepers. These great echelon of healthy sleepers. These portals are the only way to portals are the only way to portals are the only way to convey to the rest of the brain and body convey to the rest of the brain and body convey to the rest of the brain and body about the time of day and wakefulness. I about the time of day and wakefulness. I about the time of day and wakefulness. I have a number of questions about have a number of questions about have a number of questions about caffeine. Does the timing in which we caffeine. Does the timing in which we caffeine. Does the timing in which we ingest caffeine ingest caffeine ingest caffeine play an important role in whether or not play an important role in whether or not play an important role in whether or not it works for us or against us? The dose it works for us or against us? The dose it works for us or against us? The dose and the timing makes the poison. and the timing makes the poison. and the timing makes the poison. Caffeine has a half-life and it's Caffeine has a half-life and it's Caffeine has a half-life and it's metabolized. The half-life is somewhere metabolized. The half-life is somewhere metabolized. The half-life is somewhere between 5 to 6 hours and the between 5 to 6 hours and the between 5 to 6 hours and the quarter-life therefore somewhere between quarter-life therefore somewhere between quarter-life therefore somewhere between 10 to 12 hours. It's variable. Different 10 to 12 hours. It's variable. Different 10 to 12 hours. It's variable. Different people have different durations of its people have different durations of its people have different durations of its action, but for the average adult 5 to 6 action, but for the average adult 5 to 6 action, but for the average adult 5 to 6 hours. So, let's say that, you know, hours. So, let's say that, you know, hours. So, let's say that, you know, I've been awake for 12 hours now and I've been awake for 12 hours now and I've been awake for 12 hours now and it's, you know, 8:00 p.m. and I'm it's, you know, 8:00 p.m. and I'm it's, you know, 8:00 p.m. and I'm feeling a bit tired, but I want to push feeling a bit tired, but I want to push feeling a bit tired, but I want to push through and I want to keep working for through and I want to keep working for through and I want to keep working for another couple of hours. So, I have a another couple of hours. So, I have a another couple of hours. So, I have a cup of coffee. All of a sudden, I was cup of coffee. All of a sudden, I was cup of coffee. All of a sudden, I was feeling tired, but I don't feel like feeling tired, but I don't feel like feeling tired, but I don't feel like I've been awake for 12 hours anymore. I've been awake for 12 hours anymore. I've been awake for 12 hours anymore. Then, after a few hours and the caffeine Then, after a few hours and the caffeine Then, after a few hours and the caffeine is starting to come out of my system, is starting to come out of my system, is starting to come out of my system, not only am I hit with the same levels not only am I hit with the same levels not only am I hit with the same levels of adenosine that I had before I'd had of adenosine that I had before I'd had of adenosine that I had before I'd had the cup of coffee several hours ago, the cup of coffee several hours ago, the cup of coffee several hours ago, it's that plus all of the adenosine it's that plus all of the adenosine it's that plus all of the adenosine that's been building up during the time that's been building up during the time that's been building up during the time that the caffeine has been in my system. that the caffeine has been in my system. that the caffeine has been in my system. It's sort of a an avalanche of It is a It's sort of a an avalanche of It is a It's sort of a an avalanche of It is a tsunami wave. tsunami wave. tsunami wave. Yeah. And I have a caffeine crash. Given Yeah. And I have a caffeine crash. Given Yeah. And I have a caffeine crash. Given somebody who typically gets into bed somebody who typically gets into bed somebody who typically gets into bed around 10 10:30 and falls asleep around 10 10:30 and falls asleep around 10 10:30 and falls asleep around uh 11 11:30, Yeah. uh 11 11:30, Yeah. uh 11 11:30, Yeah. when would you recommend they halt when would you recommend they halt when would you recommend they halt caffeine intake? And I These are not um caffeine intake? And I These are not um caffeine intake? And I These are not um strict prescriptions, but I think people strict prescriptions, but I think people strict prescriptions, but I think people do benefit from having some uh fairly do benefit from having some uh fairly do benefit from having some uh fairly clear guidelines of what might be might clear guidelines of what might be might clear guidelines of what might be might work for them. Would you say cut off work for them. Would you say cut off work for them. Would you say cut off caffeine by caffeine by caffeine by what time of the day? I would usually what time of the day? I would usually what time of the day? I would usually say take your typical bedtime and count say take your typical bedtime and count say take your typical bedtime and count back 10 hours or 8 hours of time. That's back 10 hours or 8 hours of time. That's back 10 hours or 8 hours of time. That's the time when you should really stop, the time when you should really stop, the time when you should really stop, you know, using caffeine is the you know, using caffeine is the you know, using caffeine is the suggestion. And the reason is because suggestion. And the reason is because suggestion. And the reason is because for those people who even just keep for those people who even just keep for those people who even just keep drinking up until, you know, the into drinking up until, you know, the into drinking up until, you know, the into the evening, the evening, the evening, you're right that they can fall asleep you're right that they can fall asleep you're right that they can fall asleep fine, maybe they stay asleep, but the fine, maybe they stay asleep, but the fine, maybe they stay asleep, but the depth of their deep sleep is not as deep depth of their deep sleep is not as deep depth of their deep sleep is not as deep anymore. And so, there are two consequences. The And so, there are two consequences. The And so, there are two consequences. The first is that for me and it can be up to first is that for me and it can be up to first is that for me and it can be up to by 30% and for me to drop your deep by 30% and for me to drop your deep by 30% and for me to drop your deep sleep by 30%, I'd have to age you by sleep by 30%, I'd have to age you by sleep by 30%, I'd have to age you by between 10 to 12 years between 10 to 12 years between 10 to 12 years or you can just do it every night to or you can just do it every night to or you can just do it every night to yourself with a couple of espressos. yourself with a couple of espressos. yourself with a couple of espressos. The second is that you then wake up the The second is that you then wake up the The second is that you then wake up the next morning and you think, "Well, I next morning and you think, "Well, I next morning and you think, "Well, I didn't have problems falling asleep and didn't have problems falling asleep and didn't have problems falling asleep and I didn't have problems staying asleep, I didn't have problems staying asleep, I didn't have problems staying asleep, but I don't feel particularly restored but I don't feel particularly restored but I don't feel particularly restored by my sleep." So, now I'm reaching for by my sleep." So, now I'm reaching for by my sleep." So, now I'm reaching for three or four cups of coffee the next three or four cups of coffee the next three or four cups of coffee the next morning rather than just two or three morning rather than just two or three morning rather than just two or three cups of coffee. And so goes this cups of coffee. And so goes this cups of coffee. And so goes this dependency cycle that you then need your dependency cycle that you then need your dependency cycle that you then need your uppers to wake you up in the morning and uppers to wake you up in the morning and uppers to wake you up in the morning and then sometimes people will use alcohol then sometimes people will use alcohol then sometimes people will use alcohol in the evening to bring them down in the evening to bring them down in the evening to bring them down because they're overly caffeinated and because they're overly caffeinated and because they're overly caffeinated and alcohol, and we can speak about that alcohol, and we can speak about that alcohol, and we can speak about that too, also has very deleterious impacts too, also has very deleterious impacts too, also has very deleterious impacts on your sleep as well. Caffeine and on your sleep as well. Caffeine and on your sleep as well. Caffeine and alcohol represent the uh they're kind of alcohol represent the uh they're kind of alcohol represent the uh they're kind of two opposite ends of the spectrum. What two opposite ends of the spectrum. What two opposite ends of the spectrum. What happens when somebody has a glass We happens when somebody has a glass We happens when somebody has a glass We always hear a glass or two of wine in always hear a glass or two of wine in always hear a glass or two of wine in the evening or a the evening or a the evening or a cocktail after dinner? How does that a cocktail after dinner? How does that a cocktail after dinner? How does that impact their sleep? So, alcohol, if impact their sleep? So, alcohol, if impact their sleep? So, alcohol, if we're thinking about classes of drugs, we're thinking about classes of drugs, we're thinking about classes of drugs, they're in a class of drugs that we call they're in a class of drugs that we call they're in a class of drugs that we call the sedatives. the sedatives. the sedatives. It's sedating your cortex. It's sedating your cortex. It's sedating your cortex. And sedation is not sleep. But when we And sedation is not sleep. But when we And sedation is not sleep. But when we have a couple of drinks in the evening, have a couple of drinks in the evening, have a couple of drinks in the evening, when we have a couple of nightcaps, we when we have a couple of nightcaps, we when we have a couple of nightcaps, we mistake sedation for sleep saying, mistake sedation for sleep saying, mistake sedation for sleep saying, "Well, I always when I have a like a "Well, I always when I have a like a "Well, I always when I have a like a couple of whiskeys or a couple of couple of whiskeys or a couple of couple of whiskeys or a couple of cocktails, it always helps me fall cocktails, it always helps me fall cocktails, it always helps me fall asleep faster." asleep faster." asleep faster." In truth, what's happening is that In truth, what's happening is that In truth, what's happening is that you're losing consciousness quicker, you're losing consciousness quicker, you're losing consciousness quicker, but you're not necessarily falling but you're not necessarily falling but you're not necessarily falling naturalistically asleep any quicker. So, naturalistically asleep any quicker. So, naturalistically asleep any quicker. So, that's one of the first sort of things that's one of the first sort of things that's one of the first sort of things just to keep in mind. The second thing just to keep in mind. The second thing just to keep in mind. The second thing with alcohol is that it fragments your with alcohol is that it fragments your with alcohol is that it fragments your sleep. And we spoke about the quality of sleep. And we spoke about the quality of sleep. And we spoke about the quality of your sleep being just as important as your sleep being just as important as your sleep being just as important as the quantity. the quantity. the quantity. And alcohol through a variety of And alcohol through a variety of And alcohol through a variety of mechanisms, some of which are activation mechanisms, some of which are activation mechanisms, some of which are activation of that autonomic nervous system, that of that autonomic nervous system, that of that autonomic nervous system, that fight or flight branch of the nervous fight or flight branch of the nervous fight or flight branch of the nervous system, alcohol will actually have you waking up alcohol will actually have you waking up alcohol will actually have you waking up many more times throughout the night. many more times throughout the night. many more times throughout the night. So, your sleep is far less continuous. So, your sleep is far less continuous. So, your sleep is far less continuous. Now, some of those awakenings will be of Now, some of those awakenings will be of Now, some of those awakenings will be of conscious recollection the next day. conscious recollection the next day. conscious recollection the next day. You'll just remember waking up. Many of You'll just remember waking up. Many of You'll just remember waking up. Many of them won't be. them won't be. them won't be. And so, but yet your sleep will be And so, but yet your sleep will be And so, but yet your sleep will be littered with these sort of punctured littered with these sort of punctured littered with these sort of punctured awakenings throughout the night. And awakenings throughout the night. And awakenings throughout the night. And again, when you wake up the next again, when you wake up the next again, when you wake up the next morning, you don't feel restored by your morning, you don't feel restored by your morning, you don't feel restored by your sleep. The third part of alcohol in sleep. The third part of alcohol in sleep. The third part of alcohol in terms of an equation is that it's quite terms of an equation is that it's quite terms of an equation is that it's quite potent at blocking your REM sleep, your potent at blocking your REM sleep, your potent at blocking your REM sleep, your rapid eye movement sleep. And REM sleep rapid eye movement sleep. And REM sleep rapid eye movement sleep. And REM sleep is critical for a variety of cognitive is critical for a variety of cognitive is critical for a variety of cognitive functions, um some aspects of learning functions, um some aspects of learning functions, um some aspects of learning and memory. It seems to be critical for and memory. It seems to be critical for and memory. It seems to be critical for aspects of emotional and mental health. aspects of emotional and mental health. aspects of emotional and mental health. It's overnight therapy. What we've It's overnight therapy. What we've It's overnight therapy. What we've discovered over the past 20 years here discovered over the past 20 years here discovered over the past 20 years here at the sleep center is that at the sleep center is that at the sleep center is that there is no major psychiatric disorder there is no major psychiatric disorder there is no major psychiatric disorder that we can find that we can find that we can find in which sleep is normal. in which sleep is normal. in which sleep is normal. And so I think that firstly told us And so I think that firstly told us And so I think that firstly told us there is a very intimate association there is a very intimate association there is a very intimate association between your emotional mental health and between your emotional mental health and between your emotional mental health and your sleep health. I don't want to be your sleep health. I don't want to be your sleep health. I don't want to be puritanical here, you know, I'm just a puritanical here, you know, I'm just a puritanical here, you know, I'm just a scientist and I'm not here to tell scientist and I'm not here to tell scientist and I'm not here to tell anyone how to live. All I'm trying to do anyone how to live. All I'm trying to do anyone how to live. All I'm trying to do is empower people with some of the is empower people with some of the is empower people with some of the scientific literature regarding sleep scientific literature regarding sleep scientific literature regarding sleep and then you can make whatever informed and then you can make whatever informed and then you can make whatever informed choices that you want. My job is not to choices that you want. My job is not to choices that you want. My job is not to tell people um that prescription for to tell people um that prescription for to tell people um that prescription for life. It's just to offer some scientific life. It's just to offer some scientific life. It's just to offer some scientific information. I would like to ask about information. I would like to ask about information. I would like to ask about marijuana. In many places, not all, marijuana. In many places, not all, marijuana. In many places, not all, medical marijuana is approved or is medical marijuana is approved or is medical marijuana is approved or is legal. Does marijuana disrupt sleep? THC legal. Does marijuana disrupt sleep? THC legal. Does marijuana disrupt sleep? THC can s- seems to speed up the time with which s- seems to speed up the time with which s- seems to speed up the time with which you fall asleep. But again, if you look you fall asleep. But again, if you look you fall asleep. But again, if you look at the electrical brain wave at the electrical brain wave at the electrical brain wave signature of your falling asleep with signature of your falling asleep with signature of your falling asleep with and without that THC, it's not going to and without that THC, it's not going to and without that THC, it's not going to be an ideal fit. So you could argue it's be an ideal fit. So you could argue it's be an ideal fit. So you could argue it's non-natural. It too, but through non-natural. It too, but through non-natural. It too, but through different mechanisms, seems to block REM different mechanisms, seems to block REM different mechanisms, seems to block REM sleep. And that's why a lot of people sleep. And that's why a lot of people sleep. And that's why a lot of people when they're using will tell me, "Look, when they're using will tell me, "Look, when they're using will tell me, "Look, you know, I definitely I was dreaming you know, I definitely I was dreaming you know, I definitely I was dreaming I don't remember, you know, many of my I don't remember, you know, many of my I don't remember, you know, many of my dreams." And then when they stop using dreams." And then when they stop using dreams." And then when they stop using uh THC, they'll say, "I was having, you uh THC, they'll say, "I was having, you uh THC, they'll say, "I was having, you know, just crazy, crazy dreams." And the know, just crazy, crazy dreams." And the know, just crazy, crazy dreams." And the reason is because there is a rebound reason is because there is a rebound reason is because there is a rebound mechanism. REM sleep is very clever and mechanism. REM sleep is very clever and mechanism. REM sleep is very clever and alcohol is the same way in this sense. alcohol is the same way in this sense. alcohol is the same way in this sense. It's the same homeostatic mechanism. It's the same homeostatic mechanism. It's the same homeostatic mechanism. Some people will tell me, "Look, if I Some people will tell me, "Look, if I Some people will tell me, "Look, if I have a bit of a wild Friday night with have a bit of a wild Friday night with have a bit of a wild Friday night with some alcohol, you know, maybe I'll sleep some alcohol, you know, maybe I'll sleep some alcohol, you know, maybe I'll sleep late into the next morning, and I'll late into the next morning, and I'll late into the next morning, and I'll just have these really intense dreams. just have these really intense dreams. just have these really intense dreams. So, and I thought I wasn't having any So, and I thought I wasn't having any So, and I thought I wasn't having any REM sleep." Well, the way it works is REM sleep." Well, the way it works is REM sleep." Well, the way it works is that it's during in the middle of the that it's during in the middle of the that it's during in the middle of the night, really, um when alcohol blocks night, really, um when alcohol blocks night, really, um when alcohol blocks your REM sleep. your REM sleep. your REM sleep. And your brain is smart. It understands And your brain is smart. It understands And your brain is smart. It understands how much REM sleep you should have had, how much REM sleep you should have had, how much REM sleep you should have had, how much REM sleep you have not because how much REM sleep you have not because how much REM sleep you have not because the alcohol's been in the system, and the alcohol's been in the system, and the alcohol's been in the system, and finally, in those early morning hours, finally, in those early morning hours, finally, in those early morning hours, when you're getting through to sort of, when you're getting through to sort of, when you're getting through to sort of, you know, 6, 7, 8 a.m., all of the you know, 6, 7, 8 a.m., all of the you know, 6, 7, 8 a.m., all of the sudden, your brain not only goes back to sudden, your brain not only goes back to sudden, your brain not only goes back to having the same amount of REM it would having the same amount of REM it would having the same amount of REM it would have had, it does that, plus it tries to have had, it does that, plus it tries to have had, it does that, plus it tries to get back all of the REM sleep that it's get back all of the REM sleep that it's get back all of the REM sleep that it's lost. Does it get back all of the REM lost. Does it get back all of the REM lost. Does it get back all of the REM sleep? No, it doesn't. It never gets sleep? No, it doesn't. It never gets sleep? No, it doesn't. It never gets back all of the REM sleep, but it tries. back all of the REM sleep, but it tries. back all of the REM sleep, but it tries. And so, you have these really intense And so, you have these really intense And so, you have these really intense periods of REM sleep, hence, you have periods of REM sleep, hence, you have periods of REM sleep, hence, you have really intense, bizarre dreams. And really intense, bizarre dreams. And really intense, bizarre dreams. And that's what happens also with THC. You that's what happens also with THC. You that's what happens also with THC. You build up this pressure for REM sleep, build up this pressure for REM sleep, build up this pressure for REM sleep, this debt for REM sleep. Will you ever this debt for REM sleep. Will you ever this debt for REM sleep. Will you ever pay it back? pay it back? pay it back? It doesn't seem as though you get back It doesn't seem as though you get back It doesn't seem as though you get back everything that you lost, but will you everything that you lost, but will you everything that you lost, but will you get back some of it? Yes, the brain will get back some of it? Yes, the brain will get back some of it? Yes, the brain will start to devour more because it's been start to devour more because it's been start to devour more because it's been starved of REM sleep for so long. So, starved of REM sleep for so long. So, starved of REM sleep for so long. So, I'd love to chat for a moment about the I'd love to chat for a moment about the I'd love to chat for a moment about the kind of grand the original, I should kind of grand the original, I should kind of grand the original, I should say, that not the granddaddy, but the OG say, that not the granddaddy, but the OG say, that not the granddaddy, but the OG of sleep supplementation, which is of sleep supplementation, which is of sleep supplementation, which is melatonin. Yeah. I was always taught, and I'm Yeah. I was always taught, and I'm Yeah. I was always taught, and I'm assuming it's still true, that the only assuming it's still true, that the only assuming it's still true, that the only source of melatonin in the brain and source of melatonin in the brain and source of melatonin in the brain and body is the pineal gland. Is that still body is the pineal gland. Is that still body is the pineal gland. Is that still true? It Yeah, it seems to be from best true? It Yeah, it seems to be from best true? It Yeah, it seems to be from best that we can tell. that we can tell. that we can tell. I have to imagine we have melatonin I have to imagine we have melatonin I have to imagine we have melatonin receptors in the brain and body. receptors in the brain and body. receptors in the brain and body. It's correct. Essentially, your brain It's correct. Essentially, your brain It's correct. Essentially, your brain has a central master 24-hour clock has a central master 24-hour clock has a central master 24-hour clock called the suprachiasmatic nucleus that called the suprachiasmatic nucleus that called the suprachiasmatic nucleus that keeps internal time. Now, it knows keeps internal time. Now, it knows keeps internal time. Now, it knows 24-hour time, 24-hour time, 24-hour time, but it needs to tell the rest of the but it needs to tell the rest of the but it needs to tell the rest of the brain and the body the 24-hour time as brain and the body the 24-hour time as brain and the body the 24-hour time as well. And one of the ways that it does well. And one of the ways that it does well. And one of the ways that it does this is by communicating a chemical this is by communicating a chemical this is by communicating a chemical signal of 24-hour nurse signal of 24-hour nurse signal of 24-hour nurse of light and day using this hormone of light and day using this hormone of light and day using this hormone melatonin. And when it is at low levels melatonin. And when it is at low levels melatonin. And when it is at low levels or it's non-existent, it's communicating or it's non-existent, it's communicating or it's non-existent, it's communicating the message it's daytime. And for us, the message it's daytime. And for us, the message it's daytime. And for us, diurnal species, it says it's time to be diurnal species, it says it's time to be diurnal species, it says it's time to be awake. Yet, at nighttime when dusk approaches Yet, at nighttime when dusk approaches Yet, at nighttime when dusk approaches and the brake comes off melatonin and we and the brake comes off melatonin and we and the brake comes off melatonin and we start to release it, then it signals to start to release it, then it signals to start to release it, then it signals to the rest of the brain and the body, the rest of the brain and the body, the rest of the brain and the body, "Look, it's dusk and it's nighttime and "Look, it's dusk and it's nighttime and "Look, it's dusk and it's nighttime and for us, diurnal species, it's time to for us, diurnal species, it's time to for us, diurnal species, it's time to think about sleep." So, melatonin think about sleep." So, melatonin think about sleep." So, melatonin essentially tells the brain and the body essentially tells the brain and the body essentially tells the brain and the body when it's day and when it's night and when it's day and when it's night and when it's day and when it's night and with that, when it's time to sleep, when with that, when it's time to sleep, when with that, when it's time to sleep, when it's time to wake. But it doesn't really it's time to wake. But it doesn't really it's time to wake. But it doesn't really help with the generation of sleep itself help with the generation of sleep itself help with the generation of sleep itself and this is why we'll come on to what and this is why we'll come on to what and this is why we'll come on to what those studies of supplementation have those studies of supplementation have those studies of supplementation have taught us. So, it tells the rest of my taught us. So, it tells the rest of my taught us. So, it tells the rest of my brain and body it's time to go to sleep. brain and body it's time to go to sleep. brain and body it's time to go to sleep. It perhaps even aids with the transition It perhaps even aids with the transition It perhaps even aids with the transition to sleep, but it's not going to, for to sleep, but it's not going to, for to sleep, but it's not going to, for instance, ensure the overall structure instance, ensure the overall structure instance, ensure the overall structure of sleep or of sleep or of sleep or it's not the conductor that's guiding it's not the conductor that's guiding it's not the conductor that's guiding the sleep orchestra, so to speak, the sleep orchestra, so to speak, the sleep orchestra, so to speak, throughout the entire night. You know, throughout the entire night. You know, throughout the entire night. You know, melatonin is like the starting official melatonin is like the starting official melatonin is like the starting official at the 100-meter race in the Olympics. at the 100-meter race in the Olympics. at the 100-meter race in the Olympics. That's a better analogy. Call calls all That's a better analogy. Call calls all That's a better analogy. Call calls all of the sleep races to the line and of the sleep races to the line and of the sleep races to the line and it begins the great sleep race, but it begins the great sleep race, but it begins the great sleep race, but it doesn't participate in the race itself. doesn't participate in the race itself. doesn't participate in the race itself. That's a whole different set of brain That's a whole different set of brain That's a whole different set of brain chemicals and brain and brain regions. chemicals and brain and brain regions. chemicals and brain and brain regions. Which then brings us on to perhaps the Which then brings us on to perhaps the Which then brings us on to perhaps the question of supplementation, question of supplementation, question of supplementation, which is which is which is it helpful for my sleep? Will I sleep is it helpful for my sleep? Will I sleep is it helpful for my sleep? Will I sleep longer? Will I sleep better? Sadly, the longer? Will I sleep better? Sadly, the longer? Will I sleep better? Sadly, the evidence in healthy adults who are not evidence in healthy adults who are not evidence in healthy adults who are not older age suggests that melatonin is not older age suggests that melatonin is not older age suggests that melatonin is not really particularly helpful as a sleep really particularly helpful as a sleep really particularly helpful as a sleep aid. I think there's a recent aid. I think there's a recent aid. I think there's a recent meta-analysis. And what that meta-analysis. And what that meta-analysis. And what that meta-analysis told us is that melatonin meta-analysis told us is that melatonin meta-analysis told us is that melatonin will only increase total amount of sleep will only increase total amount of sleep will only increase total amount of sleep by 3.9 minutes on average. Minutes? by 3.9 minutes on average. Minutes? by 3.9 minutes on average. Minutes? Minutes. And it will only increase your sleep And it will only increase your sleep And it will only increase your sleep efficiency by 2.2% efficiency by 2.2% efficiency by 2.2% So, it the source is not strong. The So, it the source is not strong. The So, it the source is not strong. The force is not strong in this one force is not strong in this one force is not strong in this one when it comes to when it comes to when it comes to a tool that in healthy people a tool that in healthy people a tool that in healthy people who are not of older age, who are not of older age, who are not of older age, it doesn't seem to be especially it doesn't seem to be especially it doesn't seem to be especially beneficial. Now, you know, results can beneficial. Now, you know, results can beneficial. Now, you know, results can vary. Everyone is different, of course. vary. Everyone is different, of course. vary. Everyone is different, of course. So, we're talking about the average, the So, we're talking about the average, the So, we're talking about the average, the so-called average human adult here. so-called average human adult here. so-called average human adult here. Well, melatonin, um, in defense of what Well, melatonin, um, in defense of what Well, melatonin, um, in defense of what you're saying, and also I should mention you're saying, and also I should mention you're saying, and also I should mention I have a colleague at Stanford, uh, I have a colleague at Stanford, uh, I have a colleague at Stanford, uh, Jamie Zeitzer, who I know Jamie Zeitzer, who I know Jamie Zeitzer, who I know Chuck Zeitzer's lab at Harvard where he Chuck Zeitzer's lab at Harvard where he Chuck Zeitzer's lab at Harvard where he also trained, a terrific sleep also trained, a terrific sleep also trained, a terrific sleep researcher, and I asked him about researcher, and I asked him about researcher, and I asked him about melatonin, and he essentially said the melatonin, and he essentially said the melatonin, and he essentially said the same thing that you just said, which is same thing that you just said, which is same thing that you just said, which is very little, if any, evidence that it very little, if any, evidence that it very little, if any, evidence that it can improve sleep, and yet it's probably can improve sleep, and yet it's probably can improve sleep, and yet it's probably the most, um, commonly consumed the most, um, commonly consumed the most, um, commonly consumed so-called sleep aid. so-called sleep aid. so-called sleep aid. Hundreds of millions of dollars Hundreds of millions of dollars Hundreds of millions of dollars industry. The only population where we industry. The only population where we industry. The only population where we typically see some benefit, and it often typically see some benefit, and it often typically see some benefit, and it often is prescribed, is in older adults. is prescribed, is in older adults. is prescribed, is in older adults. Because as we get older you can Because as we get older you can Because as we get older you can typically have what's called calcification of the pineal called calcification of the pineal called calcification of the pineal gland, which means that gland gland, which means that gland gland, which means that gland that's releasing melatonin doesn't work that's releasing melatonin doesn't work that's releasing melatonin doesn't work as well anymore. That's why older adults as well anymore. That's why older adults as well anymore. That's why older adults can have problems falling asleep or can have problems falling asleep or can have problems falling asleep or staying asleep. It's not the only staying asleep. It's not the only staying asleep. It's not the only reason, by sure any stretch of the reason, by sure any stretch of the reason, by sure any stretch of the imagination, but it's one of the imagination, but it's one of the imagination, but it's one of the reasons, and it's why melatonin reasons, and it's why melatonin reasons, and it's why melatonin supplementation in those cohorts, older supplementation in those cohorts, older supplementation in those cohorts, older adults, especially older adults with adults, especially older adults with adults, especially older adults with insomnia, people have thought about that insomnia, people have thought about that insomnia, people have thought about that as maybe an appropriate use case. Do we as maybe an appropriate use case. Do we as maybe an appropriate use case. Do we know how much melatonin is released into know how much melatonin is released into know how much melatonin is released into the bloodstream per night? Um, And can the bloodstream per night? Um, And can the bloodstream per night? Um, And can we use that as a kind of a rule of thumb we use that as a kind of a rule of thumb we use that as a kind of a rule of thumb by which to compare the typical amount by which to compare the typical amount by which to compare the typical amount that someone would supplement? I mean, that someone would supplement? I mean, that someone would supplement? I mean, typically the supplements for melatonin typically the supplements for melatonin typically the supplements for melatonin that I see that I see that I see in the pharmacy and elsewhere and online in the pharmacy and elsewhere and online in the pharmacy and elsewhere and online range anywhere from 1 mg to 12 or even range anywhere from 1 mg to 12 or even range anywhere from 1 mg to 12 or even 20 mg. 20 mg. 20 mg. Yep. My guess is that a normal night's My guess is that a normal night's My guess is that a normal night's release of melatonin typical for release of melatonin typical for release of melatonin typical for somebody in their 20s, 30s, 40s would be somebody in their 20s, 30s, 40s would be somebody in their 20s, 30s, 40s would be far lower than that. Am I correct or far lower than that. Am I correct or far lower than that. Am I correct or wrong? Yeah, it's a many magnitudes wrong? Yeah, it's a many magnitudes wrong? Yeah, it's a many magnitudes lower and this is one of the problems is lower and this is one of the problems is lower and this is one of the problems is that I see that, too. I see, you know, that I see that, too. I see, you know, that I see that, too. I see, you know, typical doses are, you know, 5 mg or 10 typical doses are, you know, 5 mg or 10 typical doses are, you know, 5 mg or 10 mg and of course, you know, if you're a mg and of course, you know, if you're a mg and of course, you know, if you're a supplement company, you know, putting 10 supplement company, you know, putting 10 supplement company, you know, putting 10 mg versus 5 mg, if that's what you're mg versus 5 mg, if that's what you're mg versus 5 mg, if that's what you're actually doing, you know, it's kind of actually doing, you know, it's kind of actually doing, you know, it's kind of like the super gulp size. You know, like the super gulp size. You know, like the super gulp size. You know, nobody wants to lower price. They just nobody wants to lower price. They just nobody wants to lower price. They just want you to, you know, we'll just give want you to, you know, we'll just give want you to, you know, we'll just give you more for the same price and that's you more for the same price and that's you more for the same price and that's how we'll compete. So, it's been this how we'll compete. So, it's been this how we'll compete. So, it's been this escalating arms race of melatonin escalating arms race of melatonin escalating arms race of melatonin concentration. And it really does not concentration. And it really does not concentration. And it really does not look meaningful for look meaningful for look meaningful for you know, for sleeping in any way. What you know, for sleeping in any way. What you know, for sleeping in any way. What we've actually found is that the optimal we've actually found is that the optimal we've actually found is that the optimal doses for where you do get sleep doses for where you do get sleep doses for where you do get sleep benefits in the populations that we've benefits in the populations that we've benefits in the populations that we've looked at are somewhere between 0.1 and looked at are somewhere between 0.1 and looked at are somewhere between 0.1 and 0.3 mg of melatonin. In other words, the mg of melatonin. In other words, the mg of melatonin. In other words, the typical doses are usually 10 times, 20 typical doses are usually 10 times, 20 typical doses are usually 10 times, 20 times, maybe more than what your body times, maybe more than what your body times, maybe more than what your body would naturally expect. And this is what would naturally expect. And this is what would naturally expect. And this is what we call a supra physiological dose. In we call a supra physiological dose. In we call a supra physiological dose. In other words, it's far above what is other words, it's far above what is other words, it's far above what is physiologically normal. I like to think physiologically normal. I like to think physiologically normal. I like to think in terms of manipulating any aspect in terms of manipulating any aspect in terms of manipulating any aspect of our biology that behavioral tools of our biology that behavioral tools of our biology that behavioral tools always are the first line of entry. always are the first line of entry. always are the first line of entry. Yeah. Then nutrition. Everyone has to Yeah. Then nutrition. Everyone has to Yeah. Then nutrition. Everyone has to eat sooner or later, if you're fasting. eat sooner or later, if you're fasting. eat sooner or later, if you're fasting. Then perhaps supplementation, then Then perhaps supplementation, then Then perhaps supplementation, then prescription drugs, and then perhaps prescription drugs, and then perhaps prescription drugs, and then perhaps brain machine interface devices that you brain machine interface devices that you brain machine interface devices that you use to induce something. And those could use to induce something. And those could use to induce something. And those could be done in combination, but what be done in combination, but what be done in combination, but what concerns me is when I hear people uh concerns me is when I hear people uh concerns me is when I hear people uh say, "Well, what should I take?" without say, "Well, what should I take?" without say, "Well, what should I take?" without thinking about their behavior, their thinking about their behavior, their thinking about their behavior, their light viewing behavior, et cetera. But, light viewing behavior, et cetera. But, light viewing behavior, et cetera. But, of course, these things work in of course, these things work in of course, these things work in combination. When it comes to sleep, combination. When it comes to sleep, combination. When it comes to sleep, there are many low-hanging fruits that there are many low-hanging fruits that there are many low-hanging fruits that don't necessarily require you to, you don't necessarily require you to, you don't necessarily require you to, you know, put know, put know, put sort of exogenous molecules, in other sort of exogenous molecules, in other sort of exogenous molecules, in other words, things like supplements into your words, things like supplements into your words, things like supplements into your body or, you know, use different types body or, you know, use different types body or, you know, use different types of drugs to help you get there. Now, of drugs to help you get there. Now, of drugs to help you get there. Now, when it comes to prescription sleep when it comes to prescription sleep when it comes to prescription sleep aids, I think I've been, again, a little bit I think I've been, again, a little bit I think I've been, again, a little bit too forthright. too forthright. too forthright. We know in clinical practice that there We know in clinical practice that there We know in clinical practice that there may be a time and a place for things may be a time and a place for things may be a time and a place for things like sleeping pills. They are a like sleeping pills. They are a like sleeping pills. They are a short-term solution to certain forms of short-term solution to certain forms of short-term solution to certain forms of insomnia, but they are not recommended insomnia, but they are not recommended insomnia, but they are not recommended for the long term. And we also know that for the long term. And we also know that for the long term. And we also know that there are lots of other ways that you there are lots of other ways that you there are lots of other ways that you can get a sleep um can get a sleep um can get a sleep um help, or you can get a sleep curative help, or you can get a sleep curative help, or you can get a sleep curative profile from things like cognitive profile from things like cognitive profile from things like cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, which behavioral therapy for insomnia, which behavioral therapy for insomnia, which is a non-drug approach, psychological is a non-drug approach, psychological is a non-drug approach, psychological effective from what I understand. effective from what I understand. effective from what I understand. Very just as effective as sleeping Very just as effective as sleeping Very just as effective as sleeping pills, great data, more effective in the pills, great data, more effective in the pills, great data, more effective in the long term. There's a recent study long term. There's a recent study long term. There's a recent study published that after working with that published that after working with that published that after working with that therapist, some of the benefits lasted therapist, some of the benefits lasted therapist, some of the benefits lasted almost a decade, you know. Now, if you almost a decade, you know. Now, if you almost a decade, you know. Now, if you stop sleeping pills, usually you have stop sleeping pills, usually you have stop sleeping pills, usually you have rebound insomnia, where your sleep goes rebound insomnia, where your sleep goes rebound insomnia, where your sleep goes back to being just as bad if not worse. back to being just as bad if not worse. back to being just as bad if not worse. And I think the same is true when we And I think the same is true when we And I think the same is true when we think about supplementation. There are think about supplementation. There are think about supplementation. There are so many things that are easy to so many things that are easy to so many things that are easy to implement when it comes to sleep that implement when it comes to sleep that implement when it comes to sleep that don't require venturing out into those don't require venturing out into those don't require venturing out into those waters. And again, waters. And again, waters. And again, we're not here to tell anyone about we're not here to tell anyone about we're not here to tell anyone about whether they should venture or not. whether they should venture or not. whether they should venture or not. That's completely your choice. All I'm That's completely your choice. All I'm That's completely your choice. All I'm saying is that if you want to think saying is that if you want to think saying is that if you want to think about optimizing your sleep, there are a about optimizing your sleep, there are a about optimizing your sleep, there are a number of ways that you can do it that number of ways that you can do it that number of ways that you can do it that don't necessarily require you to swallow don't necessarily require you to swallow don't necessarily require you to swallow anything cool or inject anything cool or anything cool or inject anything cool or anything cool or inject anything cool or you know, smoke anything cool. Right. you know, smoke anything cool. Right. you know, smoke anything cool. Right. And for which the margins of safety are And for which the margins of safety are And for which the margins of safety are quite wide. Let's talk about naps. quite wide. Let's talk about naps. quite wide. Let's talk about naps. I love naps. I come from a long history I love naps. I come from a long history I love naps. I come from a long history of nappers. What are the data on naps? of nappers. What are the data on naps? of nappers. What are the data on naps? And what are your thoughts about keeping And what are your thoughts about keeping And what are your thoughts about keeping naps short, meaning 20 to 30 minutes naps short, meaning 20 to 30 minutes naps short, meaning 20 to 30 minutes versus getting out past 90 minutes, 2 versus getting out past 90 minutes, 2 versus getting out past 90 minutes, 2 hours? Yay, nay, or meh? Naps can have hours? Yay, nay, or meh? Naps can have hours? Yay, nay, or meh? Naps can have some really great benefits. We found some really great benefits. We found some really great benefits. We found benefits for cardiovascular health, benefits for cardiovascular health, benefits for cardiovascular health, blood pressure for example. We found blood pressure for example. We found blood pressure for example. We found benefits for levels of cortisol. We benefits for levels of cortisol. We benefits for levels of cortisol. We found benefits for learning and memory found benefits for learning and memory found benefits for learning and memory and also emotional regulation. How long and also emotional regulation. How long and also emotional regulation. How long are the naps typically in those studies? are the naps typically in those studies? are the naps typically in those studies? Anywhere between 20 minutes to 90 Anywhere between 20 minutes to 90 Anywhere between 20 minutes to 90 minutes. Sometimes we like to use a minutes. Sometimes we like to use a minutes. Sometimes we like to use a 90-minute window so that the participant 90-minute window so that the participant 90-minute window so that the participant can have a full cycle of sleep and can have a full cycle of sleep and can have a full cycle of sleep and therefore they get both non-REM and REM therefore they get both non-REM and REM therefore they get both non-REM and REM sleep within that time period. And then sleep within that time period. And then sleep within that time period. And then we correlate how much benefit did you we correlate how much benefit did you we correlate how much benefit did you get from the nap and how much of that get from the nap and how much of that get from the nap and how much of that benefit was explained by what REM sleep benefit was explained by what REM sleep benefit was explained by what REM sleep you got, what deep sleep you got, what you got, what deep sleep you got, what you got, what deep sleep you got, what light sleep you got. What we've also light sleep you got. What we've also light sleep you got. What we've also found is that naps of as little as 17 found is that naps of as little as 17 found is that naps of as little as 17 minutes can have some quite potent minutes can have some quite potent minutes can have some quite potent effects on for example learning. effects on for example learning. effects on for example learning. None of this is novel. NASA pioneered None of this is novel. NASA pioneered None of this is novel. NASA pioneered this back in the 1990s. this back in the 1990s. this back in the 1990s. And during the missions they were And during the missions they were And during the missions they were experimenting with naps for their experimenting with naps for their experimenting with naps for their astronauts. And what they found was that astronauts. And what they found was that astronauts. And what they found was that naps of little as 26 minutes improved um naps of little as 26 minutes improved um naps of little as 26 minutes improved um uh mission performance by 34% uh mission performance by 34% uh mission performance by 34% and improved daytime alertness by 50%. and improved daytime alertness by 50%. and improved daytime alertness by 50%. And it birthed what was then called the And it birthed what was then called the And it birthed what was then called the NASA nap culture throughout all NASA nap culture throughout all NASA nap culture throughout all terrestrial NASA staff during that time terrestrial NASA staff during that time terrestrial NASA staff during that time period. So it's long been known that period. So it's long been known that period. So it's long been known that naps can have a benefit. Naps however naps can have a benefit. Naps however naps can have a benefit. Naps however can have a double-edged sword. There is can have a double-edged sword. There is can have a double-edged sword. There is a dark side to naps. When you nap, you a dark side to naps. When you nap, you a dark side to naps. When you nap, you are essentially opening the valve on the are essentially opening the valve on the are essentially opening the valve on the pressure cooker of sleep pressure, pressure cooker of sleep pressure, pressure cooker of sleep pressure, and some of that sleepiness is lost by and some of that sleepiness is lost by and some of that sleepiness is lost by way of the nap. Some people, however, if way of the nap. Some people, however, if way of the nap. Some people, however, if they are struggling with sleep at night they are struggling with sleep at night they are struggling with sleep at night and they nap during the day, it makes and they nap during the day, it makes and they nap during the day, it makes their sleep problems even worse. So, for their sleep problems even worse. So, for their sleep problems even worse. So, for people with insomnia, we typically people with insomnia, we typically people with insomnia, we typically advise against napping. advise against napping. advise against napping. And the advice is if you can nap And the advice is if you can nap And the advice is if you can nap regularly and you don't struggle with regularly and you don't struggle with regularly and you don't struggle with sleep at night, then naps are just fine. sleep at night, then naps are just fine. sleep at night, then naps are just fine. But if you do struggle with sleep, stay But if you do struggle with sleep, stay But if you do struggle with sleep, stay away from naps. If you are going to nap, away from naps. If you are going to nap, away from naps. If you are going to nap, try to limit your naps. Try to cut them try to limit your naps. Try to cut them try to limit your naps. Try to cut them off a bit like sort of caffeine, maybe, off a bit like sort of caffeine, maybe, off a bit like sort of caffeine, maybe, you know, 8 to sort of 12 hours, maybe you know, 8 to sort of 12 hours, maybe you know, 8 to sort of 12 hours, maybe not that, you know, far off, maybe sort not that, you know, far off, maybe sort not that, you know, far off, maybe sort of 7 to 6 hours is a good rule of thumb. of 7 to 6 hours is a good rule of thumb. of 7 to 6 hours is a good rule of thumb. Try not to nap essentially late in the Try not to nap essentially late in the Try not to nap essentially late in the afternoon. And if you do take a nap afternoon. And if you do take a nap afternoon. And if you do take a nap and you want to maintain your You don't and you want to maintain your You don't and you want to maintain your You don't want to have that grogginess hangover want to have that grogginess hangover want to have that grogginess hangover that can happen after a full night of that can happen after a full night of that can happen after a full night of sleep for the first hour, try to limit sleep for the first hour, try to limit sleep for the first hour, try to limit it to about 20 25 minutes. And that way it to about 20 25 minutes. And that way it to about 20 25 minutes. And that way you don't go down into the very deepest you don't go down into the very deepest you don't go down into the very deepest stages of sleep, which I If I wrench you stages of sleep, which I If I wrench you stages of sleep, which I If I wrench you out of with an alarm, you almost feel out of with an alarm, you almost feel out of with an alarm, you almost feel worse. No one should feel guilty about worse. No one should feel guilty about worse. No one should feel guilty about getting the sleep that they need. And I getting the sleep that they need. And I getting the sleep that they need. And I think that's been one of the big think that's been one of the big think that's been one of the big problems in society. Society has problems in society. Society has problems in society. Society has stigmatized sleep with these labels of stigmatized sleep with these labels of stigmatized sleep with these labels of being slothful or lazy. And we're almost being slothful or lazy. And we're almost being slothful or lazy. And we're almost embarrassed, you know, to tell embarrassed, you know, to tell embarrassed, you know, to tell colleagues that we take a nap. I colleagues that we take a nap. I colleagues that we take a nap. I think sleep is a right of human beings. think sleep is a right of human beings. think sleep is a right of human beings. And I therefore think that sleep is a And I therefore think that sleep is a And I therefore think that sleep is a civil right of all human beings. And no civil right of all human beings. And no civil right of all human beings. And no one should make you feel unproud of one should make you feel unproud of one should make you feel unproud of getting the sleep that you need. Are getting the sleep that you need. Are getting the sleep that you need. Are there any unconventional sleep tips, the there any unconventional sleep tips, the there any unconventional sleep tips, the what if kind of things that Yeah, what if kind of things that Yeah, what if kind of things that Yeah, what if it turns out that And I here I just I it turns out that And I here I just I it turns out that And I here I just I I've got a blank there for you to fill I've got a blank there for you to fill I've got a blank there for you to fill in. The first one which is in. The first one which is in. The first one which is unconventional along the lines of naps, unconventional along the lines of naps, unconventional along the lines of naps, if you've had a bad night of sleep, do if you've had a bad night of sleep, do if you've had a bad night of sleep, do nothing. What I mean by that is don't wake up any What I mean by that is don't wake up any What I mean by that is don't wake up any later, don't sleep in the following day later, don't sleep in the following day later, don't sleep in the following day to try and make up for it. Don't nap to try and make up for it. Don't nap to try and make up for it. Don't nap during the day. during the day. during the day. Don't consume extra caffeine to wake you Don't consume extra caffeine to wake you Don't consume extra caffeine to wake you up to try to get you through the day and up to try to get you through the day and up to try to get you through the day and don't go to bed any earlier to think don't go to bed any earlier to think don't go to bed any earlier to think that you're going to compensate. If you that you're going to compensate. If you that you're going to compensate. If you wake up later, you're not going to be wake up later, you're not going to be wake up later, you're not going to be sleepy until later the evening. So, sleepy until later the evening. So, sleepy until later the evening. So, you're going to go to bed at your normal you're going to go to bed at your normal you're going to go to bed at your normal time and you won't be sleeping. You'll time and you won't be sleeping. You'll time and you won't be sleeping. You'll think, "Well, I just came off a bad think, "Well, I just came off a bad think, "Well, I just came off a bad night of sleep and now I still I'm I night of sleep and now I still I'm I night of sleep and now I still I'm I can't even get to sleep and it's my can't even get to sleep and it's my can't even get to sleep and it's my normal time." It's because you slept in normal time." It's because you slept in normal time." It's because you slept in later than you would otherwise and you later than you would otherwise and you later than you would otherwise and you reduce the window of adenosine reduce the window of adenosine reduce the window of adenosine accumulation before your normal bedtime. accumulation before your normal bedtime. accumulation before your normal bedtime. So, don't go don't wake up any later. So, don't go don't wake up any later. So, don't go don't wake up any later. Don't use more caffeine for the reasons Don't use more caffeine for the reasons Don't use more caffeine for the reasons that are obvious because that's that are obvious because that's that are obvious because that's only going to crank you and keep you only going to crank you and keep you only going to crank you and keep you awake the following night or decrease awake the following night or decrease awake the following night or decrease the probability of a good following the probability of a good following the probability of a good following night of recovery sleep. And then night of recovery sleep. And then night of recovery sleep. And then finally, don't go to bed any earlier. finally, don't go to bed any earlier. finally, don't go to bed any earlier. Resist and resist and go to bed at your Resist and resist and go to bed at your Resist and resist and go to bed at your normal time. What I want to try and do normal time. What I want to try and do normal time. What I want to try and do is prevent you from thinking, "Well, I is prevent you from thinking, "Well, I is prevent you from thinking, "Well, I had such a bad night last night and I had such a bad night last night and I had such a bad night last night and I normally go to bed at 10:30. I'm just normally go to bed at 10:30. I'm just normally go to bed at 10:30. I'm just going to get into bed at 9:00. My body going to get into bed at 9:00. My body going to get into bed at 9:00. My body is not ready to sleep at 9:00, but is not ready to sleep at 9:00, but is not ready to sleep at 9:00, but I'm worried because I had a bad night of I'm worried because I had a bad night of I'm worried because I had a bad night of sleep last night. So, I get into bed and sleep last night. So, I get into bed and sleep last night. So, I get into bed and now I'm tossing and turning for the now I'm tossing and turning for the now I'm tossing and turning for the first hour and a half because it's not first hour and a half because it's not first hour and a half because it's not my natural sleep window, but I just my natural sleep window, but I just my natural sleep window, but I just thought it was a good idea." I think the thought it was a good idea." I think the thought it was a good idea." I think the second tip um I would offer in terms of second tip um I would offer in terms of second tip um I would offer in terms of unconventional is have a wind down unconventional is have a wind down unconventional is have a wind down routine. Many of us think of sleep as if it's Many of us think of sleep as if it's Many of us think of sleep as if it's like a light switch that we just jump like a light switch that we just jump like a light switch that we just jump into bed and when we turn the light out, into bed and when we turn the light out, into bed and when we turn the light out, sleep should arrive in that same way. sleep should arrive in that same way. sleep should arrive in that same way. Sleep is It's Sleep is It's Sleep is It's process. It's much more like landing a process. It's much more like landing a process. It's much more like landing a plane. It takes time to gradually plane. It takes time to gradually plane. It takes time to gradually descend down onto the terra firma of descend down onto the terra firma of descend down onto the terra firma of what we call good solid sleep at night. what we call good solid sleep at night. what we call good solid sleep at night. Find out whatever works for you and it Find out whatever works for you and it Find out whatever works for you and it could be light stretching. I usually could be light stretching. I usually could be light stretching. I usually meditate for about 10 or 15 minutes meditate for about 10 or 15 minutes meditate for about 10 or 15 minutes before bed. Some people like reading. before bed. Some people like reading. before bed. Some people like reading. Try not to watch television in bed. Try not to watch television in bed. Try not to watch television in bed. That's usually advised against. That's usually advised against. That's usually advised against. to your to your to your Too much light too activating. You know, Too much light too activating. You know, Too much light too activating. You know, you wouldn't race into your garage and you wouldn't race into your garage and you wouldn't race into your garage and come to a come to a come to a screeching halt from 60 miles an hour. screeching halt from 60 miles an hour. screeching halt from 60 miles an hour. You typically downshift your gears and You typically downshift your gears and You typically downshift your gears and you slow down as you come into the you slow down as you come into the you slow down as you come into the garage. It's the same thing with garage. It's the same thing with garage. It's the same thing with sleep, too. The other thing about sleep, too. The other thing about sleep, too. The other thing about sort of that idea of shifting focus away sort of that idea of shifting focus away sort of that idea of shifting focus away from your mind itself. Get your mind off from your mind itself. Get your mind off from your mind itself. Get your mind off itself is a good piece of advice. itself is a good piece of advice. itself is a good piece of advice. Catharsis. You can try to write down all Catharsis. You can try to write down all Catharsis. You can try to write down all of the concerns that you have. of the concerns that you have. of the concerns that you have. And do this not right before And do this not right before And do this not right before but usually an hour or two before bed. but usually an hour or two before bed. but usually an hour or two before bed. Some people call it a worry Some people call it a worry Some people call it a worry journal. And to me it's a little bit journal. And to me it's a little bit journal. And to me it's a little bit like closing down all of the emotional like closing down all of the emotional like closing down all of the emotional tabs on my browser. Because if I shut tabs on my browser. Because if I shut tabs on my browser. Because if I shut the computer down and all of those tabs the computer down and all of those tabs the computer down and all of those tabs are still open, I'm going to come back are still open, I'm going to come back are still open, I'm going to come back in the morning and the computer's red in the morning and the computer's red in the morning and the computer's red hot, the fan's going because it didn't hot, the fan's going because it didn't hot, the fan's going because it didn't go to sleep because it couldn't because go to sleep because it couldn't because go to sleep because it couldn't because there were too many tabs active and there were too many tabs active and there were too many tabs active and open. I at first thought this just open. I at first thought this just open. I at first thought this just sounds like hooey. It sounds very sounds like hooey. It sounds very sounds like hooey. It sounds very Berkeley. It's kind of come by our we Berkeley. It's kind of come by our we Berkeley. It's kind of come by our we all hold hands and you know, walk home all hold hands and you know, walk home all hold hands and you know, walk home at the end of the day. But then this the at the end of the day. But then this the at the end of the day. But then this the data started coming out. Really good data started coming out. Really good data started coming out. Really good studies from good people and they found studies from good people and they found studies from good people and they found that keeping one of those journals that keeping one of those journals that keeping one of those journals decreased the time it takes you to fall decreased the time it takes you to fall decreased the time it takes you to fall asleep by 50% 5-0. You know, it's well asleep by 50% 5-0. You know, it's well asleep by 50% 5-0. You know, it's well on par with any pharmaceutical agent. I on par with any pharmaceutical agent. I on par with any pharmaceutical agent. I think the fourth sort of little tip I think the fourth sort of little tip I think the fourth sort of little tip I would give that's unconventional is would give that's unconventional is would give that's unconventional is remove all clock faces from your bedroom remove all clock faces from your bedroom remove all clock faces from your bedroom including your phone. Including your including your phone. Including your including your phone. Including your phone because if you are having, you phone because if you are having, you phone because if you are having, you know, a tough night, know, a tough night, know, a tough night, knowing that it's 3:22 in the morning or knowing that it's 3:22 in the morning or knowing that it's 3:22 in the morning or it's 4:48 in the morning does not help it's 4:48 in the morning does not help it's 4:48 in the morning does not help you in the slightest. And it's only you in the slightest. And it's only you in the slightest. And it's only going to make matters worse than better. going to make matters worse than better. going to make matters worse than better. Matt, this has been an amazing deep dive Matt, this has been an amazing deep dive Matt, this has been an amazing deep dive on sleep. It is chock-a-block full of on sleep. It is chock-a-block full of on sleep. It is chock-a-block full of valuable takeaways. It's been a valuable takeaways. It's been a valuable takeaways. It's been a tremendously fun for me to dissect out a tremendously fun for me to dissect out a tremendously fun for me to dissect out this incredible aspect of our lives that this incredible aspect of our lives that this incredible aspect of our lives that we call sleep with a fellow that we call sleep with a fellow that we call sleep with a fellow scientist and a scientist and a scientist and a fellow public educator. And fellow public educator. And fellow public educator. And we don't just want to hear more from we don't just want to hear more from we don't just want to hear more from Matt Walker. I speak for many people. Matt Walker. I speak for many people. Matt Walker. I speak for many people. We need to. The work you're doing is We need to. The work you're doing is We need to. The work you're doing is both influential, but more importantly, it is influential, but more importantly, it is influential, but more importantly, it is important work. It it has the impact important work. It it has the impact important work. It it has the impact that's needed especially in this day and that's needed especially in this day and that's needed especially in this day and age where science and medicine, public age where science and medicine, public age where science and medicine, public health, and the issues of the world, health, and the issues of the world, health, and the issues of the world, etc., are really converging. So, etc., are really converging. So, etc., are really converging. So, I know I speak on behalf of a tremendous I know I speak on behalf of a tremendous I know I speak on behalf of a tremendous number of people when I just say, "Thank number of people when I just say, "Thank number of people when I just say, "Thank you for doing the work you do and for you for doing the work you do and for you for doing the work you do and for being you."